





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Term of Reference #4: Improving Management Plans and the Process for their Intersessional Review





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Term of Reference #4: Improving Management Plans and the Process for their Intersessional Review
Working Paper submitted by Australia on behalf of the SGMP
Abstract
During the 2009/10 intersessional period the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SMGP) undertook several tasks relating to its role of developing advice to the CEP on improving management plans and the process for their intersessional review. In accordance with the work plan agreed by CEP XII (CEP XII Final Report, Appendix 2) the SGMP developed suggested standard wording and a template for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) management plans, considered options for the review of management plans not referred by the CEP for intersessional review, and discussed plans for a possible Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) workshop. The CEP is invited to consider the outputs of this intersessional work, and is reminded of its intention to review at this meeting the effectiveness of the SGMP.
    1. Background
This Working Paper reports on the SGMP’s activities under Term of Reference #4: ‘Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.’ The SGMP’s activities under Terms of Reference #1 to #3 are detailed in a separate Working Paper ‘Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans’.
    2. Improving management plans and the process for their intersessional review
During the 2009/10 intersessional period the SGMP addressed the tasks outlined in the work plan agreed by CEP XII, including:
    • Develop recommended standard wording for suitable management plan components, for consideration by CEP;
    • Examine approaches to reviewing plans other than those referred for intersessional review, for consideration by CEP; and
    • Commence development of standard template for management plans.
The SGMP also held initial discussions of a task identified for the 2010/11 intersessional period:
    • Workshop to share best practice in ASMA management and to consider development of Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.
A report on each of these tasks is provided below.
    3. Standard wording for suitable management plan components
At CEP XII the SGMP recalled that the Committee had previously acknowledged the benefit of promoting consistency between management plans, and had discussed the possibility of developing standard wording to help achieve that objective. The SGMP reported on its review of the standard components of ASPA management plans, and advised that several components were suited to the development of recommended standard wording. The Committee agreed the SGMP should seek to develop such recommended wording during the 2009/10 intersessional period.
SGMP members from India, Romania, the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Australia volunteered to prepare suggested wording for one or more management plan components. With reference to the wording contained in existing management plans, these coordinators developed draft wording which was reviewed by the SGMP and revised as appropriate. This recommended wording is presented within the suggested template for ASPA management plans at Attachment A. It is proposed that the template and suggested wording could be incorporated into a revised version of the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide), which the SGMP will prepare during the 2010/11 intersessional period.
As noted in the SGMP’s report to CEP XII, and as indicated in the explanatory text in the suggested management plan template, the SGMP is strongly of the view that management plans should contain sufficient details about the special features of the site and requirements for access and management to ensure that persons planning visits and national authorities responsible for issuing permits are able to do so in a manner consistent with the purpose for designation. The availability of suggested standard wording is not intended to discourage proponents from developing and implementing site-specific or creative and innovative approaches to area protection and management. As appropriate, the suggested wording should be utilised, modified, or replaced with alternative text that adequately reflects site-specific considerations.
In the final round of discussion – to review a draft of this Working Paper – a small number of comments regarding standard wording were raised which could not be considered by the SGMP in the time available. It is proposed that these matters will be addressed, in conjunction with any comments from the Committee, during the coming intersessional period when the SGMP finalises the suggested standard wording for inclusion in a revised version of the Guide. Additionally, the SGMP considered but did not reach a conclusion on the suitability of standard wording regarding the taking of poultry products into ASPAs. The SGMP would welcome advice from the CEP on that issue.
Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the suggested standard wording for suitable components of ASPA management plans, presented in Attachment A, and the SGMP’s proposal to incorporate this wording into a revised version of the Guide.
    4. Approaches to reviewing plans not referred for intersessional review
In its report to CEP XII the SGMP noted that it might be useful to consider options to help improve the quality and consistency of the full suite of management plans, including those not referred by the CEP for intersessional review. The SGMP discussed this issue further during the intersessional period, led by the SGMP member from Norway.
The SGMP noted that the CEP has now established a functional manner in which to review ASPA and ASMA management plans before adopting them, utilizing the function of the SGMP in that process. However, certain types of plans may not be subject to consideration by the SGMP, including:
    • Type 1: Management plans in Annex V format that were adopted before the SGMP was established1 and which undergo such small changes (or none) during 5-year review that the CEP advises the ATCM to adopt them directly. 
    • Type 2: Management plans in Annex V format that are overdue for 5-yearly review. Likely there is a process in the pipeline for many of these management plans (there are a number of causes for plans being delayed by a year or two), but possibly there are a few of these that have been deferred for one reason or another, and will likely not reappear in front of the CEP for a number of years. 
    • Type 3: Management plans in Annex V format that have undergone 5-yearly review, but have been determined by the proponent to not require revision, and thereby not put in front of the CEP for consideration.
    • Type 4: Management plans which have not yet been adopted in Annex V format.
An overview of how existing management plans fit into these four categories is given in Attachment B.
The SGMP agreed that an appropriate long-term goal would be to ensure that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective. A review of all plans by the SGMP would assist in achieving this goal, although there are and will be other suitable mechanisms (e.g. self-review by proponents with reference to tools and aids developed by the SGMP). The SGMP also noted that the input and participation of new participants in the SGMP process would be of great benefit to achieving such a goal. The SGMP has the opportunity for outreach and could offer assistance for any proponents requesting guidance for the revision of a management plan. 
The SGMP noted the potential workload involved in reviewing such “other” management plans, and underlined that any process aimed at reaching the long-term goal should avoid over-burdening the SGMP. 
The SGMP did note, however, that it is likely that some plans could take a while to appear before the SGMP if the present approach was maintained, and that this would impede progress towards reaching the long-term goal identified above. The SGMP considered some elements in this regard:
    • The SGMP could identify categories of plan which might benefit from SGMP review earlier rather than later, for example prioritizing Type 2, 3 and 4 plans2. The group also noted that its review of plans might be prioritized based on potential for human impact. For example Areas which are easily accessible and thus often visited by researchers or educators, Areas which contain active research sites and/or long term research programs and Areas in proximity to national program activities.
    • The SGMP did not identify a clear process for how such “other” plans could be referred to the SGMP, but one option discussed was to invite those Parties responsible for Type 2, 3 and 4 plans to provide information about the review status and timeframe, as basis for further prioritization.
    • As a large workload is anticipated for the SGMP in 2010 (see graph below), any supplementary review of plans other than those referred for intersessional review should start no sooner than 2011. 

Number of management plans due for five-yearly review

    • The SGMP is still in the process of developing its thinking about the type of advice proponents should receive when preparing management plans, and preparing tools that over time will assist proponents to develop good management plans without the assistance of the SGMP, so waiting until these tools are ready may lessen the burden on the SGMP. 
    • As the number of plans referred by the CEP for intersessional review varies from year to year, the SGMP would not aim to annually review a predetermined number of “other” plans, and could instead make a decision each year based on the workload for the upcoming year. 
    • It may be necessary to amend the SGMP terms of reference to accommodate such a function of reviewing “other” plans. 
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP invites the CEP to consider:
    • establishing a long-term goal of ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective;
    • accordingly, adding an additional Term of Reference to provide a basis for the SGMP to suggest mechanisms for achieving this goal, as follows: ‘Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective’; and
    • agreeing that the SGMP should invite those Parties responsible for Type 2, 3 and 4 plans to provide information about the review status and timeframe, as basis for further prioritization.
    5. Template for management plans
In its report to CEP XII, the SGMP noted that, in addition to developing suggested standard wording, a template may also help promote consistency between ASPA management plans, and such a template could be incorporated into a revised version of the Guide. The SGMP discussed this issue further during the intersessional period, led by the SGMP member from Australia.
The suggested template presented at Attachment A incorporates references to the current version of the Guide (and could be updated accordingly when the Guide is revised) suggested standard wording as discussed above, and is prepared in accordance with the standard format and styles established by the Secretariat.
Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the suggested ASPA management plan template presented in Attachment A, and the SGMP’s proposal to incorporate this template into a revised version of the Guide.
    6. ASMA workshop and guidelines
In its report to CEP XII the SGMP noted that there are currently no guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans. It suggested that it would be useful to exchange best practice and produce guidelines for preparing management plans, perhaps by convening an ASMA workshop. 
The SGMP held further discussions on this matter during the intersessional period, based on a discussion paper prepared by the SGMP member from the United Kingdom. The group noted that ASMAs generally comprise areas of significant human activity and environmental risk and agreed that the aim of a workshop could be to review how the ASMA designation is currently working (with seven ASMAs now adopted, almost a decade after Annex V came into force).
The SGMP agreed that workshop objectives could include to:
    1) Share good practice by examining common issues arising and lessons learnt from different approaches to site management in Antarctica, and drawing  upon relevant approaches to the management of multiple use areas elsewhere. The workshop could consider  how ASMAs can be used most effectively to address themes such as:
    • managing the interactions between different scientific activities;
    • the use of zoning;
    • education and outreach and mechanisms for exchanging and disseminating information, including websites;
    • logistic cooperation;
    • managing marine areas;
    • managing tourism;
    • managing cultural heritage; and
    • environmental monitoring. 

    2) Produce guidelines for the preparation of ASMA Management Plans
This would build upon the work that the SGMP is embarking upon to review and update the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
    3) Scope potential new ASMAs (noting that this is beyond the SGMP Terms of Reference, but appropriate for a CEP workshop)

The SGMP also gave some consideration to practical arrangements for the workshop. It was felt that a workshop of approximately two days duration might best be held in conjunction with a CEP meeting. Participants could include CEP Members, Observers and possibly external experts in area management (e.g. CCAMLR Scientific Committee, Arctic area managers), while noting that it may be appropriate to cover the costs of the latter.
Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the SGMP’s initial outline for a possible ASMA workshop. In particular, the SGMP would welcome guidance from the CEP regarding a suitable date and venue for such a workshop, and options for funding.
    7. Work plan and review of SGMP’s effectiveness
When the SGMP was established at ATCM XXXI (2008), it was agreed that the CEP should review the effectiveness of the SGMP after a two year period, and revise the terms of reference as necessary. The SGMP has prepared a suggested work plan for the 2010/11 intersessional period, reflecting the tasks discussed above (see Attachment C). The forward work plan is presented in combination with a summary of tasks completed in the 2008/09 and 2009/10 intersessional periods, to assist the CEP with its planned review at this meeting of the effectiveness of the SGMP. 
Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the suggested work plan at Attachment C and instruct the SGMP accordingly.
The CEP is reminded of its intention to review at this meeting the effectiveness of the SGMP and to revise the terms of reference as necessary.
Attachment A
Template for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plans
[Note: The SGMP will review the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) during 2010/11. At that point the template might usefully be incorporated into the Guide as an attachment, and wording similar to that provided below might be used in the Guide to introduce the template. If the template is incorporated into the Guide it might be unnecessary to include cross-references from the template to the Guide – see point #2 below. The following text introduces the template in the present circumstances, before the Guide is reviewed.]
Introduction
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has recognised the benefits of promoting consistency between protected area Management Plans. The template is intended as a framework into which the proponent can insert content specific to the area in question when preparing a new or revised Management Plan for an Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA).
General guidance
The template includes references to the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide), which contains a range of useful guidance to proponents preparing new or revised Management Plans for ASPAs. References to the Guide are provided in the template in this (italicised) font, and should be deleted from the Management Plan.
Suggested standard wording
It is important that Management Plans contain sufficient details about the special features of the site and requirements for access and management to ensure that persons planning visits and national authorities responsible for issuing permits are able to do so in a manner consistent with the purpose for designation. To help promote consistency between Management Plans for areas with similar management arrangements, suggested standard wording is provided for some sections. The availability of suggested standard wording is not intended to discourage proponents from developing and implementing site-specific or creative and innovative approaches to area protection and management. As appropriate, the suggested wording should be utilised, modified, or replaced with alternative text that adequately reflects site-specific considerations. 
Formatting
The template is formatted in accordance with the Manual for the submission of documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection prepared by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty. Proponents should consult the Manual for guidance on specific formatting issues, such as for tables and figures incorporated in a Management Plan.
Management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. [XXX]
[INSERT NAME OF PROTECTED AREA]
Introduction
Section 3.1 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
1.	Description of values to be protected
Section 3.2 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
2.	Aims and objectives
Many existing management plans share similar aims and objectives. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific aims and objectives, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.3 of the Guide. 
Management of [insert name of Area] aims to:
    • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
    • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts through managed access to [insert specific hut here];
    • allow scientific research in the Area provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere;
    • prevent or minimise the introduction to the Area of alien plants, animals and microbes;
    • minimise the possibility of the introduction of pathogens which may cause disease in fauna populations within the Area;
    • preserve [a part of] the natural ecosystem of the Area as a reference area for future comparative studies;
    • maintain the historic values of the Area through planned conservation and archaeological work programmes;
    • [further site-specific aims and objectives should be added here]
3.	Management activities
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific management activities, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.4 of the Guide.
None required.
[Insert type of information] on the location of the Area [stating special restrictions that apply] shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan shall be made available, at [insert location of information].
Copies of this Management Plan [and informative material] shall be made available to vessels [and aircraft] [insert: travelling/ planning to visit/visiting/operating in] the vicinity of the Area.
Signs illustrating the location and boundaries, with clear statements of entry restrictions, shall be placed at appropriate locations on the boundary of the Area [and Restricted Zone] to help avoid inadvertent entry.
Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition and removed when no longer required.
In accordance with the requirements of Annex III of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, abandoned equipment or materials shall be removed to the maximum extent possible provided doing so does not adversely impact on the environment and the values of the Area.
The Area shall be visited as necessary, and no less than once every five years, to assess whether it continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure that management [and maintenance] activities are adequate.
Visits shall be permitted as necessary in order to facilitate the study and monitoring of anthropogenic and natural impacts that could affect the protected values in the Area, in particular, [insert specific activity]. These activities should be conducted, to the maximum extent possible, by non-invasive methods.
National Antarctic Programmes operating in the Area shall consult together with a view to ensuring the above management activities are implemented.
The management plan shall be reviewed no less than once every five years and updated as required.
Personnel [national programme staff, field expeditions, tourists and pilots] in the vicinity of, accessing or flying over the Area shall be specifically instructed, by their national program [or appropriate national authority] as to the provisions and contents of the Management Plan.
All pilots operating in the region shall be informed of the location, boundaries and restrictions applying to entry and over-flight in the Area.
[Further site-specific management activities should be added here]
4.	Period of designation
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. Suggested wording has been developed and can be utilised as appropriate (see below) Section 3.5 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. 
Designated for an indefinite period. / Designated for a [x] year period.
5.	Maps
Section 3.8 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. Guidance for producing the maps themselves is given in Appendix 3 of the Guide. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question. However, proponents could utilise the following suggested format:
    • [Map X, Title of Map X
    • Map Y, Title of Map Y
    • Map Z, Title of Map Z]
6.	Description of the Area
Section 3.6 of the Guide provides general guidance for this section of Management Plans. Content should be inserted under the following sub-section headings.
6(i)	Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Section 3.6.1 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
6(ii)	Access to the area
Section 3.6.2 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
6(iii)	Location of structures within and adjacent to the site
Section 3.6.3 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
6(iv)	Location of other protected areas in the vicinity
Section 3.6.4 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question. However, proponents could utilise the following suggested format (e.g. ASPA 167, Hawker Island, 68°35’S, 77°50’E, 22 km to the north-east):
[Other protected areas in the vicinity include (see Map XX):
    • ASPA XXX, Name of Protected Area, latitude, longitude, XX km to the [direction]
    • ASPA YYY, Name of Protected Area, latitude, longitude, XX km to the [direction]
    • etc]
6(v)	Special Zones within the Area
Section 3.7 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans, if any such zones are present. If there are no special zones, the following standard wording could be used. No other suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
There are no special zones within the Area. / [Site-specific content should be inserted here]
7.	Terms and conditions for entry permits
7(i)	General permit conditions
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific permit conditions, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10 of the Guide.
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
    • it is issued for compelling scientific reasons which can only be undertaken in the Area, or for reasons essential to the management of the Area;
    • the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan;
    • the activities permitted will give due consideration to the continued protection of the [environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness] values of the Area;
    • the Permit shall be issued for a finite period;
    • the Permit shall be carried when in the Area;
    • [further site-specific conditions should be inserted here]
In the case of sites designated as ASPAs to which tourist visits are permitted, the following text might be considered:
    • allow visits to the Area for historical, educational, wildlife and scenic viewing purposes under control by permit;
    • [further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(ii)	Access to, and movement within or over, the Area
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.1 of the Guide.
Vehicles are prohibited within the Area and all movement within the Area should be on foot.
Vehicle use in the Area should be kept to a minimum.
The operation of aircraft over the Area should be carried out, as a minimum requirement, in compliance with the ‘Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds’ contained in Resolution 2 (2004).
Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary to undertake permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects.
Movement within the Area by foot should be on designated tracks only.
Where no routes are identified, pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary to undertake permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects.
Visitors should avoid areas of visible vegetation and care should be exercised walking in areas of moist ground, particularly the stream course beds, where foot traffic can easily damage sensitive soils, plant and algal communities, and degrade water quality.
[further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(iii)	Activities which may be conducted in the Area
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.2 of the Guide.
Activities which may be conducted within the Area include:
    • compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which will not jeopardise the ecosystem or values of the Area or interfere with existing scientific studies
    • sampling, which should be the minimum required for approved research programs
    • conservation and maintenance
    • educational and/or recreational visits including tourism
    • essential management activities, including monitoring
    • operational activities in support of scientific research or management within or beyond the Area, including visits to assess the effectiveness of the Management Plan and management activities.
    • [further site-specific content, including any requirements for active management within the site which may be necessary in the future, should be added here]
7(iv)	Installation, modification or removal of structures
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.3 of the Guide.
No [new] structures are to be erected within the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for compelling scientific or management reasons, as specified in a permit.
Permanent structures or installations are prohibited [with the exception of permanent survey markers and boundary signs].
No [new] structures are to be erected within the Area, or scientific equipment installed.
All markers, structures or scientific equipment installed in the Area must be clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator or agency, year of installation and date of expected removal.
All such items should be free of organisms, propagules (e.g. seeds, eggs) and non-sterile soil, and be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area.
Installation (including site selection), maintenance, modification or removal of structures and equipment shall be undertaken in a manner that minimises disturbance to the values of the Area.
Existing structures must not be removed, except in accordance with a permit.
Structures and installations must be removed when they are no longer required, or on the expiry of the permit, which ever is the earlier.
Removal of specific structures or equipment for which the permit has expired shall be [the responsibility of the authority which granted the original permit and shall be] a condition of the Permit.
[further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(v)	Location of field camps
Section 3.10.4 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(vi)	Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the site
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.5 of the Guide.
In addition to the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area are: 
    • the deliberate introduction of animals, plant material, micro-organisms and non-sterile soil into the Area shall not be permitted. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of animals, plant material, micro-organisms and non-sterile soil from other biologically distinct regions (within or beyond the Antarctic Treaty area).  Site-specific bio-security measures are listed below:
    • [site-specific measures should be inserted here];
    • fuel or other chemicals shall not be stored in the Area unless specifically authorised by Permit condition.  They shall be stored and handled in a way that minimises the risk of their accidental introduction into the environment;
    • materials introduced into the Area shall be for a stated period only and shall be removed by the end of that stated period;
    • [further site-specific conditions should be inserted here]
7(vii)	Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.6 of the Guide.
Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a permit issued in accordance with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.
[Further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(viii)	The collection, or removal, of materials not imported by the permit holder
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.7 of the Guide.
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit (issued under Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1991 by the appropriate national authority) and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Similarly, sampling is to be carried out using techniques which minimise disturbance to the Area as well as duplication.
Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, and which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised and is not an historical artefact or abandoned relic, may be removed from any part of the Area unless the environmental impact of the removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate Authority must be notified and approval obtained.
Unless specifically authorized by permit, visitors are prohibited from interfering with or from handling, taking or damaging any historic artefact found within the Area. Similarly relocation or removal of artefacts for the purposes of preservation, protection or to re-establish historical accuracy is allowable by permit. Any new artefacts observed or any abandoned relic found should be notified to the appropriate national authority.
[Further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(ix)	Disposal of waste
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.8 of the Guide.
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.
All wastes, other than human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. [Although removal from the Area is preferable, human wastes may be disposed of into the sea]
Waste generated as a consequence of the activities developed in the Area shall be temporarily stored (insert site specific location details) in such a way as to prevent their dispersal into the environment and removed when activities have been concluded.
 [Further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(x)	Measures that may be necessary to continue to meet the aims of the Management Plan
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.9 of the Guide.
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to:
    • carry out monitoring and Area inspection activities, which may involve the collection of a small number of samples or data for analysis or review;
    • erect or maintain signposts, structures or scientific equipment; or
    • carry out protective measures.
Any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked on site and on maps of the Area. A GPS position should be obtained for lodgement with the Antarctic Data Directory System through the appropriate national authority.
To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the Area visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial, animal or vegetation introductions sourced from soils from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. To the maximum extent practicable, visitors shall ensure that footwear, clothing and any equipment – particularly camping and sampling equipment – is thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area.
To avoid interference with long-term research and monitoring activities or duplication of effort, persons planning new projects within the Area should consult with established programs.
[Further site-specific content should be inserted here]
7(xi)	Requirements for reports
Many existing management plans share similar wording in this section. A pool of suggested standard wording has been developed and can be used, amended or deleted as appropriate for the Area in question (see below). Proponents are encouraged to identify site-specific content, and should consider the guidance for this section of Management Plans given in Section 3.10.10 of the Guide.
The principal permit holder for each visit to the Area shall submit a report to the appropriate national authority as soon as practicable, and no later than six months after the visit has been completed.
Such visit reports should include, as applicable, the information identified in the recommended visit report form [contained in Appendix 4 of the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998)][available from the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty www.ats.aq].
If appropriate, the national authority should also forward a copy of the visit report to the Party that proposed the Management Plan, to assist in managing the Area and reviewing the Management Plan.
Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original visit reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, for the purpose of any review of the Management Plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
[Further site-specific content should be inserted here]
8.	Supporting documentation
Section 3.9 of the Guide provides guidance for this section of Management Plans. No suggested standard wording is provided here because the content of this section will be specific to the Area in question.
[Site-specific content should be inserted here]
Attachment B
Assessment of review and revision process for ASPA management plans 
Type 1

Type 2 and/or Type 3
ASPA 101: Taylor Rookery, Mac. Robertson Land

ASPA 105: Beaufort Island
ASPA 102: Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land

ASPA 107: Dion Island, Marguerite Bay
ASPA 103: Adery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast

ASPA 108: Green Island
ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Island

ASPA 110: Lynch Island
ASPA 109: Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

ASPA 111: Southern Powell Island
ASPA 113: Litchfield Island

ASPA 114: Northern Coronation Island
ASPA 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, C. Bird, Ross Isl.

ASPA 115: Lagotellerie Island
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land

ASPA 117: Avian Island
ASPA 119: Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley ponds, Dufek Massif

ASPA 122: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
ASPA 120: Pointe-Geologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie

ASPA 126: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Isl.
ASPA 121: Cape Royds, Ross Island

ASPA 128: Western shore of Admiralty Bay
ASPA 123: Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land

ASPA 139: Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
ASPA 124: Cape Crozier, Ross Island

ASPA 147: Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights, Alexander Island
ASPA 127: Haswell Island

ASPA 148: Mount Flora, Hope Bay
ASPA 129: Rothera Point, Adelaida Island

ASPA 151: Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
ASPA 130: “Tramway Ridge”, Mount Erebus, Ross Island

ASMA 2: McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land


ASPA 132: Potter Peninsula, King George Isl., South Shetland Isl.


ASPA 133: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Isl.

Type 4
ASPA 134: Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast

ASPA 112: Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Island
ASPA 135: North-east Bailey Pen., Budd Coast, Wilkes Land

ASPA 144: Chile Bay (Discovery Bay, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
ASPA 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land

ASPA 146: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
ASPA 137: North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound


ASPA 138: Linnaeus Terrace


ASPA 140: Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

Have been considered by SGMP
ASPA 141: “Yukidori Valley”, Langhovde, Lutzow-Holmbukta

ASPA 106: Cape Hallett, Victoria Land 
Currently under SGMP review
ASPA 142: Svarthamaren

ASPA 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
ASPA 143: Marine Plain; Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elisabeth Land

ASPA 150: Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island
ASPA 145: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

ASPA 168: Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
ASPA 149: Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Isl.

ASPA 169: Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elisabeth Land, East Antarctica
ASPA 152 Western Bransfield Str. off Low Island, S. Shetland Isl.

ASPA 170: Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula
ASPA 153: Eastern Dallmann Bay

ASPA 171: Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island
ASPA 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land


ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island


ASPA 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island

Type 1: Management plans in Annex V format that were adopted before the SGMP-process was established, which undergo only small changes during 5-year review, and which are adopted directly by the CEP/ATCM.

Type 2: Management plans in Annex V format that should, but have not, undergone a 5-year review after the SGMP-process was established.

Type 3: Management plans in Annex V format that have undergone 5-year review, but have been determined by the proponent to not require revision.

Type 4: Management plans which have not yet been adopted in Annex V format.

ASPA 157: Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds, Ross Island


ASPA 158: Hut Point, Ross Island


ASPA 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast


ASPA 160: Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land


ASPA 161: Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea 


ASPA 162: Mawson’s Hut, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica


ASPA 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier


ASPA 164: Scullin and Murray Monolites, MacRobertson Land, East Antarctica


ASPA 165: Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea


ASPA 166: Port-Martin, Terre Adélie


ASPA 167: Hawker Island, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elisabeth Land, East Antarctica


ASMA 1: Admirality Bay


ASMA 3: Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land


ASMA 4: Deception Island


ASMA 5: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole


ASMA 6: Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica


Grey: Have been considered by ICG, but not SGMP
Attachment C. SGMP activities in first two years of operation, and suggested work plan for coming years
Terms of Reference (ToR)
Year 1 (08/09) – tasks completed
Year 2 (09/10) – tasks completed
Year 3 (10/11) – suggested tasks
Year 4 (11/12) – provisional tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents 
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents
ToR 4 and 5*
Develop SGMP work plan, for consideration by CEP
Review and update SGMP work plan
Review and update SGMP work plan
Review and update SGMP work plan

Review progress with existing protected area recommendations, for consideration by CEP
Develop recommended standard wording for suitable management plan components, for consideration by CEP
Review Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, taking into account work on recommended standard wording


Identify management plan components suited to recommended standard wording, for consideration by CEP
Examine approaches to reviewing plans other than those referred for intersessional review, for consideration by CEP
Invite those Parties responsible for Type 2, 3 and 4 plans to provide information about the review status and timeframe, as basis for further prioritization
Commence review of management plans overdue for five-yearly review


Commence development of standard template for management plans
Finalise standard template for management plans, as component of revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas



Commence planning for workshop to share best practice in ASMA management and to consider development of Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Further planning for workshop to share best practice in ASMA management and to consider development of Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas

Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 1 to 3
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 1 to 3
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 1 to 3
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 1 to 3

Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 4
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 4
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 4 and 5*
Prepare report for CEP against SGMP ToR 4 and 5*
* References to Term of Reference 5 if approved by CEP XIII



