





Supervision of Antarctic Tourism 





Supervision of Antarctic Tourism

Summary
On the basis of comments made at ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009) by different parties and IAATO regarding possible mechanisms for ensuring more appropriate supervision of tourism on board cruise ships, and considering what was agreed in the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism (Resolution 7, 2009), Argentina submits for the ATCM’s consideration a proposal that an Intersessional Contact Group be set up to discuss possible additional tools, or changes to existing tools, that would serve to ensure better supervision of the management of Antarctic tourism on board cruise ships.  
Introduction
At ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009), a number of countries and IAATO agreed on the possibility of establishing additional mechanisms for observing the development of Antarctic tourism (paragraphs 171-173 of the Final Report of ATCM XXXII). 
In addition, Resolution 7 (2009) established a series of general principles to be used to inform and guide further work in managing Antarctic tourism activities, including the following:  
    • all tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica will be conducted in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, its Protocol on Environmental Protection, and relevant ATCM Measures and Resolutions;
    • Antarctic Treaty Parties should implement all existing instruments relating to tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica and aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that they continue to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism; and 
    • all operators conducting tourism activities in Antarctica should be encouraged to cooperate with each other and with the Antarctic Treaty Parties to coordinate tourism activities and share best practice on environmental and safety management issues.

Tools currently available for the supervision of tourist activities on board cruise ships 
The Parties currently have three mechanisms at their disposal for supervising various aspects of tourist activities on board cruise ships: 
1. Inspections conducted under Art. VII of the Antarctic Treaty
This tool has been used on various occasions, most recently on tourist cruise ships, by different inspection teams of the Consultative Parties. 
This formal mechanism has the endorsement of the Parties, and the results achieved are ensured a high level of exposure, as reports of inspections conducted under Art. VII are transmitted annually to the ATCM.  
However, since Art. VII stipulates that “ships ... at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica ... shall be open at all times to inspection by any observers”, the inspection team can conduct its inspection on board the cruise ships only. There is the possibility that an inspection team could become established at landing points, as Art. VII also stipulates that “each observer designated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall have complete freedom of access at any time to any or all areas of Antarctica”. However, there has been no recent use of this form of inspection in a manner related to tourism development.  
 2. National Antarctic Programs deploying observers on cruise ships flying the Party’s flag or whose operator has a legal address on their territory
This power is exercised more frequently by the Parties, and generally speaking, the results have been positive, as it allows Parties to obtain a better overview of tourism management over the course of an entire voyage, while at the same time promoting improved mutual understanding between operators and National Antarctic Programs. 
The main drawback of this tool is that Parties can only use it on ships flying their flag or whose operators have a legal address on their territory. As a result, Parties with no ships flying their flag and no operators with a legal address on their territory are not able to make use of this tool. 
3. Deploying observers at sites regularly visited by tourist cruise ships 
This tool has also been used on occasion by some Parties to monitor tourism management during landings and ensure that the relevant regulations, such as the Visitor Site Guidelines, are being respected. Although this mechanism allows for the obtention of valuable data on the management of sites visited by tourists over the course of one or more seasons, the information gathered in this way is restricted to one site only. If one considers that tourist cruise ships have visited a total of 150 different sites in the past, and that each season, some 80 sites receive regular visits, the resources required to collect representative data in this manner would be considerable, especially considering the fact that for effective monitoring, one would require a data series covering at least 10 years. 
The conclusion to be drawn from this brief assessment is that there are still a number of factors restricting the appropriate supervision of Antarctic tourism on board cruise ships. 
Proposal
Considering all of the above information, Argentina submits for the ATCM’s consideration a proposal that an Intersessional Contact Group be set up to discuss possible additional tools, or changes to existing tools, that would serve to ensure better supervision of the management of Antarctic tourism on board cruise ships. 


