





The 2009 Norwegian Antarctic Inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty





The 2009 Norwegian Antarctic Inspection under Article VII 
of the Antarctic Treaty

1. Introduction
Norway carried out its fourth inspection in Antarctica in accordance with Article VII of the Treaty during the period 19-21 February 2009, and covered 3 stations and installations in Dronning Maud Land and Coats Land:

    • Princess Elisabeth Antarctica (Belgium)
    • Halley (United Kingdom)
    • Novo Runway and ALCI Airbase (ALCI1 and Russia2).
 
The inspection team consisted of the following six Norwegian nationals designated by the Norwegian Government:

    • Ambassador Karsten Klepsvik, Special Adviser for Polar Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    • Ms. Inger Holten, Senior Adviser, Legal Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    • Ms. Kjerstin Askholt, Director General, Polar Department, Ministry of Justice
    • Ms. Marie Helene Korsvoll, Adviser, Ministry of Environment
    • Dr. Jan-Gunnar Winther, Director, Norwegian Polar Institute
    • Ms. Birgit Njåstad, Head of Section, Norwegian Polar Institute

The logistics supporting the inspections were arranged within the framework of the Norwegian Polar Institute. The inspection team travelled by air from Cape Town to Novo Runway, within the DROMLAN flight framework. A Twin Otter was used to reach the 3 stations and installations where inspections were carried out. The inspection team returned by air from Novo Runway to Cape Town on 23 February.

The full inspection report has been submitted as a separate Information Paper to this meeting.


2. Summary of findings

2.1 General
The inspection team used as a starting point the checklist for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations annexed to the Final Report of the XVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as guidelines for items to be covered at each visited station. While use of these checklists is neither a compulsory nor a prejudicial procedure of conducting inspections under the Antarctic Treaty, the check lists are highly useful and make the inspections more consistent and possible to compare.  

The inspection team did find it very useful when they at their arrival at Halley (UK) were presented with an already filled-out inspection checklist along with other relevant material about the station, its operations and science activities. The usefulness of receiving such a succinct package of information cannot be overestimated, and also this inspection team, in line with earlier inspections, would recommend that all stations and installations have relevant information available in such a format both for the purposes of inspections and other instances where such information could be useful.

2.2 Operations
It was noted during the inspection, and in considering relevant material following the inspection, that there seemingly is a potential shift occurring with respect to ownership, financing and objectives associated with Antarctic science operations and related activities. Up till now science operations have mostly been a purely national responsibility, with clear national structures and organizations behind the Antarctic operations, and clear priorities with regard to the scientific activities. Today there seems to be more private interests involved, both with regard to logistics (station construction/operation, transport, etc) and science priorities. In itself this does not necessarily lessen the quality and priorities of the activities, but it does raise questions with respect to inter alia liability and safety issues, scientific objectives, safeguarding of scientific continuity and issues related to cooperation (inter alia between operations and science, between various operators, between operator and COMNAP, and between operator and national authorities). These are issues that the Antarctic Treaty system might want to consider further in order to ensure the most appropriate governance of Antarctic activities within the framework of the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty.

Furthermore, the new complex ownership structures, encountered by the inspection team both at Novo Runway/ALCI Airbase and at Princess Elisabeth posed new challenges in getting the necessary and correct understanding of which entities were responsible with respect to various provisions of the Antarctic Treaty (such as notification requirements, EIA procedures, etc). The traditional national government structure, encountered by the inspection team at Halley, was in this respect much easier to get a clear understanding of.  

2.3 Permitting
As far as the inspection team could discern no authorities seem to have notified the activities at the ALCI Airbase as activity organized out from their country in accordance with current exchange of information requirements under the Antarctic Treaty.  This goes for both the national program support activities and the tourist related activities. There seems to be an undefined responsibility relating to permitting and notification of the activities at ALCI Airbase in accordance with Antarctic Treaty obligations. The inspection team would recommend that all involved parties clarify their responsibilities and obligations. 

2.4 Safety
Safety must be a central issue in Antarctica due to the special circumstances governing activities there. The inspection team did not have sufficient time or appropriate knowledge to consider the element of safety sufficiently during the inspection. However, considering the importance of safety in the context of large scale flight operations, the inspection team did find that it could be useful if DROMLAN, through COMNAP, could report to the ATCM on safety management procedures at Novo Runway/ALCI Airbase.  The inspection team would like to underline the need for strict communication practices between the various air facility operations in the area, to ensure that the back-up airstrip control always is available and sufficiently prepared when specifically international flight operations are taking place. The back up operations between Novo and Troll should be reflected in written agreements, including exchange of information between Novo and Troll in connection with actual flights. 

2.5 Scientific research
The 2009 Norwegian Inspection Team was impressed by the commitment at Halley with respect to maintaining the station as a platform for long-term monitoring and research. The station is obviously a resource intensive station to maintain, both with respect to financial and human resources, and also made obvious by the fact that the sixth station in succession is about to be constructed at the site. The importance of maintaining long-term data series has been made obvious by inter alia the discovery of the ozone hole. The team would like to emphasize the advantages of maintaining such long-term strategic scientific priorities at stations.

In parallel with a changing focus with respect to ownership, financing and objectives associated with Antarctic science operations, there may be reason to consider closely the implications this may have for strategic research planning in Antarctica. It may be appropriate to consider what driving forces define the research planned for new research stations, ie. whether there is a long term, coordinated and unique, scientific motive behind, or whether other forces dominate. More private interests involved in Antarctic research and operations may provide for other incentives with regard to scientific priorities. The 2009 Norwegian Inspection Team does not necessarily see this as a significant issue, but notes that changes seem to occur, and that the Antarctic Treaty Parties may want to consider implications at an early stage. 

The inspection team also notes that the number of scientists at the two inspected research stations was low compared to number of people present. Although this can be easily explained for both stations since they were in a period of heavy construction, the inspection team nevertheless perceives that this is a general tendency more often seen in today’s Antarctic operations. Stations are becoming quite resource intensive to operate (also with respect to human capacity), while more and more of the scientific activity is based on remote access to data. Again, this is not seen as a significant issue, but the 2009 Norwegian Inspection Team would like to draw the Parties attention to this perceived general tendency. 

2.6 Environment
The 2009 Norwegian inspection team wants to draw particular attention to the innovative, creative and cutting edge profile of the new Belgian Antarctic station. The effort and thought that has gone into the process of planning and designing a modern environmentally conscious station in Antarctica lacks precedence as far as the team can see. The Princess Elisabeth Antarctica is truly a research project in itself, and should if it lives up to expectations stand as a model for other national programs. Princess Elisabeth Antarctica paves the way for new thinking and approaches, and moves away from the “business as usual” concept that one sees more often than not in Antarctic operations. The inspection team notes that energy efficiency also has been a priority in the design of the new Halley VI which soon will replace the current Halley V. 

2.7 Military activities
No activities of a military nature, or any evidence of such activities were observed by the inspection team. There were no indications of nuclear explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes or activities linked to these issues. The observance of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty reserving Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes was fully demonstrated. The personnel at the stations visited were civilians.  

2.8 Tourism
The two scientific stations visited are too remote to immediately be significantly affected by tourism. However, it was noted that the approach and attitude towards potential tourism at the sites were quite different, with one station/program (Halley V) having a clear tourism policy associated with its operations, while the other (Princess Elisabeth Antarctica) did not yet have a written policy despite the fact that the station in reality will be quite accessible. It seems to the inspection team that it would be a clear advantage for stations and national programs if they were to have clearly stated policies with respect to the level of availability of infrastructure and personnel to cater for tourism activities. 

The 2009 Norwegian inspection team notes that the operations at Novo Runway/ALCI Airbase provide a platform for unregulated tourism to Dronning Maud Land. This seems to be a potential effect when private operators are given the responsibility for transport services for national operators. Clearly providing for such side services strengthens the financial outcomes of such marginal operations as well as lessens the burden on the national programs, and there are reasonable explanations for it occurring. The inspection team does, however, note the significant potential for this situation catering for tourism activities that can only take place as a result of the national (and international) science operations in Antarctica. The Treaty Parties might want to consider these aspects further. 

2.9 Concluding remarks
The observers were impressed by the spirit of commitment and dedication encountered at all the stations that were visited, and by the openness and friendliness shown by everyone at the bases inspected. Antarctica remains a special place and the scientists and support personnel working there treat it as such. The observers see this as a clear evidence of the spirit of co-operation that prevails within the Antarctic Treaty System and of the transparency of that System.


