





The Enhancement of Port State Control for Passenger Ships Departing to Antarctica





The Enhancement of Port State Control for Passenger Ships Departing to Antarctica
Submitted by New Zealand

This paper refers to WP1, the Chairs’ Report on the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and in particular Recommendation 6 of the report.  

2	A draft resolution is attached for the consideration of the Parties. The resolution contains three operative paragraphs.

3	The first operative paragraph recommends the Parties proactively apply the existing regime of port State control (PSC) to passenger ships departing from their ports to Antarctica. This accords with the objective of recommendation 6 in WP1.  Most PSC regimes have introduced targeted inspections based upon simple risk indicators that have proven to be valid through many hundreds of inspections.  Port States have discretion to vary the target factors according to the nature of ships visiting their ports.  It is entirely appropriate for States from whose ports ships may depart for Antarctica to decide that such ships should be given ‘high priority’ status and to introduce procedures to ensure that they undergo a PSC inspection at their port of departure.  High priority status for such ships could help ensure they were inspected at a maximum of three monthly intervals by at least one Party using common inspection guidelines.

4	The second operative paragraph recommends that the Parties encourage the secretariats of the various port State control memoranda of understanding to share information on inspections of vessels departing to Antarctica. There is already in place a functioning PSC regime that could, in conformity with international law and the aims of the IMO to foster harmonised global PSC, administer PSC for ships departing to Antarctic waters.  Administrative arrangements could be agreed among the secretariats of the PSC memoranda of understanding to provide access to each others databases for PSC data on ships departing to Antarctica.

5	The third operative paragraph refers to the development of the mandatory Code for ships operating in polar waters by the IMO.  In Resolution 8 (2009) the Antarctic Treaty Parties expressed the desire that the IMO would start work as soon as practicable to develop mandatory requirements for ships operating in Antarctic waters. The Meeting of Experts reiterated its strong support for the development of a mandatory Code and Parties present confirmed they would remain actively engaged in the process (WP1, paragraph 30).  Work on the Code was initiated in the 53rd meeting of the IMO’s Subcommittee on Design and Equipment (DE53) when it met from 22 to 26 February 2010. A Correspondence Group was established under the chair of Norway.  Further work on the Code will be undertaken at DE54 which will meet from 25 to 29 October 2010.  When it enters into force the Code will become an integral part of PSC inspections for ships departing to Antarctica.  The draft resolution recommends that the Parties contribute to the development of the Code so as to facilitate its entry into force as soon as possible.
 





Resolution XX (2010)
The Enhancement of Port State Control for Passenger Ships Departing to Antarctica


The Representatives,

Recalling Resolution 8 (2009) regarding a Mandatory shipping code for vessels operating in Antarctic waters;

Welcoming the start of work by the International Maritime Organisation in February 2010 on a mandatory International Code of safety for ships operating in polar waters (Polar Code);

Acknowledging the duties of the flag State as set out on Article 94 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea which include inter alia the taking of such measures for ships flying its flag as are necessary to ensure safety at sea;

Noting also Articles 218 and 219 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding Enforcement by port States and Measures relating to seaworthiness of vessels to avoid pollution;

Recalling also the requirements of the International Convention on the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974; the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL); the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW), 1978; and, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Conscious that the majority of passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area are not flagged to Parties either to the Antarctic Treaty or its Protocol on Environmental Protection;

Recommend that the Parties:

    1. Through the applicable port State control regional memorandum of understanding, proactively apply the existing regime of port State control  to passenger ships departing from their ports to Antarctica;
    2. Encourage the secretariats of the port State control memoranda of understanding to exchange freely with each other detailed information on the results of port State control inspections of passenger ships departing to Antarctica;
    3. Contribute to the development of the mandatory Polar Code so that it might enter into force as soon as possible. 
 

