





Enhancing the Antarctic Protected Areas Database to help assess and further develop the protected areas system




Enhancing the Antarctic Protected Areas Database to help assess and further develop the protected areas system
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
The protected areas database maintained by the Secretariat is a very useful tool, which could be further enhanced to support the assessment and development of the Antarctic protected areas system. Australia suggests that the CEP considers possible additions to the database, to incorporate fields like: primary reason for designation; values present; environmental domain(s) represented; and accurate size. A range of related objectives could also be addressed if area boundaries were available in digital format and centrally available, perhaps also through the protected areas database.
Background
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty has developedi, and makes available on its website, the Antarctic Protected Areas Database (http://www.ats.aq/devPH/apa/ep_protected.aspx?lang=e)ii. The database provides access to a range of useful information about each Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), including: Area type (ASPA/ASMA); Number; Name; Proponent; Location; Approximate area; Summary; Designation; Last review; Next review; Annex V format adoption; and Modification / review summary. The database also links to the current management plan for each Area and to a location map displayed in a basic online geographic information system (GIS).
At CEP XII the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) reported on its review of the status of recommendations arising from previous protected area workshops and related CEP discussions (WP 8). The SGMP raised several suggestions regarding possible actions outside its terms of reference, including two points relating to the protected areas database:
    • considering what information about protected areas could usefully be contained in the protected areas databaseiii; and
    • promoting the use of global positioning systems (GPS) to accurately define protected area boundariesiv, managing such information in the protected area database, and using such information in conjunction with Resolution 3(2008) to assess representativeness.
The CEP endorsed these points.
Possible enhancements to the protected areas database
Additional information about protected areas
The information currently available in the protected areas database is of considerable value for administering individual areas. The inclusion of further information fields, and the consequent ability to readily access, compile and query information across the suite of protected areas, could assist the CEP to move towards a more holistic approach to area protection, within a systematic environmental-geographic framework. 
Previous CEP meeting papers have presented useful assessments of the representativeness of existing protected areas against the categories of values to be protected in ASPAs (Annex V, Article 3(2)) and against the environmental domains identified in Resolution 3 (2008) – see, most recently, ATCM XXXII/WP31 (New Zealand). Utilising a database to collect and centrally manage the relevant information could greatly reduce the effort required to prepare such assessments.
Specifically, and in addition to the current information fields, the database could be expanded to incorporate the following information fields for each ASPA:
    • primary reason for designation (see the categories identified in Annex V, Article 3(2)); 
    • other values being protected (again, see Annex V, Article 3(2));
    • accurate area size (possibly specifying area of terrestrial and/or marine components); and
    • environmental domain(s) represented – see Resolution 3(2008).
One option for capturing such information would be to amend the coversheet for Working Papers presenting ASPAs and ASMAs appended to Resolution 1(2008). Modifications to the protected areas database would be required to incorporate this information. 
Spatial information about protected areas
Consistent with the status and importance accorded to Antarctic environmental protection by the Parties, including through the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs, Australia suggests that it would be appropriate to develop modern spatial data management tools for the protected area system. If ASPA and ASMA boundaries were available in a digital format suitable for use in a geographic information system (GIS) a range of opportunities for mapping and spatial analysis of protected areas would become available. Such spatial information can be generated by a Global Positioning System (GPS) device, or through the use of topographic datasets and/or digitising of base mapsv. 
The benefits to the CEP would be maximised if the boundaries of all ASPAs and ASMAs were available in digital format, and if this spatial information was centrally managed. When considered in concert with other information in the protected areas database (such as discussed above), this would facilitate a range of potential applications, including for example:
    • determining the proportion of each environmental domain represented by one or more ASPAs; 
    • producing maps for CEP reports, such as the CEP tourism study; 
    • supporting state of the Antarctic environment reporting (e.g. total area under protection / portion of EDA under protection);  and
    • generally, enhancing the CEP’s ability to visualise and further develop the protected areas system.
Many parties already use GIS to prepare management plan maps, and the boundaries of many areas are likely already available in a suitable digital format. However, it would be useful if such parties were open to providing advice and assistance to others as appropriate, to help develop spatial information for the full suite of areas over time. 
Recommendations
Australia proposes that the CEP:
    1) considers modifications to the protected areas database to enhance the value of the database as a tool to inform the assessment and further development of the Antarctic protected areas system;
    2) considers the benefits of having centrally managed spatial information for all ASPAs and ASMAs, and encourages proponents to make ASPA and ASMA boundaries available in a digital format suitable for use in a GIS; and
    3) as appropriate, considers options for pursuing any necessary amendments to the protected areas database and existing process for submitting management plans.

