





Current tendencies of climatic changes based on data of Russian studies in the Antarctic





Current tendencies of climatic changes based on data of Russian studies in the Antarctic

An obvious climate change occurring at the planet in the 20th century determines the need for a quantitative study of variability of the Earth’s climatic system key parameters for constructing justified scenarios of future climate changes. 
Special attention to Antarctic climate is also due to the fact that its continental ice sheet contains enormous fresh water supplies, and increased melting of this ice during possible atmospheric warming can lead to a catastrophic global ocean level rise. Strong variability of sea ice makes the Antarctic climate especially sensitive to climate change in the other regions due to diverse feedbacks in the climatic system.
The South Polar area being a unique component of the Earth’s climatic system influences significantly formation of global climate, and it also serves as a sensitive indicator of occurring climatic changes. 
Results of multiyear studies of global climate change were summarized in a series of assessment reports of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). SCAR Publication of the first Report on Antarctic climate change and its influence on the South Polar Area ecosystems is a development of such approach. The Report confirms the IPCC basic conclusions, but also contains new important results not included to IPCC Reports. It presents the results of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological and biological studies of the Antarctic from a common methodological standpoint. 
Russian specialists have reviewed the SCAR Report and highly evaluated it. Nevertheless, some drawbacks were noted, which are briefly summarized below.
The main conclusion, which is the first in the List of key findings on the Antarctic climatic system, is connected with a significant role of spring anomaly of atmospheric ozone, which shields the bulk of the Antarctic from global warming. The seasonal loss in ozone and related cooling in the lower stratosphere contribute to an intensified circumpolar vortex (increased west-easterly transport), which helps in isolating a significant part of the Antarctic from warmer air masses of temperate latitudes. This accounts for the observed trend of the increased sea ice area. 
The authors believe that the spring ozone anomaly prevents global warming development in the Antarctic. This is actually based on one study (Turner, et. al.,Geophys. Res. Lett., 36). In our opinion, such conclusion requires more detailed additional studies as mechanisms of different positive and negative feedbacks participate here.  
In reality, measured concentrations of most important greenhouse gases over the circumpolar Antarctic network show a smooth increase of the corresponding background values, consistent with known global tendencies. According to data of altitudinal soundings, the Antarctic troposphere over the entire continent becomes intensively warmer during the last decades, which can be partly related to the global greenhouse effect, and to intensified cyclonic activity (increased recurrence of sea air inflows to the central continental regions). That is why additional efforts are required for numerical simulation of the mechanism of signal propagation from the stratosphere to the troposphere due to a positive feedback (spring anomaly of ozone – circumpolar vortex intensity), which is possible only in a coupled high resolution climate model with a more detailed interactive photochemical block, than the one used in the Report. In investigating this phenomenon, the role of polar stratospheric clouds was insufficiently studied, in particular, in warming in the troposphere. Most climatic trends in the Report are based on mean monthly meteorological data. At the same time, owning to such initiatives as the СКАР READER Project, it is possible to analyze data of meteorological observations at standard synoptic hours, subjected to a strict quality assurance. This makes it possible to consider the variability within a season, synoptic scale processes and diurnal variations, providing additional important information for assessing climatic changes. 
As to sea ice, spatial distribution of the estimated temporal trends of sea ice area around Antarctica is extremely non-uniform. For example, the dipole structure of the estimated trend in the Ross Sea (positive trend) and in the Bellingshausen Sea (negative trend) can testify to a prevailing influence of a large-scale atmospheric circulation (in particular, Southern Annular Mode - SAM) on sea ice dynamics. 
In assessing the sea ice state, the “satellite epoch” is mainly considered, which began in the mid-1970s, when passive microwave sounding was used. Only one page is devoted to a “pre-satellite” period. There are generalizations based on ice mapping data (AARI of Roshydromet and the US NIC) using airborne ice reconnaissance and analysis of satellite data of visible and IR-regions. This type of information also refers to instrumental data and allows us to extend the period of assessing ice variability in the Southern Ocean up to the late 1950s. Generalizations of these data are presented in the Atlas of the Antarctic. Vol. 1, 1966. Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 225 p. (contains charts of ice edge location and ice concentration distribution for 1956-1964) and in Romanov A.A. Ice Navigation Conditions in the Southern Ocean. WMO/TD-No.783. 1996. Geneva, WMO, 51 p. (contains charts of ice edge location and ice concentration distribution and landfast ice position for 1956-1980).
Information on the chosen calculation algorithm for assessing total ice concentration based on SSMR-SSM/I-AMSR data is absent in the Report. Significance of the chosen algorithm (NASATEAM, Bootstrap, ASI, etc.) for assessment of climatic statistics is currently revealed (Andersen et. al., 2007, J. Geophys. Res.,112). It would be necessary to extend the spectrum of sea ice parameters in the Report by such characteristics as variability and thickness of landfast ice and phases of ice phenomena at the coastal stations. It is desirable to edit treatment of such phenomenon as the Weddell Sea polynya, as a zone with young and thin ice rather than an open water space.
The section devoted to reconstruction of recent (last 200-1000 years) air temperature changes in Antarctica using ice cores does not mention the Russian studies at Vostok station. The derived summary curve of the change of snow isotopic composition was carefully calibrated using data of meteorological and upper-air observations and is currently the only reliable information source on temperature changes in Central Antarctica for the last 200 years. Based on the results of these studies, several articles were published in international journals (Ekaykin et. al., 2004 Ann. Glaciol., 39).
Insufficient attention is given in the Report (only 1 page) to an assessment of permafrost parameters under the climate change conditions. Permafrost is a good indicator of regional climate changes. RAE carries out regular geocryological studies in Antarctica over a network of stationary polygons, which is part of the international circumpolar network CALM-S. Interannual changes of the seasonal melting layer thickness were assessed, and surface concentrations and fluxes of main greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide) were measured in the ice-free areas, which tend to swamping. The flux values are comparable with values at the coast of the Arctic Seas. As a result of frozen ground drilling, the vertical structure and composition of frozen ground were determined. Data of geocryological measurements on King George Island indicate a gradual degradation of permafrost and its transformation from a permanent form to the intermittent one.
In considering the “explosive” development of plant communities on the sub-Antarctic islands, of special importance appears to be determination of biochemical causes of the observed expansion of vascular plants, which was not done in the Report. Russian specialists have investigated the influence of warming on the sub-Antarctic vegetation communities by assessing humus formation in lithozem of King George Island, comparing the state of soil under grass and lichen. Influence of additional moistening during frozen ground melting on transformation of organic soil substance under vascular plants contributing to formation of root structures, was revealed. It is shown that in soils under grass the humus formation rate is higher than in soils under lichen.
In the part devoted to climatic modeling, the existing problems and assessment of uncertainties is presented in a sufficiently detailed and balanced form. An assessment of the quality of climatic models as instruments of Antarctic climate prediction is in agreement with corresponding sections of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, being however more detailed and presenting the next step regarding the IPCC Report. Conclusions of SCAR Report, both concerning assessment of future changes and priorities of model studies and prediction of Antarctic climate, are confirmed by evidence from corresponding studies in the last few years based on Russian models. Recommendations of the Report concerning climate modeling appear to be justified. 
In general, we stress once again an exceptional importance and a high scientific level of this Report.
It is reasonable given the importance of observed changes and a rapid development of satellite observation tools and new self-contained platforms that SCAR organize a similar assessment in approximately 10 years. Such assessment will fully include the results of the IPY 2007/08, and probably of the International Polar Decade, the initiative put forward by Russia. New data on monitoring changes in the glacial surface in different regions of Antarctica by means of satellite geodesy could be quite useful. The methodological basis of such monitoring was developed by Russian and German specialists and applied near the Russian Mirny, Molodezhnaya and Progress stations. During the next few years, a similar observation network is planned in the vicinity of Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen and Russkaya.
For the next Report and other similar assessments in the SCAR framework, experience of preparation, for example, of the Arctic Council Report - АСIА (Arctic Climate Impact Assessment) could be used when before the international review the national review of the Draft Report was made which was considered in the Arctic countries for the most complete inclusion of national data. This is important, as many publications in Russian, in particular, are not well known at the international level. National reviewing allows us to enhance the assessment representativity and fill the gaps in data and knowledge.  


