





Answers to comments on CEE for “Water Sampling the Subglacial Lake Vostok”





Answers to comments on CEE for “Water Sampling the Subglacial Lake Vostok”
In January 1998, as recommended by the international community, the Russian Antarctic Expedition suspended drilling of a deep ice borehole 5G-1 at Vostok after reaching a depth of 3623 m. Same year, open competition for an ecologically clean technology for water sampling from surface layers of subglacial Lake Vostok using borehole 5G-1 was declared. The borehole was filled by vertical with a drilling fluid (kerosene/Freon mixture) for counteracting the “mountainous pressure” effect narrowing the borehole diameter at its bottom. The technology was developed by St. Petersburg Mining Institute and Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute in 1999-2000. In July 2001, this technology was introduced by Russia at ATCM XXIV in St. Petersburg (WP-29).
In 2002 at ATCM XXV in Warsaw (Poland), Russia has introduced the Draft CEE “Water sampling of the subglacial Lake Vostok” (WP-19). To discuss it the Intersessional Contact Group was set up chaired by France. As a result, Russia presented at ATCM XXVI in Madrid (Spain) in 2003 the revised Draft CEE (WP-01).
Critical comments on this document were given in the ATCM XXVI Final Report, Madrid, Spain, 2003 in Annex E ‘CEP VI Report’ Appendix 2. 
Some comments could be answered only after resuming drilling in borehole 5G-1 for obtaining new data on ice composition and structure. Drilling operations began again in 2004, and by 28 October 2007, the borehole depth was 3668 m. However a technical accident resulted in the drill loss at the borehole bottom. Attempts in the seasons of 2007-08 and 2008-09 to extract it were unsuccessful, and in January 2009 it was decided to bypass the accident segment by borehole deflection from the vertical. This methodology was developed at St. Petersburg Mining Institute and successfully applied in Antarctica. The deflection was started from a depth of 3590 m in 1.5 m from the accident segment. As of late January 2010, the depth of borehole 5G-2 was 3650 m. 
The results could not be currently used in the final CEE in order to present it according to CEP regulations at CEP XIII in Uruguay in 2010. Russia has prepared the following answers to CEP comments to be discussed by the international Antarctic community. 

    1) Studies of ice cores from borehole 5G-1 and 5G-2 at Vostok station carried out in 2004 to 2010 and results of similar drilling operations in the north of Greenland Island (Denmark) and on Queen Maud Land in East Antarctica (Germany) showed the structure of lower ice layers of lake origin in the ice sheet to be comprised of large very hard ice crystals, which do not create any conditions for drilling fluid spreading from the borehole downward or towards lateral sides. Such crystalline structure is likely to be caused by physical water freezing peculiarities at a pressure of about 375 atm. Drilling performed by Denmark and Germany in different ice boreholes using the drilling fluid with similar composition as in Vostok project (kerosene and Freon mixture) has demonstrated a possible unexpected contact of this fluid with sub-glacial water masses. As a result, the upper drilling fluid level in the borehole was rising to a height of the existing pressure undercompensation of this fluid to full pressure of ice strata above water. Analyses of the ice core from Greenland formed of frozen water that has risen upward in the borehole from sub-glacial aquatic systems showed that only the uppermost 10-cm of the “fresh frozen” ice core was contaminated by the kerosene-Freon mixture. The lower layers of this core do not have any traces of contamination. So, an independent test of the Russian technology was performed under full-scale conditions in Greenland. Study of microbial diversity of the kerosene-Freon mixture from borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station showed the species composition of bacteria inhabiting this mixture to absolutely differ from that revealed in the ice cores and cannot introduce additional problems to determinations of species diversity of micro-organisms. The kerosene-Freon layer in the borehole serves as a real biological protection from biological material transportation from the borehole surface by drilling equipment and the cable. So, the risks of potential contamination of lake relict water using the proposed Russian methodology are reduced to a minimum.
    2) Technology of penetrating the sub-glacial Lake Vostok envisaged introducing an organic silicone fluid (organosilicic oil) to the lower part of borehole before the direct contact of the kerosene-Freon mixture with surface lake water. Different properties of this fluid were investigated in detail and presented in the paper prepared at St. Petersburg Mining Institute by Dr. P.Talalay “Characteristics of behavior in the environment and toxicological properties of dimethylsiloxane oil products”, introduced many times at different international conferences on ice drilling. 
Silicone oils present hydrophobic and inert substances, stable to water, air, oxygen, metals, wood, paper and plastics. This product type is manufactured in the USA, Japan, Great Britain, France, Germany, Czech Republic and Russia and has everywhere its own trademark. There are no time restrictions for personnel handling silicone oils as there is no proof of their harmful influence on human organism. 
Study of microbial diversity of silicone oil showed absence of bacteria inhabiting it in the Antarctic ice cores. 
    3) As alternative solutions, a rapid ice drilling technology “FASTDRILL” (USA) is considered. This technology cannot be applicable at Vostok station, as the required power for a constant hot water circulation in the ice borehole with a temperature of about +90o С allows drilling at a temperature higher than -35oС. At Vostok, the year-round surface temperature of the ice sheet is -55o С. Ice drilling at this temperature using hot water will require a power station with several megawatts capacity. Vertical temperature convection at the contact of relict subglacial lake water with hot water from the borehole with a temperature of +90o С will comprise many tens and even hundreds of meters. Microorganisms inhabiting these aquatic systems will be simply boiled. Of serious concern is the measurement accuracy of hydrophysical sensors lowered in the sounding complexes through hot water in the borehole, as the relaxation time of these sensors at unknown water temperature in situ in subglacial systems is practically undetermined. No other methods for glacier drilling and correspondingly penetrating the subglacial aquatic system were developed and tested under the high-latitudinal conditions.
    4) Knowledge gaps noted in 2003 about the ice/water interface conditions and chemical and microbiological composition of surface water of Lake Vostok were to a great extent eliminated for the past 7 years. The final answer can be given only after penetration. Nevertheless it is already obvious that ice formed of frozen lake water directly contacts its surface layer. Information on ice structure at the glacier bottom is given in 1. Data on the hydrochemical analysis of ice cores from lower horizons of borehole 5G-1 were obtained as a result of special analyses at the Laboratory of the University of Venice (Italy). They were presented at different international forums and published in scientific journals. An analysis of the gaseous content of specimens from the lower ice core layers showed an extremely high oxygen concentration, which most likely testifies to oversaturation of surface lake water layers with dissolved oxygen. This creates “cold reactor” conditions, under which oxygen burns the living cells. The microbiological analyses of ice from the lower part of borehole 5G-1 showed the concentration of living cells to be ultimately low, comprising 1 to 10 cells in 1 ml indicating an extremely low biological activity in the surface water layer of Lake Vostok. These results were also presented at different international forums and published in scientific editions.
    5) Data on the ice structure in the 3623 – 3668 m layer indicate a complete absence of any capillary channels in the lower glacier layers through which the drilling fluid could spread downwards. This makes the assumed risk of an accidental kerosene-Freon mixture release into the lake surface water quite baseless. The contact area of this mixture with water will be restricted by borehole diameter (132-137 mm). The mixture is a hydrophobic liquid and does not mix with water. Being lighter (density of 0.91 g/cm³) than water, the drilling fluid will always be above water. A hypothesis of the presence of flood systems in subglacial aquatic media is soundless for Lake Vostok, as the lake water body is entirely within the shores formed by mountain rocks and not by glacier. Besides, Lake Vostok does not have any systems of channels connecting it with the other subglacial water systems. The latter data were obtained from ground-based radio-echo sounding fully contouring the lake coastline. 
    6) Unforeseen circumstances in implementing the Project of penetrating lake water through borehole 5G-2 could be an accidental penetration to the lake provided the glacial thickness is less than 3750 m (measured by radio-echo sounding and seismic methods). In this case, absence of organosilicon parting fluid at the “drilling fluid/lake water” interface is possible. As shown by operations in Greenland, potential contamination is possible only in the thin 10-cm layer within the borehole. In this case, lake water will rise upward in the borehole to a height of pressure undercompensation of the drilling fluid column. Glacier drilling under any circumstances is performed at the pressure undercompensation of 5-8 atm (with the drilling fluid depth by 50-80 m lower than the borehole upper level).
Other emergencies in implementing this project, like the kerosene-Freon mixture release, are not anticipated. No other technical mistakes in drilling the glacier are expected due to special additional measures undertaken for this operation at Vostok station. These are constant control of technical equipment and monitoring the drilling fluid density and its upper level in the borehole.

