





Revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast





Revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No.159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast. 

The draft Management Plans were circulated for comment to IAATO and the four tour ship companies that frequently use the ASPA as part of their tours; the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust who carry out a regular conservation programme on the historic huts and artefacts within the ASPAs; the United States Antarctic Programme environmental team; and scientists who have undertaken research within the ASPAs. 

The revisions are outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast. 

ASPA No. 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VII-9 (1972) Historic Site and Monument (HSM) No.22
Measure 1 (1998) Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 29
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 1 (1998) Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 29
Any revisions to management plan:
Management Plan revised through Measure 2 (2005) to address issues surrounding conservation of the historic artefacts of the Area.
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes - changes to the captions and graphics
    • Map A inset title changed from ‘Cape Adare Peninsula, Ross Sea’ to ‘Adare Peninsula, Ross Sea’
    • Map A estimated coastline graphic changed from dotted line to solid line.
    • Map A label of Historic Site and Monument 22 corrected with a capital ‘M’ in Monument.
    • Map B - the ASPA boundary is now more correctly displayed reflecting the boundary description. 
    • Map B - All labels were standardized 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes
The original boundary description in Section 6(i) incorrectly identified the east and west boundaries and this has been corrected.
There were no GPS co-ordinates for the Area. These have been obtained (reworked from original data and ground truthed by site visit) and included in the boundary description.  
The southern boundary was originally the shoreline of Ridley Beach and this has been changed to the high tide mark of Ridley Beach.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    • The Management Plan has been revised in parallel with the other heroic era historic hut ASPAs in the Ross Sea region (ASPAs 155, 157 and 158) to provide consistency in wording and numbering between all plans where similar Management Plan provisions occur. Minor editing details have been completed throughout the Management Plan.
    • Provision added to Management Activities: ‘Copies of this Management Plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at adjacent operational research/field stations’. (Section 3)
    • Added “any other activity specifically provided for in this Plan” as a reason for Permits to be issued. (Section 7)
    • Included guides with number of people allowed in the ASPA at one time. (Section 7(i))
    • Addition of average hut visitor numbers ‘193 per year between 1998 and 2009’. (Section 7(i))
    • Added ‘only use tripods or monopods with flat bottomed rubber bases as opposed to those with metal spikes which can damage the floor’, ‘and when the maximum number of visitors (4) are in the hut at one time the use of tripods or monopods is prohibited’ and ‘remain on established walking tracks’ to the Code of Conduct when visiting the historic hut and ASPA. (Section 7 (ii)).
    • Added the word ‘introduced’ to bullet 3, Section 7(v) so it now reads “All introduced materials are to be removed when no longer required and before a date to be specified in the relevant Permit.”
    • Added requirement for nominated guides to brief visitors of the Code of Conduct, as well as the requirements of this Management Plan and to ensure they are complied with. (Section 7(ix))
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a

