





Environmental Aspects of Antarctic Ship-borne Tourism





Environmental Aspects of Antarctic Ship-borne Tourism
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
This paper outlines the ways in which ship-borne tourism interacts with the Antarctic environment, and which of those interactions (environmental aspects) are addressed in existing regulations and guidelines. It aims to facilitate discussion of which aspects are adequately covered and which might warrant further attention.
Background
At the 2009 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism, Australia presented WP 8 Environmental Aspects of Antarctic Ship-borne Tourism. The ATME noted that the assessment presented in Appendix A to WP 8 provided a useful summary of interactions between ship-borne tourism and the Antarctic environment, and identified issues that should be addressed in environmental impact assessments for ship-borne tourism activities. The ATME recommended (Recommendation 11) that the relevant committees and groups of the ATCM (such as the CEP and the Operations Working Group) give further consideration to how the assessment could be drawn on to inform their discussions regarding the management of ship-borne tourism and shipping generally. This paper largely replicates Australia’s WP 8 to the ATME, with slight modifications to incorporate improvements suggested during that meeting.
Environmental aspects of Antarctic ship-borne tourism
Identifying, evaluating and addressing the ways in which an activity interacts with the environment (environmental aspects) is a standard approach to systematic environmental management. To facilitate discussion about environmental safeguards for Antarctic ship-borne tourism, a table identifying environmental aspects, impacts and existing regulations and guidelines is provided in Appendix A.
For the purposes of the assessment, the activity ‘Antarctic ship-borne tourism’ comprises the operation of a ship for the purpose of conducting or supporting non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. The environmental aspects identified are those associated with potential impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. Consistent with the Meeting of Experts’ focus on shipping operations, the assessment does not address the environmental aspects of activities supported by ships, including small boat operations, helicopter operations, landings ashore and shore-based activities. Each of these related activities has its own set of environmental aspects that may also warrant attention.
The assessment does not address the relative significance of each aspect, which would be determined by evaluating the associated environmental risks. It is likely that some aspects may be of particular relevance to passenger vessel operations (e.g. interaction with marine wildlife, anchoring), whereas some may be equally pertinent to all Antarctic shipping (e.g. atmospheric emissions), and others may be most applicable to national program activities (e.g. breaking ice). Such an evaluation may be appropriate in identifying priorities for future work to manage the environmental aspects of Antarctic ship-borne tourism, and may best be considered by the Committee for Environmental Protection in light of the environmental aspects of other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Recommendations
Consistent with ATME Recommendation 11, Australia proposes that the CEP and ATCM give further consideration to how the assessment in Appendix A could be drawn on to inform discussions regarding the management of ship-borne tourism and shipping generally.
