





Proposal for the drafting of guidelines for bases that receive visitors




Proposal for the drafting of guidelines for 
bases that receive visitors 
Summary
In virtue of what was agreed in the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism (Resolution 7, 2009), and given the current situation as regards visits of tourists to Antarctic bases, Argentina submits for the ATCM’s consideration the present paper outlining a proposal encouraging the Parties to draft guidelines for regulating tourist visits to the bases under their administration. The proposal also includes aspects relating to the format to be used in these guidelines and the notification mechanisms to be applied.  
Introduction
Resolution 7 (2009) stipulates, within the framework of the general principles it establishes to inform and guide further work in managing Antarctic tourism activities, that the Antarctic Treaty Parties should aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that they continue to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism, and also that all operators conducting tourism activities in Antarctica should be encouraged to cooperate with the Antarctic Treaty Parties to coordinate tourism activities.
In addition, at ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009), the IAATO presented Information Paper 87 on the IAATO Field Operations Manual (FOM), a compendium of guidelines and operating procedures for tourist vessel expedition crews meant to facilitate access to the IAATO’s internal regulations as well as those arising from the Antarctic Treaty System. Chapter 12 of this Manual includes information on Antarctic research stations, explaining, among other things, which countries have procedures in place regulating visits to their bases. 
During the 2008/09 season, tourist vessels visited a total of 17 Antarctic bases, belonging to the National Antarctic Programs of 11 different Consultative Parties. However, only four Antarctic bases currently have internal tourism management procedures in place, which have been included in the IAATO Field Operations Manual. This means that the majority of tourist visits to Antarctic bases are not subject to formal regulation, leaving the manner in which visits take place to be agreed unofficially between the bases and the vessels. 
Proposal
Considering all of the above information, Argentina hereby presents to the Meeting a specific proposal encouraging the Parties to draft guidelines for regulating tourist visits to bases under their administration. 
Should this proposal prosper, it is further proposed that these guidelines be drafted using the same format as the Visitor Site Guidelines, so that tourist vessel expedition crews find them easy to understand. In addition, Parties that already have procedures included in the IAATO FOM are encouraged to adapt the format of these procedures to that of the Visitor Site Guidelines. 
This proposal by no means implies that these guidelines should be submitted for the ATCM’s consideration. It is understood that each Party is free to establish its own procedures for managing tourism at its Antarctic bases as it sees fit. However, the proposal does include the recommendation that the Parties that do draft guidelines of this sort inform the ATCM of this in an appropriate manner, so that the guidelines can be included in the FOM, thereby ensuring that they can be easily accessed and applied by tourist vessel expedition crews belonging to the IAATO, and thereby also ensuring that visits are regulated by the necessary formal procedural framework, as duly reported to the Consultative Parties and tourist operators. 
Argentina feels that this proposal is not only in keeping with and providing support for the General Prnciples of Tourism, but also that it will lead to improved tourism management at Antarctic bases. 

