





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 105: Beaufort Island, Ross Sea





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 105: Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Abstract
New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 105: Beaufort Island. New Zealand recommends the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for this Area.
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA 105: Beaufort Island. 

A review of this management plan was initiated during 2008.  Key aspects of the review were:

    • Determination of the size and location of the penguin colonies (Adelie and Emperor penguins);
    • Assessment of vegetation cover within the Area; 
    • Assessment of the appropriateness of the current boundary in relation to where Emperor penguins breed.

This review is one year later than the five yearly review periods for Management Plans in accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V of the Protocol. IP 8 (ATCM XXXII –CEPXII) outlined reasons for the delay due to the inaccessibility of the site during the 2008/09 season to assess the key aspects of the review. 

A site visit was again not possible in the 2009/10 season. Instead, the draft Management Plan was circulated for comment to scientists with both the United States Antarctic Programme (USAP) and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme who conduct research in the Area and have visited the site recently. In addition, the USAP environmental team was consulted.

The input received was used with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998), when considering revisions to the Management Plan. The following section briefly describes the proposed amendments arising from the review of the Management Plan.
Revisions
The revisions are outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA 105 Beaufort Island.

ASPA No. 105: Beaufort Island, McMurdo Sound, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-5 (1966) as Specially Protected Area No. 5
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 1 (1997)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2003)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 105: Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes 
The fast ice portion of the ASPA boundary was revised and enlarged to account for the movement of the breeding area of the Emperor penguins. The new coordinates are:
    • From the northern coast of Beaufort Island at 76 ° 55’ 44” S, 166° 52’ 42” E north to 76° 55’ 30” S, 166° 52’ 49” E; 
    • From 76° 55’ 30” S, 166° 52’ 49” E east to 76° 55’ 30” S, 167° 00’ E;
    • From 76° 55’ 30” S, 167° 00’ E south along the 167° longitude parallel to where it intersects with the coastline of Beaufort Island at 76° 55’ 30”S, 167° E.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes 
The existing four maps were updated with new imagery. Due to the remoteness of the site, recent imagery is scarce. The original imagery was obtained from 22 November, 1993. The new imagery is an ASTER image with around 15m resolution taken 26 November 2006. Because this new image is at a low resolution, details of the island topography was lost. Therefore, an updated set of maps has been included:
    • Map A – Topographic map of Beaufort Island;
    • Map B – Orthophotograph of north Beaufort Island; and
    • Map C – Orthophotograph of south Beaufort Island.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes 
Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout the Management Plan. A literature review was conducted to update the information within the Management Plan. In addition, consultation with the scientists who frequently visit the Area provided information to update the existing Description of the Values to be Protected (Section 1) and the Description of the Area, Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features (Section 6(i)). 

(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).

The statement, “Copies of this Management Plan (stating the special restrictions that apply), including maps of the Area, shall be made available at adjacent operational research/field stations” replaced the existing statement, “A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed prominently and copies of this Management Plan shall be made available at Scott Base (NZ)” under Section 3 Management Activities.

Section 7 Terms and Conditions for Entry Permits was amended to allow entry to the Area for ‘essential management purposes’ in addition to compelling scientific reasons.

5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a 
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a 
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


