





Third Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island




Third Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island
    1. Introduction
At CEP VII, Germany introduced IP 005, “Research Project Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for desig­nation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas’”. This paper described the below mentioned German three-year research project (2003 – 2006) and introduced it for the first time. Several CEP members expressed their support for the proposal, and indicated that they would willingly assist Germany in the project.
At CEP VIII, Germany introduced IP 016, “Progress Report on the Research Project Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”. This paper provided an update of the project, noting the excellent cooperation with other Parties in the area through an informal co-ordination group. 
At ATCM XXVIII, “Germany agreed that prior to tabling a draft Management Plan for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island) and following a proposal by Chile an International Working Group should be established. This Working Group should be composed of those Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Observers to the Antarctic Treaty. It should discuss the issues related to the Draft Management Plan. For this purpose, Germany would organize two international workshops, one in September 2005 and another one in January/February 2006, in order to convene the par­ticipants on this issue” (Final Report of ATCM XXVIII, para. 90).
At CEP IX, Brazil, China, Germany, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation introduced WP 022, “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Proposal to establish an Intersessional Contact Group”. This paper reported on the main findings and recommendations of the King George Island Work­shop “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island” in January/February 2006 as well as on the outcome of the Workshop “Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic” in September 2005”. Discussion of this paper is reflected in paragraphs 70 to 75 of the CEP Report.
At ATCM XXIX, “Germany expressed satisfaction on reaching agreement with Chile in principle on devel­oping an ASMA for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. They will jointly convene – via note verbal – an inter­national working group (paragraph 74 of the CEP Report). Germany expressed the hope that a substan­tive outcome of the group’s work would be presented to the next ATCM. Chile confirmed that it will host a work­shop to prepare the input on this issue for discussion at CEP X.” (Final Report of ATCM XXIX, para. 77).
Pursuant to these understandings an international working group involving government representatives of interested Parties was convened by Germany and Chile in order to discuss management approaches, possibly aiming at drafting a management plan for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region (see separate IP 22 rev. 1 by Germany and Chile). 
At ATCM XXX, Germany introduced IP 112 “Possible Modules of a “Fildes Peninsula region” ASMA Management Plan”. Further, Germany and Chile introduced IP 22 rev. 1 “Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”. Comments of 15 IWG parties to four questions concerning the future management of the Fildes Peninsula Region were reported.
At ATCM XXXI, Germany introduced IP 30 “Final Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas“”. It contained a proposal for a “Fildes Peninsula region ASMA Man­agement Plan” which was already presented to CEP X as IP 112 (2007) “Possible Modules of a ‘Fildes Peninsula region’ ASMA Management Plan” and which was uploaded on the IWG web-based Discussion Forum.
At ATCM XXXII, Chile and Germany introduced WP 004 “Second Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”. Chile introduced IP 81 “Notes on a Multiple Protection System for some areas in King George Island: Zones under Annex V and their relevance to Fildes Peninsula and adjacent areas”.
    2. Intersessional Work
2.1	Meeting of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environ­mental Management of Fildes Peninsula Region 
As agreed by ATCM XXXII 2009 in Baltimore, the extra meeting of the International Working Group on Fildes (IWG Fildes) took place in Punta Arenas, INACH, Chile, on 30 and 31 July 2009 to discuss items related to the management scheme of the area. 15 participants including representatives from Argentina, Chile, Germany, the Russian Federation and Uruguay as well an observer from IAATO and DAP took part. 
The meeting addressed the need to establish and to further define a facility zone in the area. For this purpose, the boundaries of such a facility zone have to be fixed. This can only be done on the basis of comments from the National Antarctic Programs involved. Therefore, it was also agreed that the National Managers involved should formalize their cooperative efforts into a coordination group, for which Uruguay volunteered to take the lead. They were requested to report back to the convenors of the IWG Fildes. 
The complete results of the IWG meeting in Punta Arenas including agreed issues and working plan/time schedule of the IWG Fildes for the intersessional period 2009/2010 are presented in Annex I. 
2.2	Tasks of the IWG for the intersessional period until CEP XIII in 2010 
At the IWG meeting in Punta Arenas, it was agreed that the convenors would work on a revised draft Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula taking aboard comments made within the IWG Meeting as well as any written contributions for their submission as part of a Progress Report to the XXXIII ATCM (see the references contained in the chapter “Working Plan/Time Schedule” in Annex I).
Therefore, Germany revised the draft Management Plan on the basis of the comments received by Uruguay, China and the Russian Federation. This revised Management Plan is attached in Annex II in which all recent amendments are underlined. It also includes the code of conduct for scientific research, which is now in line with the code of conduct for scientific research by SCAR (IP 4 ATCM XXXII). 
Further, detailed maps about the proposed location and size of a possible facility zone around their stations were presented by Uruguay, China, the Russian Federation and Chile. Uruguay made a proposal towards an integrated facility zone (see Map 3 of Annex II). However this map does not yet represent the agreed common boundaries of all parties with stations in the region and further work must be done towards that end. 
    3. Further Steps
While some progress has been made in the search of an agreed protection for the Fildes Peninsula Region, the following aspects should be taken into consideration for further discussion:
(a)	The spatial synthesis of the different requirements concerning a possible Facility Zone, on the basis of the maps submitted by the countries with stations in the area;
(b)	The proposed revised Management Plan and its relationship with the existing and any proposed ASPA included in the region;
(c)	Any missing requirements, either in the information already provided by stations, or in other matters requiring coordination and enhancing or contributing to the justification for a Fildes Peninsula ASMA.
The participants of the IWG Meeting are pledged to continue their intersessional work at the web-based Fildes Discussion Forum of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
In addition, the IWG conveners propose to have an IWG Meeting during CEP XIII in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in order to continue the discussion of all elements related to the nature, scope and characteristics of a management scheme for the Fildes Peninsula Region, including the suggestions by Uruguay and any other participant regarding the integration of the Fildes Facility Zones, and the revised Management Plan prepared by Germany.
