





Revision of maps and text for the Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7: Southwest Anvers Island & Palmer Basin






Revision of maps and text for the Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7:
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin
Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin was originally designated through Measure 1 (ATCM XXXI, Kyiv, 2008). The Area has a wide range of important natural, scientific and educational values and is an area of considerable and increasing scientific, tourist and logistic activities. The aim of the Management Plan is to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin region by managing the variety of activities and interests in the Area. Two Antarctic Specially Protected Areas are designated within the ASMA: ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, and ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island.
Substantial increases to numbers of breeding pairs of Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua) on Biscoe Point has necessitated revisions to the provisions in the protected area management plan relating to aircraft access. In particular, it was considered necessary to extend the overflight restrictions over the entire island on which Biscoe Point lies with the exception of the designated landing site. 
Designated access procedures and routes were needed to provide clear guidance for aircraft access on and near Biscoe Point. In the context of this site, the most effective way in which to achieve this has been to designate a new access zone in the Management Plan for ASMA No. 7 for helicopter approaches to landings sites at Biscoe Point. This is specified as a Helicopter Access Zone to ensure there is no confusion with access routes for other forms of transport such as small boats.
The new Helicopter Access Zone at Biscoe Point has necessitated updates to Map 8 of the Management Plan for ASMA No. 7 as follows:
    • Addition of revised overflight and access conditions, including the Helicopter Access Zone and the limits of a 2000 foot recommended separation distance from the edges of known bird colony breeding locations within the Area; 
    • A reduction in scale to 1:14,000 at US Letter Page size in order to include the full extent of the revised overflight and access conditions that apply.
The addition of the Helicopter Access Zone at Biscoe Point necessitates the following changes to the text of the Management Plan for ASMA No. 7:
Changes to Section 6(iii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area – 
Section 6(iii)(d) is renumbered as Section 6(iii)(e).
A new Section 6(iii)(d) is inserted as follows:
(d) Helicopter Access Zone
A Helicopter Access Zone is designated covering the approaches to the landing sites (A and B) designated in ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point (Map 8). The Helicopter Access Zone extends in northwesterly and northeasterly directions from the designated landing sites out to a distance of 2000 feet (610 m) from the edges of known bird colony breeding locations within the Area.
Changes to Section 7(i) Access to and movement within the Area – 
Paragraph 4: amend the last sentence in the paragraph such that the words ‘and access’ are inserted after “specific overflight” as follows:
“Overflight of wildlife colonies should be avoided throughout the Area, and specific overflight and access restrictions apply at Litchfield Island (ASPA No.113) and Biscoe Point (ASPA No.139) (Maps 7 & 8 and specific provisions in the ASPA management plans).”
The updated provisions and map will aid in the implementation of the Management Plan for those conducting activities in the Area, and ensure that the maps and text in both the ASPA No. 139 and ASMA No. 7 plans remain fully consistent.

