





Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange via the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES): Current state and improvements for a consistent use





Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange via the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES): 
Current state and improvements for a consistent use 

Background:
The Antarctic Treaty requires each Contracting Party to freely exchange information about its activities in Antarctica.
In order to promote international cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica, Article III (1) establishes that
    (a) information regarding plans for scientific programmes in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations;
    (b) scientific personnel shall be exchanged in Antarctica between expeditions and stations;
    (c) scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available.

On the other hand, Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires each Contracting Party to inform the other about its activities by giving advance notice of
    (a) all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory;
    (b) all stations in Antarctica occupied by its nationals; and
    (c) any military personnel or equipment intended to be introduced by it into Antarctica subject to the conditions prescribed in Article 1 (2).

These requirements were later elaborated in various measures of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991 added important information exchange obligations on environmental matters. The information to be submitted was then divided into three categories:
        ◦ Pre-season information,
        ◦ Annual report, and
        ◦ Permanent information.

Under the direction of the ATCM, the Secretariat (ATS) has developed the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) as a tool to facilitate the submission of information and as a central repository for this information.
While entering the information for the season 2008/2009, Germany faced a few difficulties due to the different ways in which “scientific activities of the previous year” in the annual report can be interpreted and some limitations in the pre-season report. When discussing the adequate presentation of information with the ATS, we found out that there seems to be no consensus between Parties on presenting the required information. While several Parties follow the requirements of the regulations mentioned above, others seem to have difficulties in submitting their data for exchange. Based on these present but also on former suggestions for (technical) improvements, this topic should be discussed at the upcoming ATCM in relation to global requirements of the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange.
Aims:
The overall aims of this Working Paper are:
    1) to remind all Parties using EIES to maintain the required information exchange without losing information compared to the former format,
    2) to clarify for all Parties which information is to be included in the given website structure, and
    3) to reach consensus on the feasible use of EIES which will be recorded in the user guide and accepted by the next ATCM.
Points for consideration/Proposals:
    1) In order not to lose information, we would like to suggest to all Parties that they should not only use external links to local homepage entries, but describe the activities in a few sentences and provide the link as additional information. This would enable the ATCM to use this repository as a tool to e.g. survey tourism activities and to provide a database for future tourism policy within the framework of the ATCM. Furthermore, this will also be very helpful for the ATS in case further analyses are carried out based on this information, e.g. for tourism or research activity statistics.
    2) The EIES user guide (updated in January 2010) should be followed by each Party and its local supporters in order to maintain a standardized report system. In addition, we propose some technical improvements, e.g. concerning additional categories and subsections, in order to simplify the use of the given website structure. Suggestions will be summarized from former requests to the ATS as well as current discussions on certain problems.
    3) Interested Parties should thus discuss the advantages and problems of the successful information exchange according to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection via EIES in an ICG. They support the ATS improving EIES with feedback from the users. In addition, it may be helpful if this group provides practical assistance to Parties with starting problems.
Recommendations:
We recommend that the Meeting:
    1. makes a decision on the establishment of an ICG which supports ATS website utilization and checks the standard of information exchange and the regular availability of advance notice according to Article VII (5). A report on the status and the successful use of EIES will be expected at the next ATCM.
    2. agrees at the next ATCM on proposed improvements by the ICG and approves the updated user guide of the EIES format as a tool for successful information uploads and exchange.

