





A proposal to continue review of ATCM recommendations





A proposal to continue review of ATCM recommendations
WP submitted by Argentina and Germany
During past years the ATCM has been reviewing the recommendations adopted since 1961 in order to clarify which of them, whether approved or not, still require action to be taken by the Parties. With this objective the ATCM decided to consider this task as an ongoing process in order to maintain the accuracy of its legal instruments.
At ATCM XXV (Warsaw – 2002) Decision 3 (2002) was adopted, in which over 20 recommendations were designated as spent.
At ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh – 2006) the Secretariat presented SP 5 Legal status of the ATCM measures on protected areas and the meeting decided to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG) chaired by the United States to analyze this matter. In parallel it requested the Secretariat to prepare a paper for consideration at ATCM XXX (New Delhi – 2007), providing a broad overview of all ATCM instruments, categorized by general subject matter, and a detailed analysis of past instruments related to all other aspects of environmental protection, similar in nature to SP 5. 
As result of the work of the ICG, ATCM XXX adopted Decision 1 (2007) designating 13 recommendations on protected areas as no longer current. 
Since then, review of recommendations has been matter of further discussion at following ATCMs, and the Secretariat presented several documents aimed to help in the analysis of the legal status of recommendations on protected areas, on general environmental matters and, at ATCM XXXII (Baltimore-2009), on operational matters. 
Unfortunately, since during the last meetings there were other topics to be discussed by the WG on Legal and Institutional Matters, there was insufficient time to properly discuss the subject and take a decision on this issue, and it has been postponed year after year.
Considering that again at this year’s meeting the Secretariat is presenting the following papers:
SP 5: Review of the Status of Recommendations on Protected Areas and Monuments,
SP 6: Review of the Status of Recommendations on operational matters, and
SP 7: Review of the Status of ATCM Recommendations on Environmental Issues other than Area Protection and Management, 
and, given that it is probable that during this meeting the ATCM will again not be able to properly discuss and take a decision on these proposals, but also considering that it is a very important issue to clarify which recommendations still require action by Parties and which ones could be designated as spent or no longer current, Argentina and Germany think that it would be convenient to consider the following action plan:
    1) To establish an ATCM Intersessional Contact Group in order to analyze the proposals for a review of the recommendations contained in SP 5, SP 6 and SP 7.

    2) To agree to the terms of reference for the ICG, which would be open-ended for all the ATCPs and would operate through the on-line ATCM Discussion Forum established by the Secretariat.

    3) That, given the technical matters considered in some of the recommendations to be reviewed, the ICG request the advice of the CEP, SCAR, COMNAP and other expert bodies when necessary.

    4) That the ICG present an initial report with a proposal on which recommendations could be designated as no longer current at ATCM XXXIV and that it continue, if necessary, to discuss this issue for an additional intersessional period, given the technical nature of matters contained in some of the recommendations being considered.

