





Proposed addition of the Plaque Commemorating the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant at McMurdo Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument




Proposed addition of the Plaque Commemorating the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant at McMurdo Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument
This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument

    (i) Name of Proposed HSM: Plaque Commemorating the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant at McMurdo Station.
    (ii) Description:  The plaque is approximately 18x 24 inches, made of bronze and secured to a large vertical rock at McMurdo Station, the former site of the PM-3A nuclear power reactor. It is approximately half way up the west side of Observation Hill. The plaque text details achievements of PM-3A, Antarctica’s first nuclear power plant. 
    (iii) Coordinates: 77o 51’  S Latitude  and  166o 41’ E  Longitude
    (iv) Original proposing Party: United States
    (v) Party undertaking management: United States
Proposed addition of the Plaque Commemorating the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant at McMurdo Station to the List of Historic Sites and Monument

Summary
The United States proposes, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, that the plaque commemorating the PM-3A nuclear power plant at McMurdo station be added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments Approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting”.   The plaque commemorates the significant technical achievement of safely installing, operating, and removing the first, and only, nuclear power plant in Antarctic.  
Background
The PM-3A nuclear reactor was the first, and only, experiment to power an Antarctic station with a nuclear reactor.  The reactor was conceived as a way to lower the reliance on fuel oil at McMurdo Station, where nearly half of all supplies sent consisted of fuel oil.  
The PM-3A reactor was specially designed to be loaded onto a C-130 and flown wherever it was needed.   It could be packed, transported and assembled in all environmental conditions.  The PM-3A arrived at McMurdo Station on December 12, 1961 and began producing electricity for the station on July 10, 1962.  
Over the next 10 years, the 1.8 megawatt reactor had a remarkable record of achievement.  It set two records for the longest continuous operation of a military reactor. There was never a release of radiation in excess of safety levels set by the Atomic Energy Commission or any injuries reported in association with the reactor.  Beginning in 1966 the reactor also supplied steam for an evaporative distillation plant that provided McMurdo Station’s freshwater.
In 1972, the reactor was decommissioned when continued operation would no longer be cost effective. From 1973-6, the reactor and its associated buildings, except for those used for water distillation, were disassembled and shipped to the United States.  Contaminated backfill was also boxed and shipped.  Cleanup continued until 1979 when a radiological survey, and subsequent review by the U.S. Navy and the NUS Company of Rockville, Maryland, determined the radiation levels at the site were similar to background radiation levels and there was minimal risk from radiation exposure.   The U. S. Department of Energy then released the site for unrestricted use.  The last remaining buildings were removed during the 2009-2010 Austral summer.
The plaque commemorates the significant achievements of the PM-3A project.  Private funds were used to design and cast the plaque.  It was dedicated by United States Antarctic Program director Karl Erb at 6:30 PM (local time) on Tuesday January 19, 2010 at McMurdo Station in the presence of representatives from the National Science Board, The National Science Foundation, Department of Energy, Antarctica New Zealand and scientists and support staff at McMurdo Station.
Position and Description
Position:  77o 51’ S Latitude and 166o 41’ E  Longitude
The plaque is approximately 18 x 24 inches and cast in bronze.  The text describes the major achievements of the PM-3A nuclear power plant.  The plaque is affixed to a large vertical rock. The rock is located near the PM-3A reactor site, approximately half way up the west side of Observation Hill at McMurdo Station.

Reason for designation
Consistent with Resolution 8 (1995) and the Appendix to Resolution 3 (2009), this site merits listing for the following reasons:
    1) The plaque is associated with a particular event of importance in the history of science, namely the first use of a nuclear reactor to power an Antarctic research station.
    2) The plaque is associated with a notable achievement, namely the longest continuous and safe operation of a military nuclear reactor.
    3) The plaque is associated with a nuclear reactor that had technical value in its design and construction.   The reactor was designed to be flown on a C-130, and assembled in any environmental conditions.   
Available Photographs
    1) Close up of the plaque
Bibliography
National Science Foundation, McMurdo station reactor site released for unrestricted use, Antarctic Journal of the United States, vol. XV, no.1, March 1980: 1-4.
Naval Nuclear Power Unit at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, Removal Plan for the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant McMurdo Station, Antarctica,  September 1973.
Naval Nuclear Power Unit at Port Hueneme, California Report of Decommissioning of the PM-3A Nuclear Power Plant, McMurdo Station, Antarctica,  February 1979.

Picture 1: Close-up of the plaque.


