





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Marathons and other large – scale Sporting Activities in Antarctica




Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Marathons and other large – scale Sporting Activities in Antarctica


Introducction

The development of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area has been a subject of continuous concern of the Parties in the Consultative Meetings, according to the recommendations, resolutions and measures that has been enacted to this regard.

During the ATCM XXXII, Chile presented WP 54 the Effects of marathons held in the Antarctic Continent, pointing out that the large – scale sporting activities require an adequate regulation. On that opportunity, Chile request to the ATCM express their views about these events. The ATCM established an Intersessional Contact Group on this subject, with the objective of presenting a draft document and resolution during the next Consultative meeting that reflect the opinions from the Parties. 

The terms of reference agreed to this ICG are the followings: 

    • Conduct an analysis of the management of large-scale sporting and marathon running events;
    • Study where any additional regulations are required to address regulating the tourist activities mentioned above, with particular reference to site-specific instrument;
    • Noting Resolution 3 (2004), to consider whether additional procedures for prior communication and exchange of information between Parties are needed;

Development of the Intersessional Contact Group on Marathons and other large – scale Sporting Activities in Antarctica

The Intersesional Contact Group started on October 2009, after the publication of the terms of reference on the website forum and the invitation extended to the Parties to join it. Japan, United States, Argentina, Norway, Sweden, China, New Zealand, France, Germany, United Kingdom, Australia, South Africa and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) indicated their intention to participate on this group.

On March of 2010, Chile posted a vision on the development of these activities and presented a question paper with the intention of guiding the dialogue among the parties, according to the terms of reference established on the ATCM XXXII. This had the objective of collecting the experience and opinions of the parties about the subject. That question paper is attached to this document. 

The Forum received 176 views. Valuable comments were received from China, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa and the IUCN, which are summarized below.

Opinions from the participants according to the terms of reference

    • Conduct an analysis of the management of large-scale sporting and marathon running events;

Not all the participants have experienced the development of these activities in their areas of work in Antarctica.

Regarding about the existence of a special policy in their countries seeking to regulate the mass sports activities in Antarctica, most participants indicated not having a policy exclusively for that purpose. Others noted that their national legislation provided a prohibition on the development of high-risk activities in Antarctica. 

    • Study where any additional regulations are required to address regulating the tourist activities mentioned above, with particular reference to site-specific instrument;

One participant stressed that tourism and sports including marathons are in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, framed within the range of activities for peaceful purposes that can be carried out on the continent. Nevertheless, considering the increase in these types of activities, it was necessary to regulate aspects related to the timing or number of participants, to control its impact for the scientific work and the environment.

Another party noted that instead of establishing new rules, it is essential that these activities be carried out in accordance to it corresponding Environmental Impact Assessment. This reinforces the need that the exchange of information be done properly and exist an adequate monitoring in place.

Some participants pointed out the difficulties of establishing new regulations without having scientific data that could support them. The establishment of any type of measure regard to this subject must be based on objective criteria.

    • Noting Resolution 3 (2004), to consider whether additional procedures for prior communication and exchange of information between Parties are needed

The importance of the exchange of information between the parties was highlighted by another participant, who also raised the need to ask whether all expeditions to Antarctica notify the parties in advance, and have their Environmental Impact Assessment approved.  

Some parties stressed that the process of exchanging information with the organizers of these activities has improved in recent years, establishing a whole set of procedures for such purposes.

Another participant noted that any additional measure should only be discussed after ensuring that every government count with the adequate domestic legislation on the subject. 

Conclusions 

The comments provided by participants are not conclusive regarding the need for additional measures concerning large-scale sporting activities. In general terms, an important part of the comments indicates a trend that emphasizes in the compliance under the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

Also, the participants on this ICG stressed the importance of the exchange of information and advance notice of such activities.

It is estimated that the valuable comments received during the Intersessional Contact Group on marathons and large scale sporting events are insufficient to establish a draft resolution regarding to these activities. It also requires the involvement of a greater number of parties to move towards the establishment of consensus on this issue.

Nevertheless, in his capacity as leader of this group, Chile will continue with the work of consultations between the parties during the course of this meeting to move on with this topic.
  
Annex 1.

Questions to the participants in the Intersessional Contact Group Forum on 
“The effect of marathons held on the Antarctic Continent”

The following questions are intended to guide the dialogue according to the terms of reference defined in the ATCM XXXII, as well as the experiences and views from the Parties on the subject.

1. Conduct an analysis of the management of large-scale sporting and marathon running events

In relation to large – scale sporting events in Antarctica, Is it possible to harmonize the performance of these activities with the principles of environmental protection, scientific purpose of the continent and zone of peace that inspire the Antarctic Treaty System?

What has been the experience of your National Antarctic Program in relation to the marathons or similar activities in Antarctica? Is there a policy established by your country on this matter?

2. Study where any additional regulations are required to address regulating the tourist activities mentioned above, with particular reference to site-specific instrument;

Regarding the need for progress on the conceptual definition, does it seem desirable to establish a criterion based on the number of participants that a specific sporting event should contain to be considered as massive? This number could be set at 10, 20, 30 or more people?

Would it be appropriate to establish specific sites for these activities, according to criteria such as shorter or longer distance from the stations or the vulnerability of the environment against the potential environmental impact generated?

3. Noting Resolution 3 (2004), to consider whether additional procedures for prior communication and exchange of information between Parties are needed

According to your experience with the marathon or other large – scale sporting events in Antarctica, do you believe these activities are carried out in compliance to what is stated in Resolution 3 of 2004?

In the event of contacts being established with the organization of such activities, has the exchange of information between the National Program and them been fluid?

If it has not been so, how could it progress towards a better implementation of this Resolution?

Taking into account the assessment that can be done on the exchange of information related to these activities, Is it necessary that Resolution 3 of 2004 should become a Measure?


