





The Implications of Climate Change for the Antarctic Protected Areas System





The Implications of Climate Change for the Antarctic Protected Areas System 
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
Recent advances in climate change science1 have furthered our understanding of the Antarctic climate system and its effects on terrestrial and marine environments and species. This Working Paper reviews how these effects might specifically impact on the values currently protected by ASPAs, and provides recommendations on the development and review of the protected area system. 
 Introduction
Annex V of the Environmental Protocol allows Parties to designate ASPAs to protect ‘areas of outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values ....’. To date, 71 ASPAs have been adopted. However, the ASPA network has been described as lacking a strategic approach to site selection2, evolving instead in a relatively ad hoc fashion. Designation has generally followed a risk-based approach, with sites in proximity to hubs of human occupation or visitation. Whilst this approach has some merit, a more systematic approach which takes into account the likely future effects of climate change would be more effective. 
The Antarctic Peninsula is one of the most rapidly warming regions on the planet1 and contains 31 (44%) of the current ASPAs.  Of these, 20 are terrestrial sites, five are marine and six have marine and terrestrial components.  Appendix 1 lists those ASPAs, showing what are understood to be the main reasons for designation.  In many cases, there is no single primary reason for protection. Most commonly cited are plant communities (in 19 Management Plans), seabird nesting sites (15), land-based marine mammals (5), benthic communities (5), invertebrate communities (5), geology (4), freshwater lakes (2), control sites (1) and heritage (1).   
 Implications of climate change on terrestrial and freshwater environments
Warming across the Antarctic Peninsula is now well established1. This has caused the thinning of glaciers, the rapid retreat of ice-shelves and the exposure of new ice-free terrain3. 
Glacial retreat will have an immediate effect on ASPAs whose boundary definitions follow ice-fronts, for example ASPA 125 (Fildes Peninsula), ASPA 126 (Byers Peninsula), ASPA 147 (Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights) and ASPA 148 (Mount Flora). Where these are in retreat, this will shift the ‘physical boundary’, exposing new ground, in some cases fossiliferous remains, and create new habitat for terrestrial species. 
Warming encourages the growth and spread of established plants. Convey4 predicted terrestrial ecosystems to show particular sensitivity and rapid responses to regional climate change on the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc. Populations of Antarctica’s two native flowering plants increased in size and number due to climate warming, yet 16 (62%) of the terrestrial ASPAs protect one or (in most cases) both of these species.
Colonisation by new species (through natural dispersal or transfer by human activity), and corresponding competition with native species is likely to be a major outcome of climate change within Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems4,5. Natural introductions are rarely documented, but are scientifically important, vulnerable to disturbance, and may merit protection. Whilst provisions for preventing inter and intra-regional transfer of non-native species by human transfer into ASPAs are becoming more comprehensive (see for example Marion Nunataks ASPA 170 Management Plan), it is debatable whether this issue can be effectively addressed through the provisions of management plans rather than through a comprehensive continent-wide bio-security strategy6,7. 
The relationship between climate change and ecosystem function in lake systems is not well understood8, but lakes are thought to magnify the rates of change seen in the terrestrial environment9. Climate change will impact lake environments even in the short term through permafrost degradation, rock weathering, soil formation, erosion and vegetation development, which may affect the chemical, physical and biological properties of downstream lakes10. Lake ecosystems are under-represented in ASPAs of this region, with only two Management Plans citing this as a primary reason for protection (ASPA 126 and ASPA 147).  
 Implications of climate change on seabird colonies
Antarctic penguins can be highly sensitive to climate variability and change; they are thought most likely to respond by dispersal rather than adaptation.  The ice-obligate emperor and Adélie penguins are more vulnerable to warming, as their distribution will potentially shift pole-ward and contract.  In particular, declining sea-ice extent will have a severe impact on emperor penguins, which generally rely on fast ice as a breeding habitat. Ice-intolerant species (gentoo and chinstrap) may benefit as they expand their range southward11. 
Twelve ASPAs on the Antarctic Peninsula protect chinstrap penguin colonies, 11 protect gentoo colonies, 11 protect Adélie colonies (with a range of colony sizes of each species represented) and one protects emperor penguins.  It may be necessary to review and adjust the distribution of these ASPAs to enhance the protection of the more vulnerable Adélie and emperor colonies. Whilst it is predicted that gentoo and chinstrap colonies might thrive under climate-warming, these ASPAs could serve as reference sites to monitor climate-related change in population structure.  
Implications of climate change on marine ecosystems 
Warming of the Southern Ocean is concentrated in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC). Projected warming of ACC surface waters could be up to 1.5°C by 2100, although there is likely to be less warming (between 0.5 and 0.75°C) of bottom waters and other surface waters1,12. Ocean acidification as a result of increased CO2 uptake could also have detrimental effects on marine systems, particularly on shell-building organisms including plankton species1.
A reduction in annual mean sea-ice extent has been observed around the western Antarctic Peninsula13. Warmer waters and declining sea-ice have been associated with a decline in krill stocks of up to 80% in the southwest Atlantic14 and reduced availability of prey for higher predators 15,16,17. Changes in the extent of winter sea-ice habitat and prey availability may result in changes to the size and distribution of predator populations, or even the disappearance of some colonies. ASPAs protecting marine habitat for land-based predators may therefore require flexibility to respond to changes in the location and availability of prey sources. Designation of larger marine areas would help to ensure that variability in foraging ranges is accommodated.
Potential impacts on benthic ecosystems include changes in the level of freshwater input to coastal systems following glacial melt, collapse of ice-shelves, and increased frequency of iceberg scour. Benthic communities are at increasing risk from non-native species introductions (particularly those near frequently visited sites), which could have severe impacts on endemic species, including local extinctions. Changes in the geographic ranges of benthic species are a possibility in the longer term18. Newly exposed marine habitats could be afforded special protection following the collapse of ice-shelves, to allow the establishment of baseline information and monitoring of further change. 
Decadal climate prediction and ASPA review
The Environmental Protocol requires the review of Management Plans to be initiated every 5 years. Existing climate models are not designed to predict short-term regional climate variations1, which will have implications for site management. Decadal-scale climate prediction is currently the subject of intensive research internationally, and shows promise. At that scale, climate modelling may increasingly become a useful planning tool for ASPA site selection and review. However, direct observation (through remote sensing and site visit) is likely to remain the primary short-term mechanism for monitoring change in ASPAs. 
Conclusions
Climate change is likely to have significant implications for terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems, and the network of ASPAs protecting these environments.  ASPAs may become an increasingly important tool in mitigating the impacts of climate change, by ensuring that other pressures are minimised and thus improving the likelihood of withstanding or adapting to change. However, the timing, extent and location of climate change impacts on these ecosystems may be difficult to predict. It should remain a priority to aim for a representative network of ASPAs in line with Article 3 of the Protocol, whilst ensuring that the protected area system remains dynamic and flexible, with the ability to respond to changes in the distribution and characteristics of values for protection. 
Recommendations 
The CEP is recommended to consider: 
    1. How to ensure a more strategic approach to ASPA selection and designation. Such an approach should consider the implications of climate change, particularly in regions of rapid change (e.g. Antarctic Peninsula). It should be evidence-based, dynamic and flexible enough to fast-track the protection of important new sites and facilitate the de-listing of sites for which the principal values no longer exist; 
    2. Developing a methodology for classifying existing ASPAs continent-wide according to their potential vulnerability to regional climate change;   
    3. Whether particular attention should be given to ASPAs which contain, or whose boundaries comprise, ice-fronts. In some cases, automatic temporary protection might be afforded to newly-exposed ground following ice retreat;
    4. Giving newly-exposed marine habitats protection following the collapse of ice-shelves to allow scientific research to establish baseline information and monitor further change; 
    5. Whether further spatial protection for species that are particularly vulnerable to climate change (e.g. Adélie and emperor penguins) is appropriate to minimise other impacts that might limit their survival in marginal locations;
    6. Reviewing the need for further or continued site-protection of species whose abundance or range has increased substantially under climate warming;
    7. Whether it would be appropriate to use the ASPA system to protect natural colonisation and establishment events on the basis of their importance to science, and their uniqueness or rarity. 

References

1. Turner, J., Bindschadler, R.A., Convey, P., di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D.A., Mayewski, P., & Summerhayes, C., S., Eds. 2009. Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment. SCAR. 
2. New Zealand. 2005. A Review of the Antarctic Protected Areas System.  ATCM XXVIII, WP 11 (unpublished).
3. Cook, A. J.,  Fox, A. J., Vaughan, D. G. & Ferrigno, J. G. (2005) Retreating Glacier Fronts on the 	Antarctic Peninsula over the Past Half-Century, Science, 308, 541-545.

4. Convey, P. 2006. ‘Antarctic climate change and its influences on terrestrial ecosystems’. In: Bergstrom,
D.M., Convey P. &  Huiskes, A.H.L. (eds.), Trends in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems: Antarctica as a Global Indicator. Springer, Dordrecht. pp 253-272.

5.  Frenot, Y., Chown, S.L., Whinam, J., Selkirk, P., Convey, P., Skotnicki, M. & Bergstrom, D. 2005. 	Biological invasions in the Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications. Biological Reviews, 80, 45-	72.
6. United Kingdom .2009. ASPA and ASMA management plans: review of provisions relating to non-native species introductions ATCM XXXII, WP 12 (unpublished). 
7.  Hughes, K.A., & Convey P. 2010.  The protection of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems from inter- and 	intra-continental transfer of non-indigenous species by human activities: a review of current systems 	and practices.  Global Environmental Change, 20, 96-112.
8. Lyons, W.B., Laybourne-Parry, J., Welch, K.A. & Priscu J.C .2006. ‘Antarctic lake systems and climate change’. In:  D.M. Bergstrom, P. Convey and A.H.L. Huiskes (eds.), Trends in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems: Antarctica as a Global Indicator. Springer, Dordrecht. pp273-295.
9. Quayle, W.C, Convey, P., Peck, L.S., Ellis-Evans, J.C., Butler, H.G. & Peat, H.J. 2003.  ‘Ecological responses of maritime Antarctic lakes to regional climate change’. In:  E. Domack, A. Burnett, A. Leventer, P. Convey, M. Kirby & R. Bindschadler (eds), Antarctic Peninsula ClimateVariability: Historical and Palaeoenvironmental Perspectives, Antarctic Research Series vol. 79. American Geophysical Union. pp. 159-170. 
10. Quesada, A., Vincent, W.F., Kaup E., Hobbhie,  J.E., Laurion, I., Pienitz, R., Lópe- Martínez, J., Durán, J.J. .2006. ‘Landscape Control of High Latitude Lakes in a Changing Climate’ In: D.M. Bergstrom, P. Convey and A.H.L. Huiskes, Trends in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems: Antarctica as a Global Indicator. Springer. Dordrecht.pp 221-252.
11. Forcada, J. and. Trathan, P.N .2009. Penguin responses to climate change in the Southern Ocean. Global Change Biology, 15, 1618-1630.
12. Convey, P., Bindschadler, R.A., di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J. Hodgson, D.A., Mayewski, P. 	Summerhayes, C.P. & Turner, J.2009. Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment. Antarctic 	Science 21, 541-563.
13. Clarke, A., Murphy, E.J., Meredith, M.P., King, J.C., Peck, L.S., Barnes, D.K.A., & Smith, R.C. 2007. Climate change and the marine ecosystem of the western Antarctic Peninsula. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. B, 362(1477), 149.
14.  Atkinson, A., Siegel, V., Pakhomov, E., & Rothery, P. 2004. Long-term decline in krill stock and increase in salps within the Southern Ocean. Nature, 432(7013), 100-103.
15.  Forcada, J., Trathan, P.N., Reid, K., & Murphy, E.J. 2005. The effects of global climate variability in pup production of Antarctic fur seals. Ecology, 86(9), 2408-2417.
16.  Trathan, P.N., Forcada, J., & Murphy, E.J. 2007. Environmental forcing and Southern Ocean marine predator populations: effects of climate change and variability. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. B, 362(1488), 2351.
17.  Murphy, E.J., Trathan, P.N., Watkins, J.L., Reid, K., Meredith, M.P., Forcada, J., Thorpe, S.E., Johnston, N.M., & Rothery, P. 2007. Climatically driven fluctuations in Southern Ocean ecosystems. Proc. Roy. Soc. B, 274(1629), 3057.
18.  Barnes, D.K.A., Griffiths, H.J., & Kaiser, S. 2009. Geographic range shift responses to climate change by Antarctic benthos: where we should look. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 393, 13-26.
. 

