





Considerations of Chile on the Antarctic Treaty System Handbook 





Considerations of Chile on the
 Antarctic Treaty System Handbook 


Summary

This document presents the position of Chile regarding to the proposal of implementing some modifications to the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System. This was raised by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat by Circular No. 18/2009 and the SP 8 presented at this meeting.

In this regard, Chile affirms that this Handbook is a valuable element for the operation under the Antarctic Treaty System, and stresses to the Secretariat and the Consultative Parties the need for a new edition. It also suggests some elements for consideration in the preparation of this text.  

Requirements and functions of a Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System

The Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System should allow access to the information on its topics in a simple mode and arranged by topic.

This document should continue with the publication of the decisions, resolutions and measures agreed at the Consultative Meetings, which must be contextualized with the extracts of the final reports and other legal instruments of the System.

Thus, in this way is presented a comprehensive and accurate view on each subject. The mere publication of these provisions in the format of a manual, without added value, would mean a duplication of effort since they are already available through the website of the Secretariat of the Treaty.

This interaction between the various instruments is even more necessary when considering the competence of the Antarctic Treaty System on an extensive variety of topics, ranging from environmental protection to logistical and operational aspects, and many others.

It also seems appropriate to continue including introductory texts agreed by the Parties to each topic, considering the technical and complex nature of the areas covered by the System. Also, the historical references of these introductions have also the value of characterizing the dynamic evolution of the System over time.

Some aspects of the proposal of the Secretariat do not fulfill the main characteristic of a manual, which is to have the documents organized by topic and updated.


The proposal of editing the first volume in the list of basic texts of the Antarctic System does not imply a significant contribution, considering that those texts are available on the website of the Secretariat. That is different from publishing them in a contextualized mode with the rest of the elements, which could be considerate as a contribution.

Chile recognizes the important efforts made by the Secretariat to keep the Antarctic System data accessible through its website. This has meant a significant contribution. Nevertheless, this should act as a complementary element to the Handbook without having the intention to replace it. 

The need for a new edition 

The updating of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System in English and Spanish has been a constant concern in our country. This has been reflected in some extracts of the ATCM final reports, as noted in the XXX ATCM 2007.


The last edition of the Handbook was undertaken by the U.S. State Department in 2002. Due to the time elapsed since it last updating, the results of the subsequent consultative meetings have not been incorporated, nor has supplemented the existing information in this document.

The Handbook is also relevant to observe the historical development that has affected the Antarctic Treaty System and to understand it current situation

The Proposal of Chile
 
As is known by the Parties, Chile prepared a First Edition of the Manual in Spanish in 1991, entitled "Handbook of Theory and Practice of the Antarctic System," which was distributed during the XVI ATCM in Bonn, Germany. Chile proposes to the Consultative Parties to structure the new edition of the Handbook considering some concepts of the model presented on that occasion.

The volumes are suggested according to the topics. The first one would be dedicated to function of the Antarctic System and another one devoted to Antarctic science. This last one should also reflect the history of negotiations before approving the Antarctic Protocol.

A third volume would cover the area of Environment, starting from the adoption of the Protocol and all matters connected with its annexes, and also would address all the provisions approved under the Environmental Protection Committee. Finally, a fourth volume would correspond to the regulation and conservation in general. It is annexed a proposal in Spanish that could illustrate the arrangement of the subjects.  

It is also recommended to incorporate in the new version the title "Handbook of Theory and Practice of the Antarctic System", as done on that occasion. This would reflect two goals: continuing being a source of interest from the academic point of view, and also being an element of support for those involved in the decisional process at the different levels of National Antarctic Programs.

It is also proposed that this text covers a broader concept, incorporating elements of international law relating to Antarctic Treaty System instruments, even if they are not part of the Antarctic Treaty System. In the version of 1991, the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling was included in the volume on the Conservation and Regulation of the Antarctic Resources due to its implications regarding the protection of Antarctic wildlife. 
 
Final aspects to consider

Chile is conscious that an update of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty as suggested could mean a major expense for the Secretariat, taking into account that according to the entry into force of Measure 1 (2003) correspond to its functions the updating of the Handbook. Nevertheless, there are costs that can be reduced by publishing it only electronically trough the website, leaving the decision of its printing to the Parties.  

At the beginning, the Secretariat may require a significant investment of time and staff to update the draft manual suggested, since the latest data from eight years ago. Nevertheless, the performance of this procedure on a regular basis in the future could mean a reduction of expenses.

According to the vision and experience of Chile, the existence of a Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty has been a great assistance to understand how the Antarctic System operates and has also been a contribution to depth knowledge about its topics. Considering this, it is reiterated to this Consultation Meeting the importance of defining a decision on this issue. 
ANNEX I

Volume I
OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

Introduction

1.	The Antarctic Treaty
	a)	Interpretative declarations
	b)	Ratification of the Antarctic Treaty
	c)	Table of Contracting Parties
	d)	List of Consultative Meetings and adopted Recommendations, Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions

2.	Basic structure of the System
	a)	Institutionalization of Consultative Meetings
	b)	Rules of Procedure for Consultative Meetings
	c)	Meetings of Experts
	d)	Special Consultative Meetings
		i)	Accession by new Consultative Parties
			Reports of Special Consultative Meetings (I, III, V, VII, VIII, IX, X)
			Guidelines for the notification of Consultative status
ii)	Consultative Meetings convened to discuss specific issues
    e) Other Special Meetings

3.	Main instruments of the System
	a)	Inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
	b)	Information exchange: implementation of Articles III (1) and VII (5) of the Treaty
	c)	Recommendations adopted under Article IX

4.	Operationalization of the Antarctic Treaty System
a)	Information on the Antarctic Treaty System
b)	The White Book
    c) Public availability of documents
    d) Consultative Meetings: organizational aspects
    e) Participants: non-Consultative Parties, other components of the System, international organizations
    f) Coordination of the Antarctic Treaty System: Recommendation XIII-2 
Reports in accordance with Recommendation XIII-2
Reports in accordance with Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

5.	Activities by non-Party States

6.	Other functions of the Antarctic Treaty System
a)	Cooperation and mutual assistance
i)	Postal cooperation
ii)	Emergency assistance
    ii) International commemorations
    iii) Messages to stations in Antarctica

    b) The Antarctic Treaty System and the public
        i) Antarctic research institutes and programs
        ii) Antarctic documentation centers and funds
        iii) Antarctic place names and maps
        iv) Environmental organizations
        v) The System’s academic forums


Volume II
ANTARCTIC SCIENCE

Introduction

1.	International scientific cooperation
	a)	History of polar scientific cooperation
	b)	SCAR	
		i)	Establishment
		ii)	Constitution
		iii)	Membership
		iv)	Subsidiary bodies (working groups)
v)	SCAR’s relationship with the Antarctic Treaty System
    c) International organizations
    d) Measures to promote international scientific cooperation
I-III (Exchange of scientific data)
II-VIII (International Year of the Quiet Sun)
V-3 (Southern Ocean)
XV-14 (Promotion of international scientific cooperation)
XV-15 (Promotion of international scientific cooperation)
Various statements

2.	Facilitation of scientific research
    a) Rules governing Antarctic stations
    b) Scientific personnel
    c) Transportation of scientific materials
    d) Geological collections 
    e) Nuclear equipment and technology
    f) Use of radioisotopes 
    g) Use of rockets
    h) New islands
    i) Oceanographic research 
    j) Accessibility and comparability of scientific data 

3.	Support for scientific research	
    a) Telecommunications and meteorology
    b) Hydrometeorological services in the Southern Ocean; cooperation in meteorological and marine ice information
    c) Hydrographic charting
    d) Logistics
    e) Transportation
    f) Air safety
    g) COMNAP/SCALOP
h)	List of bases and refuge huts in Antarctica

4.	Overview of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems
a)	Human impact on the Antarctic environment	
    b) Environmental monitoring
    c) Environmental impact assessment

5.	Environmental behavior
	a)	Code of conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities
	b)	Waste disposal
	c)	Nuclear waste
	d)	Marine pollution
	e)	Oil pollution
	f)	Rules governing scientific drilling

6.	The Antarctic Protected Area System
	a)	Overview
	b)	Specially Protected Areas (SPA)
	c)	Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
	d)	Historic Sites and Monuments
	e)	Specially Reserved Areas (SRA)
	f)	Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPA)
	g)	Nature reserves and seal areas
	h)	Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)
	i)	Sites of Special Tourist Interest
	
7.	Tourism and non-governmental expeditions


Volume III
THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Introduction 

1.	Negotiation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
    a) Recommendation XV-1
    b) Report of the XV ATCM
    c) Summary provisional report of the XI Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

2.	Text of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes
        i) Environmental Impact Assessment
        ii) Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora
        iii) Waste Disposal and Management
        iv) Prevention of Marine Pollution
        v) Area Protection and Management
        vi) Liability arising from environmental emergencies

3.	Committee for Environmental Protection


Volume IV
CONSERVATION AND REGULATION OF ANTARCTIC RESOURCES


Introduction

1.	Conservation of Antarctic whales
    a) International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling
    b) Annex to the Convention
    c) List of  Parties to the Convention

2.	Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora
    a) Measures relating to the Agreed Measures

3.	Conservation of Antarctic Seals
    a) Final Act of Conference on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
    b) Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
    c) Report of the Meeting to Review the Operation of the Convention, London, 1988
    d) Rules of Procedure
    e) Table of Contracting Parties to the Convention

4.	Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
    a) Report of the II Special Consultative Meeting
    b) Final Act of the Conference on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, Canberra 1980
    c) Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
    d) Headquarters Agreement
    e) Rules of Procedure
    f) Current conservation measures
    g) Table of Contracting Parties to the Convention

5.	Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities
a)	Final Report of the Special Preparatory Meeting, Paris, 1976
b)	Reports of the Group of Experts on Mineral Exploration and Exploitation, London, 1977, and Washington, 1979
c)	Final Report of the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting
    d) Final Act of the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting, Wellington, 1988
    e) Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities
    f) Interpretative declarations by Argentina, Chile, and the United Kingdom
    g) Table of Contracting Parties to the Convention

6.	Use of Antarctic ice

7.	Use of alternative energy	
	
	



