





Proposed Modification to 
Historic Site Nº 37





Proposed modification to Historic Site Nº 37


Site description

The original wording for Historic Site Nº 37 (the numbering of which should remain unchanged) reads as follows: “Statue erected in 1948 at General Bernardo O’Higgins Base (Chile), Trinity Peninsula, of Bernardo O'Higgins, the first ruler of Chile to envisage the importance of Antarctica. This monument is representative of pre-IGY activities in Antarctica and has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctic exploration since it was during O’Higgins’ government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820. Lat. 63°19’S, Long. 57°54’W”.   Adopted by Rec. VII-9 and updated by Measure 3 (2003)

We propose that Historic Site N° 37 be modified; the monument currently referred to in this site description would be maintained and the following new elements would be added:

    1. The monument to General Bernardo O’Higgins (Nº 12 in Annex 2), which has been moved since its inclusion on the Historic Sites and Monuments List, from a location close to the entrance to the main building to atop a rock in front of the base; it would therefore be advisable to change the wording used to describe its location. Photos of the original and current locations of the O’Higgins monument are included (Annex 1).

    2. The structures comprising the former General Bernardo O’Higgins Base (Nº 1 in Annex 2), inaugurated on February 18, 1948 by Gabriel González Videla, then President of Chile. The building complex, a typical base of the decade prior to the International Geophysical Year, is in a good state of conservation and will be restored to its original condition and characteristics, as will all installations and structures dating from the International Geophysical Year. 

    3. We are also considering allocating space in one of the former base’s buildings for a Historic Base Museum, and renaming the whole complex to be protected the “O’Higgins Historic Site”. 

    4. An indication of the location of the Luis Risopatrón Research Station (Nº 7 in Annex 2). The establishment of this station was referred to in the speech given at the inaugural ceremony for O’Higgins Base. The station was built for the International Geophysical Year (IGY) and was ultimately intended for use by the Antarctic Institute, which had yet to be created at the time, but it was completely destroyed in a fire. A photo of Risopatrón Base is included (Annex 3), as well as a sketch of its interior floor plan, which was designed to facilitate the scientific research being done as part of Chile’s scientific programme for the IGY (Annex 4).

    5. Plaque for those fallen in service, commemorating the deaths of Lieutenants Oscar Inostroza Contreras and Sergio Ponce Torrealba (Nº 13 in Annex 2, photo in Annex 6), fallen on the Antarctic continent in the service of Peace and Science on August 12, 1957. This plaque commemorates the deaths of the first martyrs fallen in the course of the most important exploration and reconnaissance missions carried out in the Antarctic interior by the Chilean Army detachment at O’Higgins Base as it was first being set up and in subsequent decades. A photo of its location is included (Annex 5).

Protection is being requested for all installations pre-dating the International Geophysical Year, including huts used by rescue patrols and for other activities, and special treatment will be required for all these minor sites.





Precedents for granting protected status to Historic Site N° 37:

Three existing examples, or models – from France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom – were given due consideration during the drafting of the Chilean proposal. The main difference between those protection models and the type of protection sought here is that these structures are located in an area of intensive scientific and logistic activity and as such require a different protection and conservation strategy. This strategy must allow these activities to be conducted while at the same time ensuring effective protection, which should build on the experience garnered in the three different examples of protection that already exist for Antarctic Historic Sites and adopt those aspects that are considered to be applicable.

Grounds for granting protected status to Historic Site N° 37 
 
The aim of the activities being carried out at the former O’Higgins Base and on the other protected structures is to restore them to a state that conveys the realities of a pioneer base from the modern era of geographical exploration. Isabel Riquelme Island is a small islet, exposed to winds exceeding 200 km/h, and this small space must be shared by both old and new structures belonging to the new O’Higgins Base and Germany’s GARS O’Higgins and its large satellite antenna, as well as airstrips, piers, hangars, mechanical workshops and other ancillary installations. The presence of all this infrastructure in this “Facilities Area” precludes its designation as an “Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)” or “Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)”, as any conflicts that may arise between the different uses cannot be resolved through a differentiated administration of the activities being conducted on the same territory. 

The Guidelines for the Designation and Protection of Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 3, 2009) offer useful guidance for the management of historic sites such as the one being proposed here.

The concept of zoning, which is foreseen in Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection, has been employed as the tool best suited to the protection of Isabel Riquelme Island. To this end, the total surface area of the Island has been divided into four Zones: Minimal Impact, Low to Medium Impact, Medium to High Impact and High Impact, and a Code of Conduct has been proposed respecting the environmental impact levels in each zone. The authorities of O’Higgins Base and the GARS O’Higgins of the Aerospace Centre of the Federal Republic of Germany can examine these procedures and manage them either jointly or separately, depending on the characteristics of each site.
    
A preliminary sketch is provided of this macro-environmental zoning proposal (Annex 7).


The following text is therefore proposed to reflect these modifications to Historic Site Nº 37: 

Nº 37: Historic Site located on Isabel Riquelme Island at Cape Legoupil, Antarctic Peninsula, which comprises the following elements of historic significance:
- Statue of General Bernardo O’Higgins, erected in 1948 at the Base that bears his name, the first ruler of Chile to envisage the importance of Antarctica. This monument has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctic exploration since it was during O’Higgins’ government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820. This monument is also representative of pre-IGY activities in Antarctica.
- The “General Bernardo O’Higgins” former Antarctic Base, inaugurated on February 18, 1948 by Gabriel González Videla, then President of Chile, the first President in the world to visit Antarctica. Considered to be a typical example of a pioneer base from the modern era of Antarctic exploration.
   - Plaque indicating the location of Risopatrón Base, built to conduct Chile’s scientific programme during the International Geophysical Year, inaugurated on March 3, 1957 and destroyed in a fire on March 18, 1958.
- Plaque commemorating the deaths of Lieutenants Oscar Inostroza Contreras and Sergio Ponce Torrealba, fallen on the Antarctic continent in the service of Peace and Science on August 12, 1957.                         
                 Coordinates:   Lat. 63º19’S; Long. 57º54’W.


The following annexes are attached:         
Annex 1.  Photos of the O’Higgins monument at its original and current locations
Annex 2.  Tacheometric survey of General Bernardo O’Higgins Riquelme Base, 1978-1979
Annex 3.  Photos of O’Higgins Base taken in 1948
Annex 4.  Photo of Risopatrón Base taken in 1957
Annex 5.  Floor plan of Risopatrón Base
Annex 6.  Photo of the plaque commemorating the deaths of Lieutenants O. Inostroza and S. Ponce
Annex 7.  Macro-environmental zoning proposal for Isabel Riquelme Island
ANNEX 1:   Photos of the O’Higgins monument
Figure 1.   Photo of the O’Higgins monument at its original location

Figure 2.   Photo of the O’Higgins monument at its current location

ANNEX 2.   Tacheometric survey of General Bernardo O’Higgins Riquelme Base, 1978-1979.  

ANNEX 3:   Photos of O’Higgins Base taken in 1948





ANNEX 4:    Photo of Risopatrón Base taken in 1957


ANNEX 5:   Floor plan of Risopatrón Base


ANNEX 6.  Photo of the plaque commemorating the deaths of Lieutenants O. Inostroza and S. Ponce







ANNEX 7:    Macro-environmental zoning proposal for Isabel Riquelme Island 


	

