





Intra-regional transfer of species in terrestrial Antarctica





Intra-regional transfer of species in terrestrial Antarctica 
CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
1.  Summary
With on-going human activity throughout Antarctica, human-mediated intra-regional transfer of species will continue, with the result that over time Antarctica’s unique biological assemblages – and scientific research opportunities – may be compromised.  
The UK encourages the CEP to: 
    • support SCAR in its on-going synthesis of available knowledge on the biogeography, bioregionalisation and endemism within Antarctica
    • discuss the spatial scale at which biosecurity measures might be applied usefully within Antarctica
    • consider use of the ‘precautionary principle’ with regard to designating intra-continental biosecurity boundaries between major biogeographical zones where detailed biodiversity work is incomplete. 
2.  Introduction
Substantial heterogeneity in Antarctic species distribution exists across many biological groups resulting in unique biological assemblages and considerable endemism at a regional scale within the continent (Chown and Convey, 2007; Pugh & Convey, 2008; Cowan et al., 2010).  Redistribution of native species within Antarctica may pose a serious risk to existing biological assemblages comparable with that from human-introduced non-polar species.  In particular, Antarctic species indigenous to one region are likely to have pre-adaptation to cold environments found in the other areas of Antarctica, therefore increasing the likelihood of survival and establishment of intra-regionally transferred species (Richardson et al., 2000).
Antarctic microorganisms, lower plants and invertebrates are likely candidates for intra-regional transfer, but are difficult to identify and are almost impossible to eradicate/control (Hughes and Convey, 2010).   Therefore minimizing the risk of introductions is essential and the most effective practical response (ATCM XXIX/CEP IX WP13).
Given the increasing presence of humans in Antarctica, it may be useful to consider effective biosecurity measures to minimize the level of human-assisted intra-regional dispersal of species, genetic dilution and biological invasion.  The rate at which unique Antarctic biological assemblages are compromised and eventually lost will depend on: 
    • the rate of expansion of the human activities in Antarctica
    • the effectiveness of intra-regional biosecurity measures applied by all national Antarctic programmes and other visitors to Antarctica
    • the degree of long-term investment in intra-regional biosecurity measures and monitoring. 
3.  Biosecurity measures applicable to intra-regional transfer 
Many biosecurity measures currently implemented by Antarctic national operators and IAATO are intended to prevent transfer of non-native species into the Antarctic Treaty area (ATCM XXVII/CEP VII IP31; ATCM XXXI/CEP XI IP98; Curry et al., 2005; Whinam et al., 2005; IAATO, 2010), but their effectiveness at reducing intra-regional transfer of species has not been fully addressed.  In particular, applying biosecurity measures away from research station facilities may be logistically difficult, and propagules of Antarctic species, such as moss and lichen fragments and invertebrates and their eggs, may be particularly difficult to detect and remove (ATCM XXXII/CEP XII IP04; ATCM XXXII/CEP XII WP32).  

4.  Over what spatial scale should biosecurity measures be applied to reduce species translocation within Antarctica?
A factor that requires further discussion is over what scale we should attempt to prevent intra-regional transfer of species, with a view to protecting Antarctica’s spatially unique biodiversity.  As the number of discrete areas that are considered to be biologically distinct increases, so will the effort needed in avoiding transfers between them.  Furthermore, spatial factors are not the same for all biological groups making the identification of distinct areas a challenge.  This effort is hampered by a lack of baseline biodiversity data for some areas.  A wider appreciation of the major influence of regionalisation on diversity patterns may help policy development and feed into the protected areas system.  
Intra-regional biosecurity challenges could be usefully considered at three broad spatial scales within Antarctica:
    1. Gressitt Line
A major biogeographic discontinuity, named the Gressitt Line, separates the majority of the Antarctic Peninsula from the Antarctic continent (Chown and Convey 2007) (Figure 1). Invertebrate assemblages either side of this boundary are distinct, with several major groups not overlapping at species level.  Human transfer of species across this boundary could lead to a major reduction in biological distinctiveness across Antarctica.  The Gressitt Line may be a useful initial candidate for discussions on the implementation of biosecurity measures to prevent intra-regional transfer of Antarctic species.
    2. Other biogeographically distinct regions
Other examples of ‘regionalisation’ exist at smaller spatial scales within Antarctica’s terrestrial biodiversity, with regional endemism common (Pugh & Convey, 2008). Although often incomplete, existing biodiversity knowledge could be used to designate some biogeographic boundaries, with more stringent biosecurity precautions being applied when these are crossed.  Defining areas of biological distinctiveness currently remains a major challenge, with the SCAR biological research community possibly best placed to provide and interpret the available information (SCAR-EBA, 2010).
    3. Location-specific biosecurity
Unusual habitats or isolated locations can have particularly distinctive biodiversities. Here, location-specific biosecurity measures, more stringent than generally applied, may be justified.  
    • Isolated bird or marine mammal colonies may be vulnerable to disease, so additional precautions may be required to prevent the introduction of pathogens.  However, marine mammals and birds may travel long distances within and outside Antarctica, so defining specific areas for additional biosecurity measures may need careful consideration (ATCM XXIV/CEP IV WP10; ATCM XXIV/CEP IV WP11).  
    • Unusual habitats (e.g. hypersaline lakes, geothermally-heated soils), a site’s isolation (e.g. ASPA 170 Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island; ATCM XXXI/CEP XI WP53), or a stochastic consequence of rare but random colonisation events can lead to unique biological assemblages. These locations are therefore vulnerable to transfer of other Antarctic but locally non-native species (Convey et al. 2000; Smith, 2005). Some examples lie between the spatial scale of a single location and a larger region, e.g. nunataks in Ellsworth Land lack nematodes in their soil fauna (Convey & McInnes 2005), while south-east Alexander Island has a large diversity and levels of endemism found in its nematode fauna (Convey & Smith 1997; Maslen & Convey 2006).
    • In locations where a non-native species has been introduced but eradication has not been attempted or completed, specific biosecurity measures may be applied to prevent further spread by human activities.  
5.  Conclusions
Due to a lack of baseline biodiversity surveys in some areas, sufficient information to conclusively designate biologically distinct regions may not be available.  However, substantial levels of endemism are already known from within Antarctica, and further examples are likely to be found in areas where biodiversity survey information is currently lacking.  In such circumstances, a precautionary approach might be considered appropriate with the application of biosecurity/quarantine measures between major geographical zones encouraged until adequate biodiversity information is available.  In addition, systematically targeted baseline biodiversity surveys of currently poorly-known but highly-visited regions might be usefully performed across Antarctica to identify areas where further intra-regional biosecurity measures might be usefully implemented. 
A series of environmental cost benefit analyses and/or risk analyses based on (a) biosecurity measures for particular biological groups, and (b) applying those measures over different spatial and temporal scales, may be a useful way forward (Atkinson and Mourato, 2008; cf. Greenslade, 2002; ATCM XXXII/CEP XII IP36).  SCAR, COMNAP and CEP may be best placed to provide this advice, possibly with input from the Invasive Species Specialist Group (IUCN) and other conservation groups. 
6.  Recommendations
In view of the above analysis, it is recommended that the CEP considers:
    • encouraging the on-going synthesis of available knowledge on the biogeography, bioregionalisation and endemism within Antarctica by SCAR;
    • discussing the spatial scale at which biosecurity measures aimed at reducing the risk of intra-regional species transfer might be practicably applied; and 
    • considering the precautionary application of intra-regional transfer biosecurity measures between major biogeographical zones, where detailed biodiversity surveys are incomplete. 

Figure 1.  Map showing the Gressitt Line, which is a region that separates the markedly different biodiversities found in the Antarctic Peninsula and continental Antarctica.



Attachment A:  References
ATCM XXIV/CEP IV WP10 Report on the open-ended intersessional contact group on diseases of Antarctic wildlife: Report 1 - Review and risk assessment
ATCM XXIV/CEP IV WP11: Report on the open-ended intersessional contact group on diseases of Antarctic wildlife: Report 2 - Practical measures to diminish risk (draft)  
ATCM XXVII/CEP VII IP31 Australia’s Antarctic quarantine practices
ATCM XXIX/CEP IX WP13 Non-native species in the Antarctic
ATCM XXXI/CEP XI WP53 Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula
ATCM XXXI/CEP XI IP98 Survey on existing procedures concerning introduction of non-native species in Antarctica
ATCM XXXII/CEPXII WP32 Procedures for vehicle cleaning to prevent transfer of non-native species into and around Antarctica
ATCM XXXII/CEP XII IP04 SCAR’s environmental code of conduct for terrestrial scientific field research in Antarctica
ATCM XXXII/CEP XII IP36 A framework for analysing and managing non-native species risks in Antarctica
Atkinson, G., Mourato, S., 2008.  Environmental cost-benefit analysis.  Annual Review of Environment and Resources 33, 317-344.
Chown, S. L., Convey, P., 2007. Spatial and temporal variability across life’s hierarchies in the terrestrial Antarctic.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (B) 362, 2307-2331.
Convey, P., Smith, R. I. L., 1997.  The terrestrial arthropod fauna and its habitats in northern Marguerite Bay and Alexander Island, maritime Antarctic.  Antarctic Science 9, 12-26.
Convey, P., McInnes, S. J., 2005.  Exceptional tardigrade-dominated ecosystems in Ellsworth Land, Antarctica. Ecology 86, 519-527.
Convey, P., Smith, R. I. L., Peat, H. J., Pugh, P.  J. A., 2000. The terrestrial biota of Charcot Island, eastern Bellingshausen Sea, Antarctica an example of extreme isolation.  Antarctic Science 12, 406-413.
Cowan, D. A., Khan, N., Heath, C., & Mutondo, M.  2010.  Microbiology of Antarctic terrestrial soils and rocks.  In: Bej, A. K., Aislabie, J., and Atlas, R. M. ‘Polar microbiology – the ecology, biodiversity and bioremediation potential of microorganisms in extremely cold environments’ CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 1-30.
Greenslade, P. 2002. Assessing the risk of exotic Collembola invading subantarctic islands: prioritizing quarantine management. Pedobiologia 46, 338–344.
Curry, C.H., McCarthy, J. S. Darragh, H. M., Wake, R. A., Churchill, S. E. Robins, A. M. Lowen, R. J. 2005.  Identifcation of an agent suitable for disinfecting boots of visitors to the Antarctic.  Polar Record 41, 39-45. 
Hughes, K. A., Convey, P.  2010.  The protection of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems from inter- and intra-continental transfer of non-indigenous species by human activities: a review of current systems and practices.  Global Environmental Change 20, 96-112.
Maslen, N. R., Convey, P. 2006. Nematode diversity and distribution in the southern maritime Antarctic - clues to history? Soil Biology and Biochemistry 38, 3141-3151.
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), 2010.  Boot, clothing and equipment decontamination guidelines for small boat operations.  http://www.iaato.org/docs/Boot_Washing07.pdf
Richardson, D. M., Pyšek, P., Rejmánek, M., Barbour, M. G., Panetta, F. D., West, C. J.  2000. Naturalization and invasion of alien plants: concepts and definitions.  Diversity and Distribution 6, 93-107.
SCAR-EBA (Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic). 2010.  http://www.eba.aq [Accessed 1 March 2010]
Smith, R. I. L., 2005.  The thermophilic bryoflora of Deception Island: unique plant communities as a criterion for designating an Antarctic Specially Protected Area. Antarctic Science 17, 17-27 
Pugh, P. J. A., Convey, P., 2008.  Surviving out in the cold: Antarctic endemic invertebrates and their refugia. Journal of Biogeography 35, 2176-2186.
Whinam, J., Chilcott, N., Bergstrom, D.M., 2005. Subantarctic hitchhikers: expeditioners as vectors for the introduction of alien organisms. Biological Conservation 121, 207–219.


