





Guidelines for the Application of Management Zones within Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas




Guidelines for the Application of Management Zones within Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
Introduction
Annex V provides the framework for the designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and allows for the creation of special zones within these areas. Since 2002, when Annex V entered into force, seven ASMAs and 71 ASPAs were approved by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  While Annex V provides some guidance related to zoning, there are no clear guidelines for the definition and implementation of zones. There are numerous overlapping and some potentially unnecessary management zones in use. As a result, visitors to Antarctica may encounter a variety of zones at different sites with different names, but similar purpose.  This is potentially a confusing situation, and may make it more difficult for visitors to understand and follow the regulations and guidelines at each site. 
In an effort to gain greater clarity on the current zoning practice, Appendix I reviews the aims, objectives, and definitions of the various zones adopted.  It then considers whether the system of zoning might benefit from clearer guidance and greater consistency applied across ASMAs and ASPAs.   Finally, Appendix I suggests a core set of commonly used management zones, identified during the review of current zoning practice, to be the basis for Zoning Guidelines.  These guidelines would help achieve greater consistency in the application of the zoning tool within ASMAs and ASPAs.
Review of management plan provisions relating to zoning
Management plans for seven ASMAs and 71 ASPAs were accessed between September 2009 and January 2010 from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website at: http://www.ats.aq/documents/cep/Register_Updated_2009_e.pdf
Each plan was examined for zoning references that were either:
    1) clearly named and defined in Section 6(ii) Restricted and Managed Zones within the Area and shown on accompanying maps; or 
    2) included, although less formally defined in the management plan; that is, areas with restrictions or special needs that have not been referred to as specific zones in Section 6(ii) or elsewhere in the plan, or restricted areas that do not have specified boundaries.
All seven ASMAs and eight ASPAs have clearly defined zones in their management plans.  Six additional ASPAs have less formally defined areas that might be considered zones.  A total of nineteen defined zones and three less formally defined zones were identified.   Several of the zones had similar names and/or purposes. The full results of this review are presented in Appendix I. 
Discussion
The analysis of existing management plans and management zones suggests that a standard set of zones could meet the majority of current zoning needs. In some management plans, sites with special management needs are informally defined and / or not shown on maps. While in some cases the informal discussion of ‘zones’ and ‘sites of special interest’ may be useful in the context of a particular plan, in others there could be benefit to including clear zone definitions and demarcations in the management plans and on the maps. Therefore, an increasing use of zoning as a management tool is anticipated as more information about sites becomes available and as maps and plans are improved over time. 
Appendix I proposes a ‘core’ set of seven zones for potential use as Zoning Guidelines for application within ASMA and ASPA management plans. These zones are: “Facilities Zone”, “Access Zone”, “Historic Zone”, “Scientific Zone”, “Restricted Zone”, “Prohibited Zone” and “Visitor Zone”.  The full definitions of these zones are provided in Appendix I.  The proposed zones are based on those already adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties and currently in use.  The aim was to identify common elements amongst the nineteen currently adopted zones, and distil a simpler, more consistent set of zones.
The types of zone needed are likely to be similar in both ASMAs and ASPAs, as demonstrated by the fact that zones with similar names and/or functions have appeared in both types of management plans. However, there is likely to be a difference in emphasis in the specific zone objectives between ASMAs and ASPAs for several zones, reflecting the different purposes and the administrative conditions of these designations.
Within ASMAs, all zones are hortatory in the sense that a permit system cannot be applied to enforce compliance, as it can within ASPAs. Thus, ASMA rules are framed as guidelines encouraging, rather than strictly enforcing, compliance. Within ASPAs, however, plan provisions are generally mandatory, with compliance enforced through the permit system.
As is the case with all guidelines, there may arise instances where exceptions are both needed and desirable. When this is the case, and where there exist clear reasons why a Party may wish to designate a zone that is not adequately encompassed by the Zoning Guidelines, it would remain entirely possible to do so. It is not suggested by these guidelines that alternative zones should not be considered where they make sense.
Conclusions
In most cases, a core set of zones such as those suggested would meet the majority of needs, and would provide considerable help not only to those drafting management plans, but also to those people visiting ASMAs and ASPAs. For the latter group, it is important that management plans contain a simple, coherent, reasonably consistent – and thus understandable – set of zones across all sites that may be visited within Antarctica.
Appendix I provides a framework for designating zones within ASMAs and ASPAs.  It should be a useful reference when the current “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” is revised and when a “Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas” is developed. 
References
Harris, C.M. 1994. Standardisation of zones with specially protected and managed areas under the Antarctic Environmental Protocol. Polar Record 30 (175): 283-86.
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, with Annexes, done at Madrid 4 October 1991, and an additional Annex done at Bonn 17 October 1991.

