





Public Availability of Information Concerning Life-saving Appliances Onboard Passenger Ships





Public Availability of Information 
Concerning Life-saving Appliances 
Onboard Passenger Ships


Working Paper submitted by the United States



Summary

Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area is projected to remain at elevated levels despite recent drops in volume due to the global economic downturn.  The United States, like other Consultative Parties, remains concerned with passenger ship safety in this area, and we believe that additional steps should be taken to help address continuing concerns over the adequacy of life-saving appliances onboard some ships.  The United States, recalling its paper WP16 (2009) from Baltimore, which proposed that open lifeboats (OLB) not be permitted on any passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area, proposes that the ATCM call upon all commercial tour operators to take steps to ensure prospective passengers are aware of the life-saving appliances provided onboard their ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Doing so will provide a heightened level of transparency for members of the public helping them make informed decisions when choosing among options for ship-borne tours of Antarctica.  A recommended resolution is appended.


The United States continues to value its partnerships with other Consultative Parties in working to ensure that Antarctic tourism is conducted in a manner consistent with the protection of both the Antarctic environment and the safety of tourists.  As efforts continue in this body as well as in others, such as the International Maritime Organization and the tourism industry itself, it is important to seek ways to help improve public safety in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Consistent with the spirit of recommendation 1 of the 2009 ATME report, which calls upon parties to consider recent incidents in Antarctica, such as the sinking of the M/V Explorer, and their lessons for improving safety, the United States concludes that greater public understanding can help lead to greater public safety.  By publicizing the type and availability of life-saving appliances, members of the public will be able to make informed choices among those ships sailing in the Antarctic Treaty area.  This paper proposes that the ATCM call upon all commercial tour operators to inform prospective passengers of the life saving appliances available onboard their ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.

Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area increased significantly up through the 2007-2008 season.  However, despite an 18 percent drop in tourism numbers for the 2008-2009 season, apparently due to the recent world economic downturn, Antarctic tourism remains at elevated levels.  Ship-related incidents such as the sinking of M/V Explorer in November 2007 and the groundings of M/V Ushuaia in December 2008 and the M/V Ocean Nova in February 2009 are still fresh in the public’s mind, so it is important that the ATCM continue to give priority to promoting safety of ship-borne tourists in Antarctica.  

Recent efforts within the international community, including the tourism industry, to establish recommendatory and mandatory measures as well as best practices to increase the survivability of passengers and crew after marine casualties in the Antarctic Treaty area are welcome developments.  However, the United States believes more can be done.  For example, the United States recalls its submission of Working Paper 43 at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXI in Kyiv, where it outlined a series of steps that could be taken to promote safe passenger ship operations within the Antarctic Treaty area, including recommendations to improve lifeboat safety.  Additionally, the United States submitted Working Paper 16 at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXII in Baltimore, where it proposed that open lifeboats, or OLB’s, not be permitted on any passenger ships in the Antarctic Treaty area.  The United States notes the efforts of International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and its members to discontinue the use of OLB’s in the Antarctic Treaty area.  The United States also notes the recent work of the IMO in approving the recommendatory Guidelines for Ships Operating in Polar Waters, A.1024(26), calling for the exclusive use of partially or totally enclosed lifeboats when operating in Polar waters.  Although the United States welcomes the efforts to improve survivability by working towards greater use of partially or totally enclosed lifeboats, compliance is not yet mandatory for all ships.1  The sinking of the M/V Explorer demonstrated the precarious situation survivors will be in if required to rely on OLB’s within the Antarctic Treaty area.  The United States believes tourists may wish to take into account such safety concerns when choosing among tour operators and passenger ships, and that such transparency is ultimately good for both passengers and the industry.   

The proposal in this paper, if adopted, would help to improve the safety of life in the Antarctic Treaty area by allowing tourists to make informed choices, taking into account the lifesaving appliances provided on the passenger ships.  In addition to the types of lifeboats available, information concerning other life-saving appliances, such as immersion suits and emergency communications equipment, would be useful in making such choices.  The United States recognizes that some tourists may still choose a tour operator based on its lower cost even if its life-saving appliances might be less capable than others.  However, this proposal might also have the incidental effect of encouraging innovation regarding life-saving appliances within the industry because the safety features of a passenger ship could become one of its selling points to the public.  Thus, the more the public bases its choice among Antarctic tours on available safety features, the more incentive there will be to improve the life-saving capabilities of a ship.  In our view, the members of the ATCM should join together to approve a resolution along the lines of the draft appended hereto.


Draft Resolution XXX (2010)
 
Public Availability of Information
Concerning Live-saving Appliances 
Onboard Passenger Ships


The Representatives, 

Conscious of their responsibilities to ensure that tourism is conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible manner consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol;

Aware of potential hazards confronting passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Desiring to promote the safety of life at sea; 

Noting a sustained and significant level in ship-borne tourism activities in the Antarctic Treaty area and the concomitant risks for marine accidents;

Recognizing the tourism industry’s collaboration, and in particular collaboration by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), in efforts to ensure that the industry’s activities are sustainable, safe, and compatible with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty;

Wishing to minimize the likelihood of casualties due to the exposure of persons to harsh Antarctic weather conditions brought about by the use of unsuitable lifeboats combined with limited search and rescue availability in the Antarctic region; 

Noting that the publication of information regarding the kind and quality of a passenger ship’s life-saving appliances, including lifeboats, will help the public make informed choices with regard to tours of Antarctica;

Noting that empowering people to choose the safest options for travelling within the Antarctic Treaty area can enhance the safety of life at sea;

Recommend that:

All commercial tour operators, as well as IAATO on behalf of its membership, make available to the public on their websites information regarding the type and capabilities of life-saving appliances onboard their passenger ships operating within the Antarctic Treaty area, including information on the types of lifeboats carried.


