





Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections, East Antarctica, 2010





Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections, East Antarctica, 2010

Abstract:
In the 2009/2010 Antarctic summer, Australia conducted inspections of Syowa station (Japan), Druzhnaya IV and Soyuz stations (Russian Federation) and Mount Harding Antarctic Specially Protected Area 168.  As provided for under Article VII (4) of the Antarctic Treaty, Australian observers also conducted an aerial observation of Molodezhnaya station (Russian Federation).  
Australia plans to provide its report on these activities to Parties at ATCM XXXIII.  
Introduction:
In January 2010 Australia conducted inspections under the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection.  An inspection team consisting of Ms Lyn Maddock, Director of the Australian Antarctic Division, Mr Tom Maggs, General Manager Policy, Australian Antarctic Division, and Mr Peter Nagy, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, travelled to the Wilkins runway near Australia’s Casey station on 6 January 2010, on Australia’s Antarctic air link Airbus A319.  The team travelled to Australia’s Davis station, and then to inspection sites via CASA 212 fixed-wing turboprop and Sikorsky S-72 helicopter.  Inspections were conducted of Russia’s Soyuz and Druzhnaya IV stations, and Japan’s Syowa station.  Molodezhnaya station (Russian Federation) was observed from the air.  The team also inspected the Mount Harding Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 168 in the Grove Mountains, Princess Elizabeth Land.  Map 1 shows the locations mentioned in this paper.
Australia extends its warm gratitude to the Russian Federation and Japan for their cooperation and assistance in the conduct of these inspections. 
Inspection activities:
Molodezhnaya station (Russian Federation): 9 January 2010 
Molodezhnaya station is located on the western coast of Enderby Land, East Antarctica.  The station includes multiple large buildings and structures, including those associated with past intercontinental air operations.  COMNAP data records that the station was established in 1962, and is temporarily closed.  The Russian Federation’s information exchange data records a maximum capacity of 100 persons.  Molodezhnaya was previously inspected in the 1966/1967 and 1982/1983 seasons by the USA.  As provided for under Article VII (4) of the Treaty, Australia conducted an aerial observation of Molodezhnaya station.  In planning for the inspection activity, Australia sought information from the Russian Federation about skiway operability, and Russia advised that Molodezhnaya would be unoccupied in the 2009/10 season.  In the absence of on-ground personnel, a fixed-wing landing was not possible, as surface conditions could not be adequately assessed from the air, and the distance from Australia’s stations precluded helicopter access.  The CASA 212 made several low passes over the station to allow the observers to view and photograph the station.  
Syowa station (Japan): 9-11 January 2010
Syowa station is located on East Ongul Island, approximately 1 km off the Prince Harald Coast of Dronning Maud Land.  Syowa station is a large, year-round station established in 1957, supporting up to 130 people, according to Japan’s information exchange details.  Syowa was previously inspected in 1966/1967, 1982/1983, and 1994/1995, each time by the USA.  The inspection team flew to the S17 skiway site approximately 20 kms east of Syowa, and were provided helicopter transport to and from the station, and accommodation, by previous arrangement with the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition.  The Station Leader provided the inspection party with a completed inspection checklist.  The inspection team conducted a full inspection of the station and environs.  
Druzhnaya IV station (Russian Federation): 13 January 2010
Druzhnaya IV is a seasonal station located on Landing Bluff, a small ice-free area on Sandefjord Cove, Ingrid Christensen Coast, in Princess Elizabeth land.  The present station was established in 1987.  The Russian Federation’s information exchange indicates that the station has a maximum capacity of 34 people.  Druzhnaya was previously inspected in 1976/1977 by the USA.  The inspection team accessed Druzhnaya IV by Sikorsky S76 helicopter.  The station was occupied when inspected.
Soyuz station (Russian Federation): 18 January 2010
Soyuz is a seasonal station on the exposed low rock ridge of Jetty Peninsula, Prince Charles Mountains, Mac.Robertson Land.  The Russian Federation’s information exchange indicates that Soyuz has a capacity of up to 20 people.  The station was unoccupied at the time of the inspection. The Russian Federation’s COMNAP information indicates that the station was established in 1982, and is temporarily closed.  Soyuz has not previously been inspected.  The inspection team accessed Soyuz by S76 helicopter.
ASPA 168, Mount Harding, Grove Mountains: 19 January 2010
The Grove Mountains are located approximately 400 km south of the Larsemann Hills in Princess Elizabeth Land, at a surface elevation of around 2000 m. A large area including Mount Harding (around 120 km²) was adopted as Antarctic Specially Protected Area 168 at ATCM XXXI in 2008, principally to protect scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values. The area is characterised by steep nunataks, blue ice exposures, and geomorphological and glaciological features indicative of ice sheet advance and retreat.  Australia has been active in this area regularly over many years, and China also conducts science in the region. The inspection team inspected the ASPA from the air, and made a short on-ground inspection by foot.  
Other activity:
The members of the team also visited the Larsemann Hills, where Australia operates a summer facility, conducts scientific activity, and is an active participant in Antarctic Specially Managed Area 6.  The team met with personnel at Zhongshan station (China), at Progress station (Russian Federation), and at the site of India’s proposed new station.  The intention of this visit was to enhance management coordination and cooperation between Australia and other nations active in the area, consistent with the objectives of the ASMA management plan.  This visit did not include formal inspection activities.

Map 1: Australian inspection visit 2010


