





Complementary protection for Marine Protected Areas designated by CCAMLR




Complementary protection for Marine Protected Areas designated by CCAMLR
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Belgium
Summary

    1. In 2009, CCAMLR approved the designation of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf as its first large-scale Marine Protected Area (MPA) (CCAMLR-XXVIII Report, paragraph 7.1). CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009), defines the boundaries of the Area and the provisions for fishery-related activities that are to be managed there.  These provisions include a prohibition of discharges and dumping of any type of waste by all fishing vessels when in the designated area.  This paper proposes a mechanism for this provision to also be applied to all non-fishing vessels whilst in the designated area, as well as co-ordinating the recommendations for scientific activities and transiting vessels with those adopted by CCAMLR.

Background

    2. CCAMLR identified the area to the south of the South Orkney Islands as being of high conservation importance, and representative of key environmental and ecosystem characteristics in the region. The designated area contains examples of two pelagic bioregions and unique oceanographic frontal systems, particularly the Weddell Front, which is a component of the Weddell-Scotia Confluence.  The area is also of key importance for winter penguin foraging. Information Paper ATCM XXXIII/IP058 provides further details on the characteristics of the area and its importance for conservation.  In adopting Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009), CCAMLR agreed to communicate details of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA to the ATCM. 

Objectives of the South Orkney Islands MPA

    3. The protection of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf aims to:

    • Contribute towards the conservation of pelagic and benthic biodiversity in the South Orkney Islands region;
    • Form part of a representative network of protected areas across the Scotia Sea region and the wider Southern Ocean;
    • Maintain important ecosystem processes including ocean frontal systems and primary productivity;
    • Provide an area that is inviolate from human disturbance;
    • Provide a scientific reference area, adjacent to fished areas in other parts of CCAMLR Subarea 48.2;
    • Increase the resilience of this area and the species within it to the possible impacts of climate change.

Management of activities within the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA

    4. In order to achieve the objectives described above, CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009) sets out a range of provisions which apply to fishing vessels and activities. This paper proposes complementary provisions for non-fishing vessels, to be adopted by the ATCM. 

    5. The CCAMLR Conservation Measure prohibits all types of fishing activities within the protected area. Transhipment activities involving any fishing vessel are also prohibited within the protected area. However scientific fishing research activities agreed by CCAMLR for monitoring or other purposes may be permitted, on advice from the Scientific Committee and in accordance with CCAMLR Conservation Measure 24-01 (which governs the application of conservation measures to scientific research). The attached draft ATCM Measure would also allow for scientific research activities to be conducted within the protected area; however Antarctic Treaty Parties would be encouraged to coordinate with Members of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee when planning such activities.

    6. No discharges and no dumping of any type of waste by any fishing vessel shall take place within the protected area, in order to enhance protection of the area, and noting that the area is not on a route regularly used by shipping and there has been little historic human activity in the area.  It is proposed that this provision should also be extended to all other types of vessels, including scientific research vessels and tourist vessels.

    7. There is no requirement for a permit to enter the protected area, and there are no restrictions on navigation through the area. However, for the purpose of monitoring traffic within the protected area, fishing vessels transiting the area are encouraged to inform the CCAMLR Secretariat of their intended transit prior to entering the area. It is proposed that this should also be extended to other types of vessels, with a provision in the draft Measure to encourage all vessels transiting the area to inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat of their of their Flag State, size, IMO number and intended course, prior to entering the area.  The ATS will then communicate this information to CCAMLR to enable them to monitor all vessel traffic in the area.

Use of an ATCM Measure to adopt provisions complementary to those in a marine protected area designated by CCAMLR

    8. It is proposed that the adoption of the draft Measure attached to this Working Paper would be the most effective and timely mechanism for the ATCM to adopt complementary provisions for the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA. CCAMLR has committed to work towards the designation of additional areas to establish a representative network of MPAs in the Southern Ocean by 2012 (CCAMLR-XXVIII Report, paragraph 7.19). We therefore suggest that the same Measure could also be applied to other similar-type marine protected areas that may be designated by CCAMLR in the future, bearing in mind that CCAMLR has made clear that there has been no precedent set by the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA, and there would be no requirement for all CCAMLR MPAs to be recognised by the ATCM in this way.  Individual areas should always be considered on a case-by-case basis.

    9. Adoption of the draft Measure attached to this Working Paper would not preclude the separate development of an ASPA or ASMA covering all or part of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf (or any other area) in the future, if Parties considered this to be necessary.

    10. CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009) will be reviewed by the Commission, based on advice from the Scientific Committee, at its regular meeting in 2014 and at subsequent 5 year periods. This review will evaluate the effectiveness of the area and its provisions for specific activities, and ensure that management measures in force remain appropriate and adequate. It is proposed that the complementary ATCM Measure, should also be reviewed by the ATCM on this same timescale (at least every 5 years), on the basis of advice from CCAMLR.
 
Recommendations

    11. The ATCM is encouraged to consider the following recommendations in relation to the recognition of marine protected areas designated by CCAMLR:

    i) That the Treaty Parties should adopt a Measure to formally recognise the South Orkney Islands southern shelf marine protected area, and to ensure, in particular, that the no discharge provisions of the area can be applied to non-fishing vessels (see draft Measure attached in Annex 1); and

    ii) That it would be desirable to develop a procedure through this Measure to enable the ATCM to adopt complementary provisions to any future marine protected areas designated by CCAMLR, where the Parties agree that specific provisions should apply to non-fishing vessels.  (Noting paragraph 9 above and that such a procedure would only be appropriate where the CEP had given prior endorsement of the process and justification to support the designation by CCAMLR and where it had been agreed that an ASPA/ASMA approach would not be a more appropriate first-stage mechanism).

 March 2010

References

Grant, S.M., Tratalos, J., & Trathan, P.N. 2008. Proposed approach to the identification of important marine areas for conservation: using 'MARXAN' software to support systematic conservation planning. Paper submitted to CCAMLR Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management. WG-EMM-08/49. 

Grant, S.M., Trathan, P.N., Tratalos, J., & Silk, J.R.D. 2009. Towards a system of marine spatial protection for the South Orkney Islands. Paper submitted to CCAMLR Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management. WG-EMM-09/22 

Murphy, E.J., Watkins, J.L., Trathan, P.N., Reid, K., Meredith, M.P., Thorpe, S.E., Johnston, N.M., Clarke, A., Tarling, G.A., & Collins, M.A. 2007. Spatial and temporal operation of the Scotia Sea ecosystem: a review of large-scale links in a krill centred food web. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. B,362(1477), 113-148.


DRAFT Measure xx (2010) 


Complementary protection for Marine Protected Areas designated by CCAMLR



The Representatives,

Mindful of the responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to take measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty including measures regarding facilitation of scientific research and preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica;

Recalling the special obligations and responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the comprehensive protection of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty Area,

Recalling also their commitment to the establishment of marine protected areas, based on scientific information and with the aim of conserving marine biodiversity, 

Welcoming the progress made on collaboration between the CEP and SC-CAMLR at the 2009 Joint SC-CAMLR/CEP Workshop, including the agreement that the CCAMLR Scientific Committee should be the lead body on matters relating to marine spatial protection and management, 
 
Recalling ATCM Resolution 1 (2006) encouraging increased cooperation at the practical level between the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 

Noting that the CCAMLR Commission has designated a marine protected area through the adoption of a Conservation Measure in accordance with Article IX of the CCAMLR Convention, and may wish to designate further such areas,

Aware of the importance of a harmonised approach to the designation and management of marine protected areas across the Antarctic Treaty System, and the need for the Antarctic Treaty Parties to implement complementary protection in relation to non-fishing vessels in such areas designated by CCAMLR,

Recognising that the complementary protection provided in this Measure is without prejudice to any additional protection that may be appropriate for some marine areas through their designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Area under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 


Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That:

    1. This measure shall apply to each area defined in the annex to this Measure (the ‘defined areas’), being areas designated as marine protected areas by the Commission on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in a Conservation Measure communicated by the Commission to the ATCM. 

    2. Complementary protection, corresponding to the provisions of the relevant CCAMLR Conservation Measure as specified in the annex to this Measure, shall apply to non-fishing vessels in each defined area. 

    3. The annex to this Measure may be amended by adding a new defined area or deleting or modifying a defined area. Such amendments may be made by a Decision adopted by the ATCM.

    4. The annex to this Measure will be reviewed at least every five years, based on the outcomes of reviews to be undertaken by CCAMLR for individual marine protected areas. 


Measure xx (2010) – Annex

1. South Orkney Islands southern shelf marine protected area

    (i) The South Orkney Islands southern shelf marine protected area is bounded by a line starting at 61°30'S 41°W, thence due west to 44°W longitude, thence due south to 62°S, thence due west to 46°W, thence due north to 61°30'S, thence due west to 48°W longitude, thence due south to 64°S latitude, thence due east to 41ºW longitude, thence due north to the starting point (Figure 1);



Figure 1: The boundary of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf marine protected area is shown as a heavy black line. Depth contours are at 1000 m intervals.

    (ii) The South Orkney Islands southern shelf marine protected area is designated and managed by CCAMLR in accordance with Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009).

    (iii) No discharges and no dumping of any type of waste by any non-fishing vessel shall take place within the defined area.

    (iv) Parties are encouraged to coordinate with Members of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee when planning any scientific research activities.

    (v) For the purposes of monitoring traffic within the protected area, all non-fishing vessels transiting the area are encouraged to inform the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) of their intended transit prior to entering the defined area, providing details of their Flag State, size, IMO number and intended course. The ATS should then communicate these details to the CCAMLR Secretariat as soon as possible.

    (vi) In the case of an emergency relating to safety of life at sea, the prohibitions in this Measure shall not apply.


