





Site Guidelines for the Northeast beach of Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island (25 de Mayo Island), South Shetland Islands






	Site Guidelines for the Northeast beach of 
Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), 
King George Island (25 de Mayo Island), 
South Shetland Islands
Summary
Considering that during the last years tourism increased in Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) (62º13’ S; 58º54’ W), Argentina and Chile present these revised draft site guidelines -considering comments received by several Parties during the intersessional period-, to manage the presence of tourism on the Northeast beach of Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island (25 de Mayo Island), South Shetland Islands, for consideration by the CEP XIII and the eventual adoption by the XXXIII ATCM. 
Introduction
Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) (62º13’ S; 58º54’ W) is located on the southwest coast of King George Island (25 de Mayo Island), east of the coast of Fildes Peninsula at Maxwell Bay (Guardia Nacional Bay /Fildes Bay). 
The zone comprises the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 150, protected due to the diverse biological values presents on it. During the XXXII ATCM in developed in 2009 in Baltimore, United States, the ASPA No 150 modified its boundaries, to do not consider inside of it the area that originally received tourist visitors. 
During the last years, tourism increased from a few visitors to approximately three hundred visitors per season. Due to the proximity of the island to Fildes Peninsula (1 km approximately), personnel from the Stations established in the vicinities of Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) also used to visit the area during their rest time.
After Argentina and Chile delegates completed an on-site assessment during the Antarctic summer season 2008/09, to check the existing information and verify the potential measures to be considered, a Guidelines draft was prepared, with following the format and contents according to those established in Resolution 2 (2006). The document was presented in the XXXII ATCM but after comments presented by some Parties, the document was retired. Now is presented in a reviewed version, that considers comments received during the intersessional period.   
Argentina and Chile, in compliance with Resolution 5 (2005), that adopted the “Site Guidelines for Visitors”, as well as with Resolutions 2 (2006), 1 (2007), 2 (2008) and 4 (2009), which contain the guidelines for new sites, and taking into account that the Final Report of IX CEP consider useful to undertake site reviews and draft site guidelines for visited sites not already covered by visitor guidelines or other forms of site management, and using appropriate formats, with the valuable input of information provided by some tour operators, present these draft site guidelines to manage the presence of tourism on the Northeast beach of Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island), King George Island (25 de Mayo Island), South Shetland Islands, for their consideration by the CEP XIII and their eventual adoption by the XXXIII ATCM.
The development of these Site Guidelines was seen as the most appropriate framework for management of tourist activities in the area just outside the ASPA in order to meet the goals of environmental stewardship of the area.
It is therefore proposed that: 
    •  Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) be included in the list of sites for which Site Guidelines have been prepared and endorsed by all Parties; and 
    • the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat publish the Site Guidelines for Northeast beach of Ardley Peninsula (Ardley Island) on its website and in hard copy, as it has been done in other cases.
