





Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, Southwest Anvers Island






Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor
Southwest Anvers Island
Working Paper submitted by the United States

Southwest Anvers Island, Palmer Station, and Torgersen Island have long been of considerable interest to tourists. Torgersen Island has been particularly popular for tour visits because of its high biological diversity, its accessibility and proximity to Palmer Station (US), allowing visitors to observe both Antarctic wildlife and scientific research operations. The numbers of tourists visiting the Palmer area have increased markedly since the 1970’s and visitor numbers at Palmer Station now range between 1500 and 4500 per year. Visitors to Palmer Station often travel to by small boat to Torgersen Island, where the number of visitors in recent years has totalled 837 in 2005-06, 680 in 2006-07, 865 in 2007-08 and 225 in 2008-09 (IAATO data, accessed Mar 2010).
Torgersen Island has been the subject of long-term scientific research into bird breeding performance and the potential impacts of tourism. To establish a control site for this research, the south-western half of the island is designated as a Restricted Zone as part of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin. Access to the Restricted Zone is to be limited to those carrying out scientific research, monitoring or maintenance. The northeastern half of Torgersen Island is designated as a Visitor Zone and is open to tourist access. Adélie penguins nest in both the Restricted Zone and Visitor Zone and comparative studies have been made between the two zones to evaluate the impact of tourism on Adélie penguin breeding success. Results to date have shown that tourism appears to be having no detectable impact on Adélie penguin breeding performance and that other environmental factors, in particular climatic change, are more influential (Fraser and Patterson, 1997). 
In recognition of the value of promoting tourist education and awareness, Palmer Station provides tours of the station and lectures by station personnel. The United States is also very conscious of the need to ensure that scientific research programmes in the Palmer area are not disrupted by tourist visits. There is a need to coordinate tour visits, and to ensure that operators confine landings to Torgersen Island and avoid sensitive sites within Arthur Harbor that are the subject of on-going research.
The attached Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island was developed with the aim of providing information on the procedures for visits established in the Management Plan for ASMA No. 7 in a form that is easily accessible to tour operators, guides and visitors. The Visitor Site Guide provides practical guidance on appropriate landing sites, behaviour ashore and on measures to minimise potential tourist impacts on the island. 
The draft Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, Southwest Anvers Island, attached to this Working Paper is consistent with the contents and format established in Resolution 2 (2006), with the objective of being consistent with existing guidelines or those that are in the process of being adopted.  
It is proposed that: 
    • the list of sites subject to Site Guidelines that have been adopted by the ATCM be extended to include Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, Southwest Anvers Island; 
    • the Secretariat be requested to publish the Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, Southwest Anvers Island, on its website and in hard copy.

