





Use of the Guidelines for the designation of Protected Areas





Use of the Guidelines for the designation of Protected Areas 


Summary
With a view to improving the work of the CEP’s Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) with regard to the examination of draft Management Plans for Protected Areas, Argentina submits for the CEP’s consideration a proposal that a number of additional elements be included in Resolution 1 (2008) “Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for ASPAs, ASMAs or HSMs”, to allow for confirmation that Resolution 1 (2000) “Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas” is being implemented effectively. 
Introduction
Annex V to the Madrid Protocol sets out the basic structure for Protected Areas and provides a list of the different values that might require special attention. It also urges Parties to identify these areas, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework. 
Since the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, a number of rules have been agreed upon that have helped establish the procedure to be followed to ensure a uniform approach is taken in the process of designating a Protected Area. For example, Resolution 2 (1998) “Guide for the Preparation of ASPA Management Plans” outlines the standard format to be used when drafting Management Plans, and Resolution 1 (2000) “Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas” includes extremely useful guidelines to be followed in the process of selecting areas to be proposed for special protection. More recently, Resolution 1 (2008), “Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for ASPAs, ASMAs or HSMs” proposes that all proposals for designation of a new ASPA or revision of an existing ASPA be accompanied by a cover sheet which clearly indicates, by means of a standard template, the expected effects of the proposal as well as the history of the ASPA concerned. 
At the same time, the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) was set up at CEP XI in order to examine draft (new or revised) Management Plans for ASPAs and ASMAs and advise the CEP on how they might be improved. 
Despite the existence of these additional rules, and although Article 5 of Annex V to the Protocol clearly lists the information that must be included in a Management Plan – Article 5.3(a) specifies in particular that there must be “a description of the value or values for which special protection or management is required” – there is no requirement to include specific information on the internal processes leading to the selection of a given area.  
Resolution 1 (2000) and current practice
In this Resolution, the Parties, aware of the need for general guidelines for the assessment  and definition of potential ASPAs, recommend that the “Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol” be used by those engaged in the development of proposals for ASPAs in Antarctica.
The aim of these Guidelines is to assist the Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR and the CEP in applying Article 3 of Annex V of the Madrid Protocol for the designation of ASPAs. They offer a number of tools for the more systematic assessment, selection, definition and proposal of areas that may require heightened protection as per the provisions of Annex V. The Guidelines are thus meant to lead to a more methodical assessment and designation of these areas. 
Specifically, the tools referred to in the previous paragraph are included in Parts II and III of the Guidelines.  
Part II provides guidance for assessing the potential of an area or site for protection and includes checklists on the framework for protected areas provided in Article 3 of Annex V, where the list of values includes environmental, scientific, historic or aesthetic values, or any combination of those values. Part III provides guidance for defining areas for protection under Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol, including ways to apply the concept of feasibility, i.e. the degree to which the proposed management goals can be applied in the particular area under consideration.  
Resolution 1 (2008), for its part, does allow for the possibility that information be provided on one fundamental aspect of the process, but it does not clearly stipulate that the cover sheet must include information required for the monitoring of the procedure referred to in Resolution 1 (2000). As a result of this omission, the work that can be done by the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) is limited, as it cannot reliably confirm the information underlying this monitoring process.  
This means that any assessment of draft Management Plans – particularly new plans – cannot be complete, and as a result the SGMP’s advisory role to the CEP, the objective of which is to improve these plans, is restricted. 
Proposal 
Argentina proposes to the CEP that a number of elements be added to the cover sheet currently provided for in Resolution 1 (2008), to allow for confirmation that Resolution 1 (2000) “Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas” is being implemented effectively.
INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN THE COVER SHEET (FOR ASPAs, ASMAs and HSMs)  PROVIDED FOR IN RESOLUTION 1 (2008) 

1- Assessment of the values to be granted special protection


    (a) Does the area contain (biological or non-biological) environmental values that are particularly unique or representative components of the Antarctic environment of the area in question? e.g.: glaciers, fresh-water lakes, rock outcrops, caves, plant and/or animal life, ecotones, ecosystems, etc. 


    (b) Does the area in question possess outstanding aesthetic or scenic attributes or values?


    (c) Does the area in question include sites or monuments of recognised historic value?

PLEASE SPECIFY FOR EACH OF THE ABOVE CATEGORIES, OR COMBINATION THEREOF, THE RELEVANT INFORMATION AT YOUR DISPOSAL: (bibliographical references, scientific publications, personal communications, photographic material, historic material, etc., or any other element that you may have in your possession that might be considered by the SGMP in its assessment).


2- Assessment of the grounds for protection

    (a) Is the aim of the proposed designation to protect prior, ongoing or planned scientific research?


    (b) Is the area being proposed for protection due to grounds related to its conservation? 


3- Environmental Risk Assessment 

Is the selected area exposed to risks that endanger the values identified to such a degree that an additional level of protection is required? 


PLEASE INCLUDE THE INFORMATION USED IN CONDUCTING THE ASSESSMENT (bibliographical references, scientific publications, personal communications, photographic material, historic material, etc., or any other element that you may have in your possession that might be considered by the SGMP in its assessment).





