





Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 126, Byers Peninsula, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands





Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 126
Byers Peninsula, Livington Island, 
South Shetland Islands

Working Paper presented by UK, Chile and Spain


    1. Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 10 through Recommendation IV-10 in 1966. The site was then redesignated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 6).  Following a proposal by the Chile and the United Kingdom (Recommendation XVI-5 (1991) the boundaries of the Area were extended. Measure 1 (2002) noted further relevant values considered important as reasons for special protection of the Area.

    2. Values protected include the diversity of plant and animal life, perhaps the most significant limnological site in the South Shetland Islands/ Antarctic Peninsula region, and the greatest concentration of historic remains in Antarctica, including artefacts from early nineteenth century sealing expeditions.

    3. Following a site visit in January 2010, the Management Plan has been revised and updated by Chile, Spain and the UK.  The revised plan is attached for the consideration of the CEP. 

    4. The proposed revisions include some substantial changes to the provisions of the existing management plan including:

Section 1 - Description of Values to be protected. The recognition that, during International Polar Year, Byers Peninsula was established as an ‘International Antarctic Reference Site for Terrestrial, Freshwater and Coastal Ecosystems’.

Section 3 - Management activities. The establishment of an International Coordination Committee to oversee the Management Plan, and to co-ordinate activities on Byers Peninsula. This might include restricting the number of people ashore at any one time on Byers Peninsula.  

Section 6 (i) - Boundaries.  Newly exposed ice-free ground resulting from the retreat of Rotch Dome will automatically be considered within the boundaries of the ASPA. 

Section 6 (ii) – Restricted and Managed Zones within the Area - Ray Promontory and recently de-glaciated areas along Rotch Dome ice front are designated as restricted areas. They are considered closed and inviolable until the next review of this Management Plan, with the exception of microbiological research which shall use the highest levels of quarantine measures. This is because they have been rarely or never visited. New metagenomic techniques are predicted to allow future identification of microbial biodiversity to an unprecedented level, allowing many fundamental questions regarding microbial dispersal and distribution to be answered. 

Section 6 (iii) – Structures within or near the Area. An international Field Camp is located at Southern Beaches, comprising two fibreglass ‘melon huts’. It is maintained by the Spanish Polar Programme and is available for use by all Parties. A designated helicopter landing site is also established, and new measures to reduce trampling effects by pedestrian traffic are included (Section 7(i) Access to and movement within the Area).   
 
Under  Section 7 (vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder, it is proposed to establish an inventory of archaeological remains that have previously been removed from Byers Peninsula.

Further detail is also included about climate, lakes and streams, breeding birds and mammals and human impacts. 

5. The draft Management Plan is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  The CEP is particularly asked to consider the changes set out above.  However, given that the revised Management Plan is proposed to be significantly amended, the proponents recommend that the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans be asked to undertake a more detailed intersessional review of the revised Plan itself and to report back to CEP XIV.

