





Enhanced coordination of Antarctic Treaty proposals within the IMO





Enhanced coordination of Antarctic Treaty proposals within the IMO
Abstract
Australia presented WP009 Enhanced coordination of Antarctic Treaty proposals within the IMO to the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 9-11 December 2009, in Wellington New Zealand.  In doing so, Australia suggested that the Parties consider adopting simple mechanisms to assist in discussing, tracking, and, if required, coordinating their actions within IMO forums, with regard to initiatives of the ATCM.  The ATME recommended that mechanisms for coordination should be considered by ATCM XXXIII.  
This paper largely replicates Australia’s paper WP009 to the ATME, for the information of those Parties not represented at the ATME, and draws on the ATME discussion. Australia proposes a number of options for consideration.
Background - the ATCM and the IMO
In seeking to ensure maritime safety and environmental protection in Antarctica, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) has referred a number of proposals to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) for consideration and implementation. It is likely that this will continue to be necessary. A coordinated and consistent approach by Antarctic Treaty Parties who are also members of the IMO to advancing these proposals within IMO forums is desirable.  This will help signal the commitment of the Parties to rapid and effective implementation, and to ensure that the objectives of the ATCM are properly considered when IMO meetings discuss (and in some cases modify) ATCM proposals. 
Australia regards the ATCM and associated forums as the primary place to deal with matters pertaining to Antarctica, including those relating to Antarctic shipping. In Australia’s view, the Parties are best placed to determine whether regulatory actions relating to shipping (mandatory or non-mandatory) in the Antarctic Treaty area are:
    • necessary and practical;
    • consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and associated agreements; and
    • consistent with the appropriate conduct of national Antarctic programs and other Antarctic activities.
The role of the IMO in shipping safety and environmental protection in the Antarctic region is also well recognised.  The IMO’s involvement in Antarctic maritime regulation is important to the Parties because of: its broad membership, covering the majority of shipping tonnage; its inclusion of States that flag vessels active in Antarctica but are not Party to the Antarctic Treaty; and its mandate for maritime safety and environmental protection.
The IMO has been invited to send a representative to attend ATCMs as an expert organisation since 1987. It is formally recognised in Article 12 of Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which requires the Parties, in developing contingency plans for marine pollution response, to draw on the advice of the CEP, the IMO and other international organizations.  
The Parties have referred a number of proposals and initiatives to the IMO for action. These include: 
    • Decision 4 (2004), through which the ATCM representatives conveyed to the IMO amended Guidelines for ships operating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters, and urged the IMO to consider these as early as possible (similarly urging their national representatives to take action towards early consideration);
    • Resolution 8 (2009), in which the Parties welcomed the work of IMO on Guidelines for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (pursuant to Decision 4 (2004) above), and conveyed to the IMO their desire that the Guidelines be adopted by the IMO Assembly in 2009, and further, that the IMO would commence work as soon as practicable to develop mandatory requirements for ships operating in Antarctic waters;
    • Decision 8 (2005), in which the Parties acknowledged the environmental risks associated with heavy fuel oil (HFO) and agreed to request the IMO to examine mechanisms for restricting the use of HFO in Antarctic waters; and
    • Decision 2 (2006) in which the Parties referred the Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty area to the IMO for appropriate action.
A number of older ATCM recommendations (eg. Rec. XV-4 (1989) which led to the establishment of the IMO’s Antarctic special areas) provide further examples. In addition, pending advice from the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the ATCM may consider making a request to the IMO to extend the boundary of the Antarctic area designated under MARPOL Annexes I, II and V northward to the Antarctic convergence, in line with Resolution 1 (2009).
Maintaining Antarctic Treaty interests within the IMO
Even where the ATCM refers a clearly defined proposal to the IMO, changes might occur as a result of the IMO’s processes and expertise being brought to bear. In complex situations, such as the development of a mandatory code for polar shipping, a range of issues may arise which have implications for the Parties’ activities and responsibilities. In these instances, enhanced discussion and coordination between Parties may assist in ensuring Antarctic Treaty interests are maintained.
Proposals may also arise within the IMO that relate to Antarctica, in some cases raised by States not party to the Antarctic Treaty and associated agreements.  Discussion and coordination between Antarctic Treaty Parties regarding such proposals may assist in ensuring a consistent and considered response to such proposals.  
Australia also regards it as important that the Parties are not seen to be at odds within the IMO on proposals forwarded by the ATCM to the IMO.  Further, some issues of key interest to the ATCM may not be high priorities for IMO, and coordinated action may be required to see timely implementation. Finally, discussion and coordination among the Parties on ATCM proposals within the IMO may assist Parties in linking their Antarctic Treaty and IMO policy work within their own Governments.
In Australia’s view, mechanisms for ensuring that Antarctic Treaty Parties are aware of and responsive to such situations would be of benefit, given the focus of the Parties on shipping issues, and the likely continued need for referral of proposals to the IMO. 
Australia therefore presented WP009 Enhanced coordination of Antarctic Treaty proposals within the IMO to the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 9-11 December 2009 in Wellington, New Zealand. In response to Australia’s proposal, the ATME report noted (Recommendation 15):
The meeting agreed that enhanced coordination between the Antarctic Treaty Parties with respect to Antarctic-related matters within IMO may be valuable in some circumstances, and noted that mechanisms for coordination should be considered by ATCM XXXIII.
Proposal
Noting Recommendation 15 of the ATME, Australia proposes that the Parties should:
    1. identify simple methods that the Treaty Parties can use to track, discuss, and if required coordinate views on proposals referred from the ATCM to the IMO as they proceed through IMO forums; and
    2. agree that Parties making proposals, Parties active in IMO, and/or Parties otherwise interested, should seek to keep Antarctic Treaty Parties collectively informed of progress in the IMO of Antarctic-related issues, using those methods as appropriate.
Australia is of the view that the Parties should retain a flexible approach, rather than establishing a fixed process, given the range of issues and timelines that might apply.  Therefore, to stimulate discussion, Australia suggests the following possibilities:
    1. A Party or group of Parties initiating a proposal in the ATCM could agree to take on responsibility for keeping the Treaty Parties informed of progress of the proposal within the IMO.  This might include:
        ◦ reporting on the likely timeframe for consideration within the IMO of the proposal, including the schedule of IMO meetings (assembly, committee or sub-committee) where the proposal is likely to be considered;
        ◦ reporting at each ATCM on the progress within the IMO of those issues referred to the IMO, including reporting on key issues or changes that may arise in IMO deliberations;
        ◦ reporting intersessionally after meetings of the IMO forums where proposals of the ATCM are considered; and
        ◦ advising the Parties when, in the view of that Party (or group of Parties), coordinated action may be required in the IMO to further the objectives of the ATCM or the Antarctic Treaty and associated agreements.
    2. Where a proposal pertaining to Antarctica first arises in a forum of the IMO, an Antarctic Treaty Party present might choose to bring the proposal to the attention of other Parties.
    3. In instances where extensive and complex discussion in IMO is likely (eg. development of a mandatory code for polar shipping) the Parties may wish to consider establishing an intersessional process to regularly share views as to how a proposal might best be advanced within IMO forums.
In Australia’s view, existing communication mechanisms, for example Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Circulars, the use of the web-based discussion forums, or the email contact lists, would be sufficient to support these interactions.


