





Guidance for visitors and environmental managers following the discovery of a suspected non-native species in the terrestrial and freshwater Antarctic environment




Guidance for visitors and environmental managers following the discovery of a suspected non-native species in the terrestrial and freshwater Antarctic environment 
CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

    1. Summary 
This working paper contains:
    • specific guidance for visitors upon discovering a suspected non-native species (Attachment A).
    • general guidelines for environmental managers following reports of a suspected non-native species (Attachment B),
The UK recommends that the CEP consider the draft guidance for incorporation into the quarantine manual proposed by the Intersessional Contact Group on Non-Native Species, following appropriate review.
    2. Background
Preventing the introduction of non-native species must continue to be the primary means of protection, but the second line of defence is early detection combined with rapid response (e.g. management action before numbers have become too great, or the area of spread too vast).  As it is difficult to predict the level of invasiveness of a newly introduced non-native species, the ‘precautionary principle’ should be applied, and a confirmed introduced species should be assumed to be highly invasive and if practicable, eradicated or contained as soon as possible.  
At ATCM XXIX/CEP IX New Zealand presented WP13 ‘Non-native species in the Antarctic. Report of a workshop’ which highlighted the risk to Antarctic ecosystems presented by non-native species.  To limit the environmental impacts of human introduced species, the paper also included the recommendation that ‘a set of comprehensive and standardized guidance and/or procedures should be developed, aimed at all operators in the Antarctic, based on a “Prevention, Surveillance, Response” approach’.  A key aspect of the surveillance component of that approach is that every effort is made to determine the colonisation history of a newly discovered species as either a non-native species, a recent natural introduction or a previously undescribed long-term inhabitant.  This is an important precursor to determining the appropriate management response, i.e. non-native species should be eradicated or controlled, while natural introductions or existing native species are protected according to the Environmental Protocol.
ATCM XXXII/CEP XII WP05 A work program for CEP action on non-native species identified the action to ‘develop practical guidelines/standards/norms for all Antarctic operators’.  Building on the United Kingdom’s practical experience of evaluating the colonisation history of a recently discovered vascular plant on Deception Island (see ATCM XXXIII/CEP XIII IP 43 Eradication of a vascular plant species recently introduced to Whalers Bay, Deception Island), the UK has prepared, for consideration by the CEP, draft guidance for visitors and environmental managers following the discovery of a suspected non-native species in the terrestrial and freshwater Antarctic environment.  
    3. Guidelines
Attachment A ‘Guidelines for visitors upon finding a suspected terrestrial or freshwater non-native species within the Antarctic Treaty Area’ lays out a suggested course of action should a non-expert visitor come across what appears to be a novel species.  
Attachment B ‘General guidelines for environmental managers upon finding a suspected terrestrial or freshwater non-native species within the Antarctic Treaty Area’ provides some general guidelines for environmental managers that may help to distinguish species new to continental Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula (i.e. either previously unknown long-term colonists or recent introductions) from known native species, and gives tentative indications of the likelihood of the species being a natural or human introduction in the absence of expert advice.
Associated with this working paper, the UK has also prepared ATCM XXXIII/CEP XIII IP 44 Suggested framework and considerations for scientists attempting to determine the colonisation status of newly discovered terrestrial or freshwater species within the Antarctic Treaty Area.  This paper may be of interest to biological scientists consulted by National authorities following discovery of a suspected non-native species. 
    4. Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP consider the draft guidance for scientists, environmental managers and visitors, detailed in Attachments A and B, for incorporation into the quarantine manual proposed by the Intersessional Contact Group on Non-Native Species, following appropriate revision and review.

Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
March 2010

