





Revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains




ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation XVI-9 (1991, SPA No. 23)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XVI-9 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif
Other relevant measures:

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes (Rev 1).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 119
Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains
    1. Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 23 through Recommendation XVI-9 (1991) after a proposal by the United States of America. The primary reason for designation of the Area is that its freshwater ponds and associated plant life represent unique examples of near-pristine freshwater ecosystems and their catchments.
    2. The boundaries of the Area were extended through Measure 2 (2005) to encompass the entire ice-free region centred on the Davis Valley, including the adjacent valleys and Forlidas Pond. The current Management Plan has not revised the boundaries of the Area and the grounds for designation of the Area remain valid.
    3. Substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        (i). (Section 7 (Bullet 1) and 7(ii)) Provision was made to allow visits to the Area for compelling educational reasons that cannot be served elsewhere and which will not compromise the values of the Area. This provision was added in view of the outstanding features documented within the Area, including aesthetic and wilderness values, which may at some stage merit being documented for the purpose of educating a wider audience about the Area and its value in the global context. The United States has no plans at present for such an expedition, although considers that the potential for limited and strictly controlled visits for these purposes should not be prohibited in the future. 
    4. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
        (i). (Introduction) A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area, including the location, the primary and subsidiary reasons for designation and the importance of the Area within the broader Antarctic protected area system.
        (ii). (Section 6(i) Minor alterations were made to the description of the Area, in particular more detail on wind, temperature and precipitation characteristics. More details are provided on glacial stages and the glacial features present. The description of water bodies was improved, with details added on a freshwater moat and on the origin of salts in Forlidas Pond. The description of biota was updated to include new data on cyanobacterial and lichen species identified in the Area.
        (iii). (Section 6(ii)) A section was added to describe access to the Area and to the icefields surrounding the Area. Information relevant on practical approach routes was included.
        (iv). (Section 7(iii)) A requirement was added specifying that installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures should be undertaken in a manner that minimizes disturbance to the physical, ecological, scientific or aesthetic and wilderness values of the Area.
        (v). (Section 7 (v)) A requirement was added that visitors should take special precautions against the introduction of non-native species to the Area. 
        (vi). (Section 7 (v)) It was specified that footwear, sampling equipment and markers should be sterilised before use within the Area.
        (vii). (Section 7 (v)) It was specified that fuel, food, and other materials are not to be stored in the Area unless authorized by permit.
        (viii). (Section 7 (vii)) A provision was added that the appropriate national authority should be notified of any items removed from the Area that were not introduced by the permit holder.
        (ix). (Section 7(x)) A requirement was added that the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken, and/or of any materials released and not removed, that were not included in the authorized permit.
        (x). (Appendix 1) The table of known visits to Davis Valley and adjacent ice-free areas was moved to Appendix 1. This table was updated to include additional information received from Dr A. Ford (formerly of the USGS) and the Russian Institute for Arctic and Antarctic Research, St Petersburg.A new table was added detailing groups of taxa identified in the Area by Hodgson et al. (in press).
        (xi). Minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

