





Open-ended Intersessional Contact Group on “Non-Native Species” (NNS) - 2009-2010 Report




Open-ended Intersessional Contact Group on “Non-Native Species” (NNS) - 2009-2010 Report
Abstract
This WP reports on the work achieved during the first year of the ICG on non-native species and proposed 1) a general introduction of a “quarantine manual” to be further developed, 2) an overall objective and 12 key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address non-native species concerns, 3) a set of measures to minimize the risk of non-native species introduction and an evaluation of their applicability, and 4) a list of further work required in order to develop specific guidance.
Introduction
Non-native species concerns have been identified as a priority 1 topic in the CEP five-year work plan. In this context, Australia, France and New-Zealand proposed to develop a specific manual to assist the Antarctic Treaty Parties in preventing the accidental or unintended introduction of non-native species (ATCM XXXII WP5). At CEP XII, The Committee endorsed the establishment of an ICG on this issue and agreed the following Terms of Reference:
    1) Develop a suggested overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address non-native species concerns.
    2) Develop a suggested set of generally applicable measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica.
    3) Identify particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance.
    4) Report to CEP XIII on progress with the above.
Participants, documents and timetable of work plan
Twelve Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil France, India, Japan, The Netherlands, New-Zealand, United-Kingdom, United States of America, and Uruguay), SCAR, ASOC, and IAATO participated in this ICG.
The ICG worked via the CEP discussion forum. The schedule was as follows:
    • 9 July to 16 October 2009: First discussion paper circulated and considered by the participants. 
    • 16 November 2009 to 12 February 2010: A synthesis of the discussion was posted, a second discussion paper circulated and considered by the participants. 
    • 15 February to 5 March 2010: Draft Working Paper circulated and considered by the participants.
All the working documents, discussions and preliminary reports are available on the CEP discussion forum.
An introduction to a future “quarantine manual”
The first round of discussion established the need to base the ICG work on a short but clear section recalling the purpose, background and context of the work done by this ICG. It was also realised that clear definitions were needed on the main terms used in our discussion (non-native / alien species, invasion, endemism...). These elements were prepared and it was suggested that such a general text and glossary could serve as an introduction of a future “quarantine manual”.
This introduction and glossary are presented in Annex I.
ToR # 1. Overall objective and key guiding principles
Overall objective
To conserve Antarctic biodiversity and intrinsic values by preventing the unintended introduction to the Antarctic region of species not native to that region, and the movement of species within Antarctica from one biogeographic zone to any other.
Comment from the ICG Members: In practice, the measures that should be put in place would minimise the risk of NNS introduction. However, a majority of ICG members recognise that the overall objective should be prevention, which is a higher standard, consistent with the principles of the Protocol.
Key Guiding Principles
In order to provide greater focus on the environmental risk related to the unintentional introduction of NNS in Antarctica and to guide Parties’ actions in accordance with the above overall objective, 12 key guiding principles are proposed. They are categorised according to the three major components of a non-native species management framework: Prevention, Monitoring and Response. 
Prevention
Prevention is the most effective means of avoiding or minimizing the risk of introduction of non-native species and their impacts. 
Awareness
    1) Awareness-raising at multiple levels in multiple audiences is a critical component of management.
All people travelling to the Antarctic should take appropriate steps to prevent the introduction of NNS.
Operational procedures
    5) The risk of NNS introductions should be identified and addressed in the planning of all activities, including through the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process under Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol.
    6) In the absence of sound scientific baseline, a precautionary approach should be applied to minimise the risk of human-mediated introduction of NNS, as well as the risk of intra-regional and local transfer of propagules to pristine regions.
    7) Preventive measures are most likely to be implemented and effective if they are:
    • focused on addressing activities and areas of highest risk;
    • developed to suit the particular circumstances of the activity or area in question, and at the appropriate scale;
    • technically and logistically simple;
    • easily applicable;
    • cost effective;
    • not unnecessarily time consuming.
    8) Prevention should focus on pre-departure measures on the logistics and supply chain, 
    • at the point of origin outside Antarctica (e.g. cargo, personal gear, packages)
    • at gateways to Antarctica (ports, airports),
    • on means of transport (ships, aircraft),
    • at the Antarctic stations and field camps that are the departure points for activities within the continent.
    9) Particularly close attention should be given to ensuring the cleanliness of items previously used in cold climates (e.g. Arctic, sub-Antarctic, mountainous areas) which may be a means for transporting species ‘pre-adapted’ to the Antarctic environment.
Monitoring
Monitoring can be passive observation (i.e. waiting for alien species to appear in the native environment) or targeted (i.e. an active programme of identifying potential alien species). It is desirable to have good baseline data about what is already present in the native fauna and flora.
    10) Regular/periodic monitoring of high-risk sites should be encouraged.
    11) Preventive measures should be periodically reviewed and revised
    12) Information on and best practices related to NNS should be exchanged between the Parties and other stakeholders.
Response
The key factor will be to respond quickly and to assess the feasibility and desirability of eradicating the alien species. If eradication is not a feasible or desirable option then control and/or containment measures need to be considered.
    13) To be effective responses to introductions must be timely.
    14) Efficacy of control or eradication programs must be regularly assessed, including follow-up surveys.
ToR # 2. Measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica.
The ICG members identified measures which could be appropriate for assisting Parties’ efforts to prevent the accidental or unintended introduction of non-native species. 
The ICG-Members addressed the applicability of these measures in order to identify, if possible, those which could be considered as priorities in the development of a manual for the prevention of introduction and the control of non-native species. The following ranks were proposed to the participants 
    1) easily applicable and can be easily generalized to all Parties
applicable and can be generalized to all Parties
    15) applicable by some Parties but difficult to be generalized
    16) not applicable 
The table in Annex II lists these measures with the range and mean of the applicability given by the participants. A lower mean suggests that the measure is generally applicable and easily generalised by most, and a higher mean suggests the measure is less applicable and less likely to be generalised. This rating is solely for the purpose of assisting the ICG process, and it will be removed from any guidelines/manual. It is obvious that the inputs of the greatest number of Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, SC-CCAMLR, IAATO and other stakeholders will be essential in the final evaluation of applicability and possibility of standardization.
ToR # 3. Particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance.
The ICG members have identified tasks which might be required to improve our knowledge and to contribute to elaborate appropriate guidance on the NNS concerns. Priorities have been assigned and potential stakeholders identified for filling gaps or developing specific guidance. 
This list of tasks appears in Annex III.
It was noticed that CEP should revise regularly these priorities according to the progress of work.
Conclusions
The discussion during the intersessional period provided the following outputs:
    • a draft text explaining the purposes and context of a manual on non native species issues prepared by CEP, as well as a glossary of specific terms used in this work, have been proposed;
    • an overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address non-native species concerns have been proposed;
    • a set of measures has been proposed which would minimise the risk of introduction of non-native species, including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica. The applicability of each was ranked by the ICG participants. But it is recognized that such applicability ranking would be more reliable if other bodies contributed (e.g. COMNAP, SCAR, SC-CCAMLR, IAATO etc..);
    • particular aspects of Antarctic operations have been identified for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance, as well as suggested priorities and potential stakeholders.
Recommendation to CEP
The CEP is invited 
    • to comment on the conclusions of this report;
    • to endorse the outputs from this period of intersessional work (introductory text, glossary, overall objective, key principles);
    • to consider  incorporating actions required to provide specific guidance in the CEP five-year work plan;
    • to provide indications to the ICG for the continuation of the work, namely the development of specific aspects of a manual in line with the most applicable measures identified by the ICG;
    • to encourage all the Parties, Observers and Experts to participate in the next steps of the ICG, recognizing that such a manual will be useful only if elaborated by the largest group of “users”.

