





Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Project Report





Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Project Report
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand on behalf of the Project Management Group
Summary
CEP XII agreed to undertake a comprehensive assessment of the environmental aspects and impacts of Antarctic tourism.  CEP XII accepted New Zealand’s offer to lead the study under the oversight of a Project Management Group.
Whilst excellent progress has been made with the study, insufficient time has been available ahead of CEP XIII in order to complete it.  A draft version of Part 1 of the study is available via the CEP discussion forum for comment.  Work on Part 2 is ongoing. A suggested way forward for completing the study ahead of CEP XIV is provided.
The CEP is invited to discuss the progress made so far and the proposed way forward.
1. Introduction
Working Paper 12, submitted to CEP XII by Australia, France and New Zealand, outlined a proposal for the CEP to undertake a study on the environmental aspects and impacts of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.  The rationale for the CEP undertaking this work was:
    • At the 31st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXI, Ukraine, 2008), the Meeting welcomed the CEP’s report that had identified as a high priority in its five-year work plan consideration of the environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities. The ATCM requested the CEP Chair convey to Committee Members the ATCM’s interest in the results of this and other relevant work, and looked forward to progress reports at upcoming Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM XXXI Final Report (203));
    • At ATCM XXXI, Parties also recalled that the issue of cumulative impacts of tourism had been raised several times in both the CEP and the ATCM (ATCM XXXI Final Report (206));
    • During its 11 meetings, the CEP has discussed a range of issues related to tourism and non-governmental activities including the assessment of possible cumulative impacts, strategic environmental assessment, limits in ship capacities, the number of people at key landing sites, and site specific guidelines.

CEP XII endorsed the proposed study and emphasised the importance of including all aspects of tourism and non-governmental activities in the scope of the study, ensuring transparency in carrying out the study, and ensuring that input by observers and experts is welcomed. It was also noted that the study will contribute to the Committee’s role in advising the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment (para 45 of the Report of CEP XII refers).

New Zealand’s offer to contract an individual to facilitate the study under the direction of a Project Management Group was supported by the CEP (para 44 of the Report of CEP XII refers). 

2. Progress with the study since CEP XII
The study was initiated in May 2009 with a call for interested Parties to join the Project Management Group.  12 countries responded indicating their desire to support the work through participation in the Project Management Group with additional support provided by ASOC and IAATO.
The work was facilitated via email among the Project Management Group members.  The CEP’s online Discussion Forum was used to post material, providing all CEP Members with the opportunity to access the relevant information and the opportunity to comment.
Between July and early December the primary focus of the study was the collection of data and information to support an overview of the status and trends of Antarctic tourism, focussing particularly on the last five seasons.
On December 12th, a small workshop was held to review progress with the study and to identify the work still to be concluded.  An informal report of those discussions was posted to the CEP Discussion Forum.
Between mid-December and January attempts were made to synthesise information on a) what we know about the environmental sensitivities at key visitor sites, and b) past and ongoing Antarctic tourism research and monitoring efforts.
During February and March, effort was placed on synthesising the report and preparing material for presentation to CEP XIII.

Status of the work at the time of CEP XIII
In general terms, this ambitious study has made good progress since CEP XII, noting in particular that:  
    • A significant body of information has been gathered in order to characterise the status and trends of Antarctic tourism; and
    • Good progress has been made with respect to presenting this information graphically and figuratively.
The analysis and discussion of the current status and observed trends of Antarctic tourism, which represents Part 1 of the project, is nearing completion. A draft version of Part 1 of the study report has been prepared and is available via the CEP’s on line discussion forum, though this still requires further development.  
It is worth noting that the collection of data for Part 1 of the study proved to be an exacting challenge.  A significant amount of time was spent compiling data sets of sufficient reliability on which to conduct status and trends assessments, including the production of graphs and figures (a list of the datasets collected during this part of the study is provided in Appendix A).  Other than the IAATO data, which is available via its website, there is a significant dearth of Antarctic tourism data available. Very little information is obtainable on non-IAATO tourism including land-based activities, yachting activity etc. 
Part 2 of the project, which focuses on an assessment and discussion of (potential) environmental impacts resulting from tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic, requires further work and additional input, especially from scientists involved in impact-related research projects. Hence, work on Part 2 of the project is ongoing and includes: 
    • The compilation of a representative and reliable body of information to characterise the nature of the receiving environment at key locations on which to base an assessment of the environmental consequence of regular visitation; and
    • The collection of information with regard to the outcomes of past and current research and monitoring efforts.

It is clear that the study will not be completed before CEP XIII / ATCM XXXIII.  Members of the Project Management Group have noted that this part of the study, the environmental assessment of Antarctic tourism, is likely to be the part of most interest to the ATCM.  More time is therefore needed to ensure that any advice provided to the ATCM is based on a comprehensive assessment of the published literature, as well as adequate consultation with experts.
As a result, discussion among the Project Management Group has concluded that the timetable for the completion of the study should be revised.  The Project Management Group anticipates to submit a full report, including Parts 1 and 2 of the study, to CEP XIV/ATCM XXXIV.
3. Next steps
Given that the study requires more time to ensure that a quality product can be provided to the ATCM, the Project Management Group suggests the following course of action:
    • CEP XIII is invited to discuss and comment on:
        ◦ progress with the study in general, and
        ◦ the draft version of Part 1 of the study specifically (available via the CEP discussion forum)
    • CEP XIII is also invited to suggest matters that should be included in the discussion surrounding Part 2 of the study.
    • Further work on the study be conducted (under the supervision of the Project Management Group) between CEP XIII and CEP XIV;
    • A final version of the study is presented to CEP XIV and ATCM XXXIV.

4. Recommendations
The CEP is invited to discuss the progress made so far and to consider the proposed way forward.
 
Appendix A

Datasets generated during Part 1 of the tourism study.

Name of database
Content
NZ tourism data_1967-2009.xls
NZ tourism database comparing IAATO data with NZ data on tourism to the Ross Sea (34 main sites & 16 other sites)
Pax by embarkation port_2003-2009.xls
One spreadsheet providing an overview of embarkation ports that Antarctic tourists pass through
Ntl tourism data_2004-2009.xls
Data on Antarctic tourism collected by some national authorising agencies (Australia, France, Germany, Japan and Norway)
Masterlist_sites on PVR form-GIS data.xls
Compilation of sites visited by Antarctic tourists and sites listed in the PVR forms with their latitudes and longitudes
Landing sites_confirmed coordinates.xls
Masterlist of landing sites with their confirmed coordinates (based on the SCAR Gazetteer) in decimal degrees
EIES_Final reports_tourism data.xls
Record of tourism information contained in the final reports of national authorising authorities
Nationalities of tourists.xls
List of nationalities of Antarctic tourists from 2003-2009
Overflights.xls
IAATO and EIES overflight data from 2003-2009
Commercial cruises.xls
Compilation of commercial ship-borne Antarctic tourism records for vessels >12 pax over the last five seasons
Yacht expeditions.xls
Compilation of yacht tourism records over the last five seasons
Private expeditions.xls
Record of non-commercial expeditions to Antarctica based on IAATO and EIES data
Land-based tourism.xls
Record of land-based tourism to Antarctica from 2003-2009 based on IAATO and EIES data


