





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans
Working Paper submitted by Australia on behalf of the SGMP
Abstract
In accordance with its Terms of Reference #1 to #3, the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) reviewed one draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) management plan referred by the CEP for intersessional review. The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan prepared by the United States for ASPA 106 Cape Hallett.
    1. Background
The Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) was established by ATCM XXXI (2008), with Terms of Reference outlined in Appendix 3 to the CEP XI Final report. As agreed at CEP XI the SGMP has been convened by one of the CEP Vice-chairs, Ewan McIvor from Australia (CEP XI Final Report paragraph 44).
During the 2009/10 intersessional period the SGMP was comprised of 19 members, including representatives from Argentina, ASOC, Brazil, Chile, China, Germany, IAATO, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Netherlands, Norway, Romania, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States. During the intersessional period SCAR also advised that a small Expert Group on Protected Area Management Plans would be formed to provide advice to the CEP, through the SGMP, on the scientific aspects of Management Plans. Discussions took place by correspondence, using the CEP Discussion Forum and email.
This Working Paper reports on the SGMP’s activities under Term of Reference #1 to #3:
    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole. 
    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so.  The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.
The SGMP’s activities under Term of Reference #4 are detailed in a separate Working Paper Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Term of Reference #4: Improving Management Plans and the Process for Their Intersessional Review.
    2. Review of draft management plans
No draft management plans submitted to CEP XII were referred for intersessional review by the SGMP during the 2009/10 intersessional period. However, the SGMP continued its review of one draft management plan referred by CEP XI for intersessional review:
    • ASPA 106: Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea (United States, ATCM XXXI/WP 13)
SGMP review of ASPA 106 during 2008/09
The SGMP reviewed the draft revised management plan for ASPA 106 during the 2008/09 intersessional period. In its initial advice to the United States in November 2008 the SGMP noted that this was a mature Management Plan and that  management provisions for Cape Hallett had been periodically refined and updated since the Area was designated in 1966. It indicated that, with minor modifications, the revised draft management plan submitted to CEP XI as WP 13 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the Area. In particular, the group sought clarification on: the suitability of conducting tourism at sites adjacent to the Area; the provisions allowing access for ‘educational purposes’; and whether the proposed flexible Area boundary (following a line 5 m from the seaward edge of the breeding colony of Adélie penguins) would create undesirable difficulties with administration, compliance and enforcement. Separate to the SGMP, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Ecuador.
In response the United States advised that it welcomed the SGMP’s comments, and was planning to prepare a revised draft management plan detailing a fixed Area boundary. Establishing a revised boundary and preparing new maps would require further field work, including surveying, which would delay resubmission of the revised plan until 2010. 
SGMP review of ASPA 106 during 2009/10
In March 2010 the United States submitted to the SGMP a revised draft management plan for ASPA 106 and a separate document detailing its responses to the SGMP’s initial comments from November 2008. The SGMP’s review of the revised draft management plan was coordinated by the SGMP member from the United Kingdom.
The SGMP noted the significant amount of work undertaken by the United States to revise the management plan, including carrying out field work during the 2009/10 season. The SGMP sought further clarification from the proponent on a small number of issues, including in relation to: whether the Area boundary could be modified slightly to allow safe and environmentally sensitive access by visitors to adjacent areas outside the ASPA; possible biosecurity issues arising from the presence within the Area of a frozen husky body (contained within an enclosed box); possible benefits of adding a marine component to the ASPA to protect foraging areas used by penguin the penguin colony; and the basis for allowing poultry products to be taken (but not released) into Area. The United States provided a written response to SGMP’s comments, together with a further revision to draft management plan.
The SGMP concluded that the issues raised during its reviews of the draft management plan had been adequately addressed by the proponent.
The final draft revised management plan is presented in Attachment A to this Working Paper. Appendix 1 contains introductory comments by the United States, and a coversheet prepared in accordance with Resolution 1 (2008). 
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP suggests that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan prepared by the United States and for ASPA 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea (Attachment A).
Appendix 1. Introductory comments and coversheet prepared by the United States
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation IV-6 (1966, SPA No. 7)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 1 (2002)
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation XIII (1985)
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2002)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Other relevant measures:
Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for Seabee Hook, Cape Hallett
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes – see full description below.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
Map 1 Regional Map added.
Map 2 Air Access Guidance added. 
Map 3 Topography replaces the former Map A.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated to reflect new boundaries.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
The Managed Zone has been deleted and a Restricted Zone has been added within ASPA No. 106.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106
Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
    1. Cape Hallett was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No.7 through Recommendation IV-6 (1966), after a proposal by the United States of America. The primary reason for designation of the Area was that it provides an outstanding example of biological diversity, in particular a rich and diverse terrestrial ecosystem. 
    2. The boundaries of the Area were enlarged in Recommendation XIII (1985) to include extensive stands of vegetation to the south and north of the Area. The Management Plan was further revised through Decision 1 (2002), which re-numbered the Area as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.106, and Measure 1 (2002) extended the Area to include Seabee Hook, the breeding area of a substantial colony of Adélie penguins. The grounds for protection described in the existing management plan remain valid. 
    3. The clean-up of Cape Hallett Station (NZ / US) was initiated in 1984, and the last remaining structures and facilities were dismantled in 2003-04. In recognition of the historic values of the site, many of the structures and artefacts from the former station are now held at the Canterbury Museum, Christchurch. The small amount of remaining material was removed with the kind assistance of the Italian Antarctic Program on 30-31 January 2010 aboard the Italica. In 2010, the only known remaining item of potential historical value and /or scientific value is the well-preserved body of a husky that died in 1964, which is contained in an enclosed wooden box secured under rocks located in the eastern part of the Area.
    4. The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    i. The boundary has been revised on Seabee Hook to delete the Managed Zone, which was intended for tourist visits. Parts of the Managed Zone have been replaced by two alternative sites outside of the protected area, to be managed by Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors. One of the sites identified for visitor access is on the northern / NW coast of Seabee Hook and the second is on the SE coast. The ASPA boundary has been revised to exclude the visitor sites. Recent survey data have been used to update the boundary where it follows the coastline, the edge of the penguin colony, and in the east where the boundary has been revised to follow natural features identified in recent imagery.
    ii. (Introduction) A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area, including the location, the primary and subsidiary reasons for designation and the importance of the Area within the broader Antarctic protected area system.
    iii. (Section 1) The value of the terrestrial habitats has been given greater emphasis, in particular that the arthropod community is the most diverse known in the Ross Sea region. The value of markers that remain present within the Area from early scientific studies for making repeat measurements has been added. The vegetation plot originally surveyed by Rudolph in the early 1960s is highlighted for its outstanding scientific value as a reference site. The high educational value of the site as an example of a station that was decommissioned and cleaned up is noted. Attention is now drawn to the enduring historic and heritage values associated with the former use of Seabee Hook during the operation of Hallett Station.  The outstanding aesthetic values of the Area are noted.
    iv. (Section 2) More specific text on aims and objectives has been added, including to allow research on environmental recovery. A specific objective to prevent the removal of the important old scientific markers has been added. The objective to take into account historic and heritage values when undertaking remediation of the site is added.
    v. (Section 5) A new regional map showing the location of Cape Hallett has been added for clarity. An Air Access Guidance map has been added to show landing sites and approach routes and for helicopters and fixed wing aircraft. The former Map A has been renamed Map 3 and has been substantially revised, including significant changes to the coastline, contours and permanent ice extent. Specific features added to the map include the extent of the Adélie penguin colony (2009), the Restricted Zone boundary, the footprint of former Hallett Station, the husky burial site and boundary cairns marking the Restricted Zone. The revised ASPA boundary and proposed new Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines areas have been added with fixed, defined coordinates. The helicopter approach route has been updated and guidance on movement within the Area is added. A fourth map focuses on the former Hallett Station area and includes the footprint of former station site and the boundary of the Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines area.
    vi. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the boundary was updated. A section describing human activities and impacts within the Area was added, including information on remediation of Hallett Station. Subheadings for each section were added to improve clarity.
    vii.  (Section 6(ii)) A section describing access to the Area by air, sea and on foot was added, including access routes and landing sites. Information relevant to specific landing sites or approaches was added, including local oceanographic and sea ice conditions, and the breeding season of Adélie penguins and skuas.
    viii. (Section 6(iii)) The Managed Zone was deleted. A new Restricted Zone has been added to provide more stringent protection to the vegetation plot first mapped in detail by Rudolph (1963) and repeated by Brabyn et al. (2006), which is an unique and extremely valuable resource for precise measurements of vegetation change in the region. As such, it is important that this site is only entered for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere within the Area. A series of cairns has been constructed to define the extent of the Restricted Zone and the corner coordinates of the Restricted Zone have been added to the Management Plan.
    ix. (Section 7(i)) Aircraft access guidelines have been clarified and strengthened. Overflight of the Area is prohibited without a specific permit.  Aircraft landings within ½ nautical mile (~930 m) of the Adélie colony should be avoided wherever possible. Landings made beyond this distance may select landing sites according to needs and local conditions. A Primary Landing Site has been designated at the point closest to the designated campsite by sea ice traverse.
    x. (Section 7(i)) The designated helicopter landing site in Willett Cove has been moved and the access route has been revised so they are as far from the Adélie colony as possible. Guidance is provided on alternative landing sites if the designated site is tidally inundated.
    xi.  (Section 7(i)) Guidelines for small boat access now specify that landings with the purpose of camping are to be made within Willett Cove, to avoid hauling camp equipment through the Adélie colony.
    xii. (Section 7(i)) Provisions on movement within the Area have been clarified and strengthened, in particular to make visitors more aware of the sensitive soils and plant communities, and the need to avoid these wherever practicable. Specific guidance is provided on movement around the campsite area and on the scree slopes in the east of the Area. Guidance has been added on movement within and around the Adélie colony and attention is drawn to skuas nesting within the Area. References to movement within the Managed Zone have been removed and guidance on movements within the visitor areas is now contained within the Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines. 
    xiii. (Section 7 (ii)) Stringent conditions for access to the Restricted Zone have been added, whereby access is allowed only for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere in the Area. 

5. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
    i. (Section 3) A requirement that National Antarctic programs operating in the Area should maintain a record of all new markers, signs and structures erected within the Area has been added. 
    ii. (Section 3) A requirement that any remaining small waste within the Area shall be removed where possible. It is stipulated that this shall be undertaken in consultation with an appropriate authority to avoid the loss of potentially important artifacts.
    iii. (Section 6) Updates to the description of the Area based on new observations and data, especially related to the terrestrial ecology and the breeding birds. Adélie penguin and skua population data for 2009-10 were added. Information on climate, soils and structures was also updated.
    iv. (Section 6iv) Descriptions of the USGS geodetic station “FISHER”, the New Zealand fuel cache, the emergency cache and historical markers were added / updated.
    v. (Section 6(v)) Protected area names and numbers were updated and newly adopted ASPAs were added;
    vi. (Section 7(bullets) and Section 7(ii)) Access for educational purposes is allowed in view of the unique context of station remediation and environmental recovery. Clarification is made of the types of educational activities allowed within the Area. Access conditions relating to the Managed Zone have been removed. 
    vii. (Section 7(ii)) A provision to allow activities related to the preservation or protection of historic resources within the Area has been added.
    viii. (Section 7 (iii)) A provision to minimise disturbance to flora and fauna when installing, modifying or removing structures has been included. Specific guidance on the use of the emergency cache has been added.
    ix. (Section 7(iv)) Provisions relating to camping have been clarified, in particular that camping on sea-ice is the preferred option whenever feasible. Attention is drawn to sensitive ecology close to the designated campsite and guidance has been added on alternative campsites if the designated site is inundated.
    x. (Section 7(v)) Provisions to minimize the risks of plant, animal and microbial introductions were added.
    xi. (Section 7(v)) A provision prohibiting release of poultry products was added.
    xii. (Section 7(v)) Guidance on actions to be taken if a release does occur was added.
    xiii.  (Section 7(vii)) Provisions prohibiting disturbance or removal of markers or features of historic value were added. A provision has been added to avoid disturbance to the husky while options for its future management are under consideration.
    xiv. Recent relevant references were appended to the plan.
    xv. Minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.


