TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE         XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/INF/40
Item 7 of the agenda
Original : English

FRENCH-AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL ON THE PROTECTION
OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(comments by the South-African Delegation)
FRENCH-AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL ON THE PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT:  COMMENTS BY THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION
--------------------------------------------------------

The joint French-Australian proposal on the protection of the
Antarctic environment covers in broad terms one of the two cardinal
areas dealt with in the Antarctic Treaty - the other main area
being scientific research.  We are appreciative of the great
amount of work which has been put into the joint French and
Australian proposals and we share the concerns expressed for
the urgent need to make a determined effort to protect the Antarctic
environment in a rational manner.

However, according to the documents in front of us, the joint
proposal if carried out as envisaged by the two proposers, would
negate the present controls and mechanisms which exist under
the Treaty.

Not only that, but if the proposed convention envisaged by these
proposals are brought into being, this convention would seriously
affect scientific research in terms of the Treaty as well as
the present working operation of the Convention on the Conservation
of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and the Convention on the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and would also
bring to an end the possibility of bringing the Convention on
Antarctic Mineral Resources (CRAMRA) into operation.

South Africa signed the "Convention on the Requlation of Antarctic
Mineral Resource Activities" on 25 November 1988, believing
that the Convention, which contains vigorous environmental measures,
stands as a testament to the vitality and efficiency of the
Antarctic Treaty System.

South Africa accepts the requirement that consensus of all members
of the Commission must be reached before exploration or development
2

could be considered in any area of the Antarctic.

Our country is of the opinion that the failure of the Convention 
on the Regulation of Mineral Resource Activities to enter into 
force would not be in the interests of environmental protection. 
The Convention provides the only reasonable and practical way 
of addressing mineral resource issues in a manner consistent 
with the spirit and substance of the Antarctic Treaty System, 
including its emphasis upon peaceful co-operation and environmental 
protection.

As a signatory to the Final Act of the Wellington Conference 
that adopted the Convention, the Republic of South Africa committed 
itself to the moratorium that no mineral resource activities 
will take place as long as steady progress is made towards its 
entry into force.

It is the conviction of the Republic of South Africa that the 
failure of the Convention to enter into force could lead to 
Antarctic mineral resource activities going ahead in the absence 
of agreed and effective regulatory provisions and could lead 
to mineral resource activities becoming the object of political 
discord and dispute among parties to the Antarctic Treaty System.

Against this background, the Republic of South Africa is looking 
forward to the commencement of. negotiations on the elaboration 
of a Protocol on Liability as requested by Article 8 (7) of 
the Convention of the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource 
Activities (CRAMRA).

My delegation will support the holding of a meeting in 1990 
of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Members to discuss the very 
important issues raised by the delegations of France and Australia 
but wishes to make it clear that it is not in favour of a further 
Convention as part of the Antarctic Treaty system, on issues
3

which it feels can effectively be dealt with under the present
Conventions in force, plus CRAMRA.

Our problem is therefore not with the issues to be discussed
in 1990 but with the mechanisms which are envisaged in terms
of the proposed Convention of the Preservation of the Antarctic
Environment.

We are in support of the thinking and the direction of the proposals
as expressed by the delegations from Chile, New Zealand and
the United States.  The South African delegation will therefore
be more than willing to participate in discussions and make
other contributions in order to transform these ideas into practical
solutions.
