TRATADO ANTARTICO
XII REUNION CONSULTIVA                                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XII CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XII REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                             CANBERRA
                             13-27 SEPTEMBER
                             1983                                    ANT/XII/24/REV 2
                                                                      8 November 1983
                                                                      Original: English



FINAL_REPORT_OF_THE_TWELFTH_ANTARCTIC_TREATY
CONSULTATIVE_MEETING
I

FINAL REPORT OF THE TWELFTH ANTARCTIC
TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1.    In accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
Representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, France, Federal Republic of
Germany, India, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the Republic
of South Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the
United States of America) met in Canberra from 13 to 27
September, 1983, for the purpose of exchanging information,
consulting together, and considering and recommending to their
Governments measures in furtherance of the principles and
objectives of the Treaty. On the invitation of the Consultative
Parties the Meeting was also attended by Delegations from
Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty which are not
Consultative Parties (Bulgaria, China, Denmark, German
Democratic Republic, Italy, Netherlands, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Romania, Spain and Uruguay);  Czechoslovakia was not
represented.

2.    The Meeting was formally opened by Mr Bill Hayden,
Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, in the presence of Mr
Barry Jones, Minister for Science and Technology.

3.    Mr J.R. Rowland, Representative of Australia, was elected
Chairman of the Meeting, and Mrs B.F. Spencer of the Australian
Department of Foreign Affairs, was appointed Secretary General.
2.

The opening session was held in public. Opening statements were delivered by Heads of Delegation (these, including that made by Mr Hayden, are attached at Annex A).

4.      The following agenda was adopted:

1.      Opening of the Meeting
2.      Election of Officers
3.      Opening Addresses
4.      Adoption of the Agenda
5.      Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and Collection and Distribution of Meteorological Data
6.      Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment
7.      Facilitation of Scientific Research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
8.      Effects of Tourism and non-Governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area
9.      Activities of Countries not Party to the Antarctic Treaty
10.     The Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System
11.     Public Availability of the Documents of the Consultative Meetings
12.     Matters relating to the Appointment of Observers at Consultative Meetings
13.     Exchange of Information in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty
14.     Uses of Antarctic Ice
15.     Antarctic Resources: The Question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation (Procedural item only)
16.     Date and Place of next Consultative Meeting
17.     Any other Business
18.     Adoption of Final Report
19.     Closing of the Meeting
3.

5.      The Meeting considered in Plenary Session all the items 
on the Agenda and appointed three working groups. A working 
group on Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and 
Collection and Distribution of Meteorological Data was chaired 
by Dr J.S. Boyd of Australia.  A working group on Man's Impact 
on the Antarctic Environment was chaired by Mr C.D. Beeby of New 
Zealand.  A working group on the Operation of the Antarctic 
Treaty System and Public Availability of the Documents of 
Consultative Meetings was chaired by Mr R. Trolle Andersen of 
Norway.

6.      The Meeting approved the following Recommendations which 
are set forth in Part II of this report:

        XII-1:                                  Collection and Distribution of 
                                                Antarctic Meteorological Data

        XII-2                                   Antarctic Telecommunications

        XII-3                                   Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
                                                Environment

        XII-4                                   Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
                                                Environment : Code of Conduct on 
                                                Waste Disposal

        XII-5                                   Extension of the Expiry Date of the 
                                                Designation of Sites 1-8 as Sites 
                                                of Special Scientific Interest

        XII-6                                   Operation of the Antarctic Treaty 
                                                System

        XII-7                                   Historic Sites and Monuments
4.
XII-8                  SCAR Assistance to Consultative
                       Parties

Telecommunications     (Agenda Item 5)

7.  This Agenda item was discussed in Plenary and further
consultations were carried on in a Telecommunications Group
chaired by Dr John Boyd (Australia). Copies of the SCAR Working
Group on Logistics "Antarctic Telecommunications Guidance
Manual" (SCARCOM) were circulated.  Appreciation was expressed
to SCAR and the Australian Antarctic Division for the
considerable work that had gone into the preparation of
SCARCOM.  It was accepted that the continuing usefulness of
SCARCOM depended on it being kept up to date.  The offer of the
Australian Antarctic Division to continue to maintain the manual
pending consideration by SCAR of its long term maintenance was
noted with appreciation.  Since the necessary information for
this purpose was in the hands of national Antarctic programs it
was considered appropriate that SCAR consult with them as to how
updating might best be achieved.

8.  Two points were considered in connection with the
adoption by some national Antarctic programs, since 1979, of
satellite communications.  First, it was suggested that national
Antarctic programs which had not adopted satellite
communications should be able to learn from the experience of
those that had.  Secondly, concern was expressed that the
widespread adoption of satellite communications by national
Antarctic programs might affect communications between
stations.  Attention was drawn to the increasing shipping and
aircraft activity in the Antarctic, to the need for point to
point communications to support such activity and to the need to
ensure that an adequate capability existed for communication
between stations to cope with emergency situations.  In order to
meet these concerns it was felt that a workshop could be the
best mechanism, possibly convened by SCAR in the context of a
5.
meeting of the SCAR Working Group on Logistics rather than as a 
Meeting of Experts under the auspices of the Antarctic Treaty.
It was recognised that such a workshop could also provide an 
opportunity to consider the matter of how best to ensure the 
regular updating of SCARCOM.

9.      The reactivation of the WMO Executive Committee Working 
Group on Antarctic Meteorology was warmly welcomed by all 
Consultative Parties.  Appreciation was especially expressed for 
the manner in which the Meeting on Antarctic Data 
Telecommunication Arrangements had explored the difficulties 
involved in ensuring that the inherent peculiarities of 
Antarctic meteorological data could be adequately handled within 
the Global Telecommunications System.  It was felt to be 
appropriate that further work in this field, along lines already 
identified in the Final Report of that meeting, should be 
encouraged through the Permanent Representatives of Consultative 
Parties with WMO.

10.    It was recognised that further work needed to be done on 
the matter of requirements for raw and processed meteorological 
data.  It was noted that while any national Antarctic program 
should be able to state what data it wanted to receive, the 
ability of stations from which data had been requested to 
provide it would inevitably be subject to constraints.  It was 
therefore felt that a revised statement of requirements should 
reflect not only what data was wanted but also what could be 
provided.

Man's_Impact_on_the_Antarctic_Environment     (Agenda Item 6)

11.    Draft Recommendations had been tabled by Argentina and 
Chile about the connection between the Antarctic Treaty itself 
and instruments derived from it, by Australia proposing 
amendments to the Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and
6.

Station Activities annexed to Recommendation VIII-11 and by the 
United Kingdom calling for the adoption nationally, on an 
experimental basis, of broadly defined procedures for the 
assessment of the environmental impact of such activities of 
national Antarctic expeditions which might have impacts which 
were significant.  In addition, Australia tabled a discussion 
paper raising the question of whether there needed to be a 
greater degree of coherence between measures for the protection 
of the Antarctic environment adopted under the Antarctic Treaty 
and instruments derived from the Treaty.

12.  An Environmental Group was convened under the 
chairmanship of Mr C.D. Beeby (New Zealand) which gave detailed 
examination to all these proposals.

13.  It was felt that, in a broad sense, the Argentine and 
Chilean draft Recommendation and the Australian discussion paper 
addressed similar concerns and should be treated together.  In 
debate, it was recognised that there was a need to consider 
whether further co-ordination was necessary of the various 
elements of environmental protection and conservation contained 
in the Antarctic Treaty system.

14.  Regarding the Australian draft recommendation on the Code 
of Conduct it was agreed to refer to national Antarctic programs 
the questions of problems in implementing the Code of Conduct 
and of the desirability and feasibility of revising the Code of 
Conduct (see Recommendation XII-4).

15.  Regarding the United Kingdom's draft recommendation, it 
was felt that the issues dealt with in the draft should be 
referred to SCAR for advice.  While it was noted that some 
governments already subject their Antarctic programs to impact 
assessment procedures, other Representatives felt that there was 
a need to move cautiously in search of whatever element of 
comparability it might be found prudent to apply, on a national 
basis, to such procedures (see Recommendation XII-3).
7.

16. It was noted that the material set out in paragraphs 17 
to 19 below, consisting of a description of the practice of a 
number of countries in relation to environmental assessment 
procedures, might be of value to SCAR in considering the issues 
referred to by Recommendation XII-3. It was further noted 
that the Consultative Parties and National Committees of SCAR 
might wish to forward to SCAR additional material relating to 
their own procedures.

Environmental Impact Assessments

17. Among the steps found in some national environmental 
impact assessment procedures are the following:

(i) definition of criteria to be used in determining whether 
proposed activities have a significant impact on the 
environment;

(ii) clear definition and description of the proposed 
activity;

(iii) a first evaluation, performed by the organisation 
responsible for the activity, of whether the proposal 
might reasonably be expected to have a significant 
impact;

(iv) if the result of such a preliminary evaluation is that 
the proposed activity is likely to have no more than a 
minor or transitory effect on the environment, the 
activity would proceed;

(v) if the preliminary evaluation indicates that a proposed 
activity is likely to have significant impacts on the 
environment, an environmental assessment of the proposed 
activity would be made;
8.

(vi)	such an assessment might be expected to include:

      (a)	description of the proposed activity as well as 
            feasible alternatives including the consequences 
            of not proceeding;

      (b)	description of the initial reference state with 
            which predicted changes are to be compared and a 
            prediction of future environmental states in the 
            absence of action;

      (c)	estimation of the nature and magnitudes of the 
            likely environmental changes resulting from the 
            proposed activity;

      (d)	definition of the criteria to be used in 
            measuring the significance of environmental 
            changes, including the relative weighting to be 
            assigned in comparing different kinds of changes;

      (e)	estimation of the significance of the predicted 
            changes;

(vii)	a decision would then be made on the basis of the 
      assessment as to whether or not the activity should 
      proceed in its original or a modified form, and this 
      decision and the reasons for it would be notified to 
      those interested or affected;	and

(viii)	implementation of the accepted action.

18.	Monitoring of key indicators of the environmental effects 
      of such activities is an important element and may call for 
      modification of the activity.
9.

19.     Where appropriate, the assessment procedures described 
above might also be expected to include the following steps:

       (a)    consideration of indirect or second order 
effects;

       (b)    consideration of the cumulative impacts of the 
proposed activity in the light of existing 
activities;

       (c)    description of any measures to be taken to 
maintain environmental quality;  and

       (d)    description of the manner in which restoration of 
the environment would be achieved.

Sites_of_Special_Scientific_Interest  (Agenda Item 7)

20.     The Meeting considered a draft Recommendation by Chile, 
Argentina and the UK embodying a proposal for the designation of 
a Site of Special Scientific Interest at South Bay, Doumer 
Island in the Palmer Archipelago.  The proposal and a management 
plan for the site has been considered and supported at the 
Seventeenth Meeting of SCAR.  The site is partly terrestrial and 
partly marine.

21.     It was agreed that any proposal for marine Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest should be carefully examined in the 
light of Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty and other factors.

22.     The Meeting noted that the management plan, as amended, 
specified that the passage of vessels into, in and through the 
area would not be affected and that the restrictions placed on 
vessels (namely that bottom trawling, dumping of waste and 
anchoring should be avoided except in compelling circumstances) 
were of a limited kind.
10.

23. The Meeting also noted, however, that at the Tenth
Consultative Meeting consideration of other Sites of Special
Scientific Interest in the marine environment (Chile Bay,
Greenwich Island and marine areas adjacent to SSSI No. 8,
Admiralty Bay, King George Island) had been deferred for future
consideration. Noting that at previous meetings proposals for
such sites which included marine areas had not been approved, it
was agreed to defer the making of a decision at this meeting
pending further study. It was therefore agreed that further
consideration of such SSSI's should be deferred until such time
as offices responsible for Antarctic programs had proposed to
SCAR, and SCAR had approved, SSSI's partly or wholly in the
marine environment. In this context particular attention was
drawn to the criteria for the designation of any SSSI contained
in operative paragraphs 1(a)(i) and (ii) of Recommendation
VIII-3.

24. Until such time as this matter might be considered at a
future Consultative Meeting or until June 1988, whichever came
earlier, it was agreed that offices responsible for Antarctic
programs operating in the vicinity of South Bay, Doumer Island
should be asked to draw the attention of their ship masters to
the scientific work proceeding in South Bay and to the draft
management plan reproduced at Annex B to this Report.

25. It was noted that the designation of Site Numbers 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 and 6 would expire on 30 June 1985; that the
designation of Site No. 8 would expire on 31 March 1985, before
the probable date of the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting; and
that the designation of Site No. 7 as a Site of Special
Scientific Interest expired on 30 June 1983. The United States
Delegate circulated for information a message recently received
from the President of SCAR, Dr James Zumberge, stating that SCAR
had not yet reviewed whether such designations should be allowed
to lapse or should be extended, that such a review would be
conducted by SCAR and the results presented at the next
11.

Consultative Meeting, and that the Conservation Sub-Committee of 
the SCAR Working Group on Biology requested the Consultative 
Parties to extend the designation of these Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest until the next Consultative Meeting, when an 
informal decision could be made.  Accordingly, Recommendation 
XII-5 extends the expiration date of the designation of Site 
Numbers 1-8 until 31 December 1985, which would be after the 
conclusion of the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting.

26.  The Parties recognised that the designation of Site No. 7 
had already expired and that Recommendation XII-5 might not be 
formally approved and become effective, pursuant to Article IX-4 
of the Treaty, until after the expiration dates of Site Numbers 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8.  Therefore, it was agreed that, in the 
interim, the Parties would voluntarily observe the management 
plans for these sites.

Tourism_and_non-Governmental_Expeditions  (Agenda Item 8)

27.  The Meeting discussed the implications of the increase of 
tourism and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica.  It was 
agreed that the isolation of the region meant that assistance by 
national programs to such activities was expensive, disruptive 
to research programs and sometimes hazardous to life and 
equipment.

28.  The Meeting agreed that emergency assistance was a 
humanitarian obligation, but that the risks and costs involving 
other assistance in Antarctica might best be reduced by 
Consultative Parties' urging upon private expeditions and tour 
operators the need for careful and thorough planning and for 
self-sufficiency in their operations.  In accordance with 
Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, the Meeting emphasized the 
importance of ensuring that non-governmental expeditions to the 
Antarctic Treaty area observed the principles and purposes of 
the Antarctic Treaty and the relevant measures adopted under
12.

it. To this end it was agreed that Consultative Parties should 
do their best to ensure that such expeditions were made aware of 
these provisions. It also agreed that Consultative Parties 
should keep each other fully informed about commercial or 
private expeditions being planned in their countries.

29.  It was noted that non-governmental expeditions and tour 
operators should be covered by adequate insurance and by some 
form of guarantee that would demonstrate their responsibility 
for their activities.  A view was also expressed that 
responsibility for compliance by non-governmental expeditions 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations 
adopted at the Consultative Meetings should be placed upon those 
States whose physical or juridical persons organize such 
expeditions or participate in them.  Since there was no 
agreement as to where responsibility for non-governmental 
expeditions should lie, the draft Recommendation which had been 
tabled was withdrawn.

30.  It was agreed that the ideas expressed in the previous 
paragraphs might be followed up and that further consideration 
be given to them at the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting.

Activities_of_Countries_not_Party_to_the_Antarctic_Treaty
(Agenda Item 9)

31.  There was a discussion of the inclusion, on the proposal 
of Malaysia and Antigua and Barbuda, of an item on Antarctica on 
the agenda for the 38th session of the United Nations General 
Assembly.  Consultative Parties unanimously reaffirmed their 
commitment to the Antarctic Treaty and expressed their concern 
that any attempts to modify or replace the Treaty would be 
likely to introduce contention and instability into a region of 
hitherto unparallelled peace and international co-operation.
13.

Operation_of_the_Antarctic_Treaty_System_and_Public
Availability_of_the_Documents_of_the_Consultative_Meetings
(Agenda Items 10 and 11)

32.     The delegation of Chile presented a systematic survey of
practical suggestions which - in time - might be considered by
the Consultative Parties in order to deal with the expanding
scope of international co-operation and interest in Antarctica.
There was general appreciation of the Chilean presentation,
which it was agreed could be considered also at the Thirteenth
Consultative Meeting.

33.     The inter-relationship between Agenda Item 10 and the
following Items 11, 12 and 13 was noted by several delegations.
However, for practical reasons, it was decided to convene a
Working Group under the chairmanship of Mr R. Trolle Andersen of
Norway for the consideration of Items 10 and 11 together.

34.     Consensus was reached on Recommendation XII-6 which
broadens the circulation of the Reports of regular Consultative
Meetings, as well as securing a continuous updating of, and the
inclusion of an explanatory introduction and prefaces in, the
"Handbook of Measures in Furtherance of the Principles and
Objectives of the Antarctic Treaty", renamed the "Handbook of
the Antarctic Treaty".  In regard to the transmission of a copy
of the Final Report of the Meeting to the United Nations
Secretary-General, it was agreed that the question of whether he
be asked to circulate the report to member countries should be
left to the Consultative Parties' Missions in New York.  In
addition, the Recommendation registers further progress with
regard to the public availability of documents. It also invites
the Depositary Government to examine the question of identifying
and cataloguing publicly available information about the
Antarctic Treaty System, and of the sources from which it may be
obtained.
14.

35. The possibility of further disseminating general 
knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty System through the future 
elaboration of an extensive report - a White Book - on the 
history and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty was discussed. 
It was agreed that the matter would require further study, and 
that it should be considered at the Thirteenth Consultative 
Meeting.

36.  It was agreed that there was a practical need for the 
host Government of a Consultative Meeting to continue to act as 
co-ordinator for matters of common interest to the Consultative 
Parties from the conclusion of one Consultative Meeting until 
the Preparatory Meeting for the next. The Contracting Parties 
expressed their appreciation to the Government of Australia for 
its offer to accept this task until the next Preparatory Meeting 
in 1985.  It was agreed that the establishment of a more 
permanent infrastructure to undertake these tasks would be 
premature at the present time, but that the matter, together 
with the question of frequency of meetings, should be discussed 
further at the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting.

37.  It was agreed that "The Operation of the Antarctic Treaty 
System" should be included on the Agenda of the Thirteenth 
Consultative Meeting.

Observers     (Agenda Item 12)

38.  Not all States which are Contracting Parties to the 
Antarctic Treaty are entitled to appoint representatives to 
participate in Consultative Meetings. Non-Consultative Parties, 
like all Contracting Parties, have rights and obligations under 
the Antarctic Treaty and are, as Parties, bound to carry out its 
provisions and uphold its purposes and principles, and to 
maintain and strengthen that Treaty. The Consultative Parties 
therefore invited non-Consultative Parties to this Consultative
15.

Meeting and welcomed their attendance: it assisted the 
deliberations of the Consultative Parties, helped to keep 
non-Consultative Parties informed about activities under the 
Treaty, and furthered the common aim of all Contracting Parties 
to develop and strengthen the operation of the Antarctic Treaty 
system.

39.  For these reasons, the representatives of the 
Consultative Parties endorsed the attendance of non-Consultative 
Parties at the next regular Consultative Meeting. They 
therefore decided to invite the non-Consultative Parties to the 
Thirteenth Consultative Meeting, as well as to its Preparatory 
Meeting.  Draft Rules of Procedure incorporating the necessary 
amendments were prepared by the Meeting, and will be referred to 
Governments for their consideration on the clear understanding 
that this would not affect the right of Special Consultative 
Meetings, as Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty, to adopt their own Rules of Procedure. 
Consultative Parties which have not indicated their views by 1 
April 1984 will be taken to have accepted the text.  If any 
government requests that the matter be discussed further, the 
Australian Government will either pursue the matter through 
diplomatic channels or will refer the draft Rules of Procedure 
to the preparatory meeting for the Thirteenth Consultative 
Meeting.

40.  Since there was a close relationship between subjects to 
be discussed at special Consultative Meetings and attendance at 
those Meetings, the Meeting decided that the question of 
attendance at future Special Consultative Meetings could be 
decided only when such Meetings were being convened.  As regards 
the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting, the Meeting took note 
of the wish of several of the non-Consultative Parties that they 
should be invited to attend future sessions.  The Meeting was of 
the view that attendance at the Fourth Special Consultative 
Meeting, representation at which had been determined in 1981, 
was a matter to be decided by that Meeting.
16.

41. A statement by Non-Consultative Parties is at Annex C.

42. There was a full discussion of the extent to which, in 
the light of paragraph 2 of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty,
the attendance of appropriate international organisations at 
regular Consultative Meetings might assist the Consultative 
Parties. The Meeting concluded that, as part of the preparation 
for each regular Consultative Meeting, the Consultative Parties 
should consider whether the Consultative Parties would be 
assisted in their discussion of any item of the agenda of the 
regular Consultative Meeting if a Specialised Agency of the 
United Nations or other international organisation having a 
scientific or technical interest in Antarctica were to attend 
the Meeting as an observer when that item was being discussed; 
and, if so, whether the relevant organisation should, with the 
agreement of all Consultative Parties, be invited by the host 
government to attend the Meeting on that basis.

Exchanges_of_Information_Under_the_Antarctic_Ireaty
(Agenda Item 13)

43. The meeting discussed a proposal that it might be 
opportune to review the timeliness of exchanges of information 
under Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty, by seeking 
the views of those directly responsible for Antarctic programs, 
as the bodies which both provided the major part of the 
information and should also gain most from its timely exchange. 
It was suggested that the first step in such a review required 
that Consultative Parties' offices responsible for their 
Antarctic programs should be asked for advice as to:

    (i) the date by which they would ideally wish to 
receive exchanged information;
17.

(ii)      whether each of them could assemble that part of 
the information for which they were responsible 
one month before the date identified under the 
preceding sub-paragraph to allow time for 
transmission of the information through 
diplomatic channels;

(iii)    whether the exchange of information called for 
under Recommendation II-VI (Annex to 
Recommendation VIII-6, para 2) should be combined 
with the exchanges called for under paragraph 1 
of the Annex to Recommendation VIII-6;

(iv)     whether some of the information called for in the 
Annex to Recommendation VIII-6 might better be 
exchanged after, rather than before, the activity 
in question;  and

(v)      whether, as one means of more effectively 
implementing Article III.1(c) of the Treaty, 
brief reports on the implementation of scientific 
investigations might be included in the 
information exchanged.

It was also suggested that national contact points might be 
designated to which enquiries about activities, scientific 
observations and results could be addressed.

44.      The Meeting agreed that, after advice on these questions 
had been received from offices responsible for national 
Antarctic programs, the matter should be discussed at the 
Thirteenth Consultative Meeting.  In the meantime, the Meeting 
agreed that it would be useful to encourage the maximum of early 
informal information exchange between offices responsible for 
national Antarctic programs.
18.

45. The Meeting also exchanged views on whether it might be 
desirable to give special attention to information exchanged,
under Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty, about 
activities on geophysical research in which the techniques used 
might be indistinguishable from those activities which would 
take place in the early stages of exploration for off-shore 
hydrocarbon resources. A number of Delegations noted that 
Article III of the Antarctic Treaty established obligations to 
exchange and make freely available scientific observations and 
results from Antarctica. In this regard, the United States 
Delegation made available its plan for data release of 
geophysical research to be undertaken in January/February 1984 
by the Research Vessel "Lee", which would include the depositing 
of record sections and magnetic tapes of seismic and other data 
in the US National Data Centre, where copies would be freely 
available, subject to payment of reasonable reproduction costs. 
A map showing the proposed cruise track would also be available 
before the cruise began, as well as the actual cruise track 
after the cruise had taken place.

46. The Japanese Delegation informed the Meeting that all 
scientific data produced by Japan, including those from recent 
expeditions by the "Hakurei Maru", would be freely available on 
request to their Government.

Uses_of_Antarctic_Ice  (Agenda Item 14)

47. The Meeting took note of two technical information papers 
on the potential uses of ice, and agreed to discuss the issue 
again at the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting.

Antarctic_Minerals  (Agenda Item 15)

48. This was a procedural item only. A report on the 
progress of negotiations towards a regime to regulate Antarctic 
minerals exploration and exploitation was given by Dr E.F. Jung
19.

of the Federal Republic of Germany, Chairman of the Second 
Session of the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting on Antarctic 
Mineral Resources. The Meeting noted that these negotiations 
were taking place in another forum, welcomed the progress in the 
negotiations that had taken place so far, and expressed the hope 
for an early completion of negotiations.

Date_and_Place_of_Next_Consultative_Meeting  (Agenda Item 16)

49.  The Meeting welcomed the Belgian Delegation's indication 
that Belgium was in principle willing to host the Thirteenth 
Consultative Meeting in 1985, subject to final confirmation as 
early as possible.

Any_Other_Business (Agenda Item 17)

50.  The Meeting agreed that Consultative Parties, being not 
all members of the International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), should not respond 
collectively to Resolution 15/20 adopted in 1982 by the IUCN.

51.  The Meeting adopted Recommendation XII-7, establishing 
the site of the temporary Indian station "Dakshin Gangotri" as a 
Historic Monument, to be annexed to Recommendation VII-9, as 
Monument No. 44.

52.  The Meeting agreed to send the traditional telegram of 
greetings to all Antarctic stations.  The text of the message is 
at Annex D.

53.  On a number of occasions in the course of the Meeting 
attention was drawn to the financial implications for SCAR of 
the requests for advice being put to SCAR through National 
Committees for consideration.  In this context Recommendation 
XII-8 was adopted.
20.

54. Attention was also drawn to the needs of those
Contracting Parties which were not Consultative Parties but
which might wish to undertake scientific investigations in the
Antarctic. It was noted that the main sources of advice were
offices responsible for national Antarctic programs and SCAR.
Representatives of Consultative Parties affirmed the willingness
of their national Antarctic programs to respond to requests for
advice. It was noted that the constitution of SCAR provided for
national and observer status within SCAR, and that those
Contracting Parties which had recently become Consultative
Parties had gained much from attending SCAR meetings.  States
interested in learning more about SCAR should address their
enquiries to the Executive Secretary, Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research, Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge,
CB2 IER, United Kingdom.

55. The United States delegation circulated for information
to all Delegations a copy of the report of an inspection tour of
Antarctic stations which was undertaken in the summer of
1982/83, in accordance with Article VII.3 of the Antarctic
Treaty.
21.

 
           II
RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTED AT THE
TWELFTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE
MEETING
22.

XII-I

THE_COLLECTION_AND_DISIRIBUTION_OF_ANTARCTIC_
METEOROLOGICAL_DATA

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VI-3 and X-3;

Noting Resolutions 4,5,6,7 and 8 of the WMO Executive Committee,
Thirty Fourth Session June 1982 concerning meteorological
observing networks, collection and transmission of
meteorological data and meteorological data processing in
Antarctica;

Recognising

(1)     the continuing importance of Antarctic meteorological
data for support of operations within Antarctica and for
weather forecasting and research, especially climate
research in the rest of the world;

(2)     the need to maintain a basic network of meteorological
stations providing surface and upper-air synoptic data to
meet in so far as possible the requirements of
Consultative Parties and of the WMO World Weather Watch;

(3)     the diminished value of meteorological data if it is not
available to users within and outside the Antarctic in
accordance with the WMO schedules for the receipt of raw
and processed data;
23.

(4)     the paucity of Antarctic meteorological surface and upper 
air data and the consequent importance of maintaining 
regularity of meteorological observations;  and

(5)     that the increasing shipping and aircraft activities in 
Antarctica will give rise to increasing demands for 
meteorological support;

Reaffirming the importance of the WMO Global Telecommunications 
System (GTS) for purposes of transmitting Antarctic 
meteorological data between Antarctic stations in cases where 
direct transmission within Antarctica is inhibited by 
ionospheric conditions, and noting that the adoption by some 
Consultative Parties of satellite communications may facilitate 
the reception within Antarctica of meteorological data from the 
GTS;

Noting:

(1)     that monitoring carried out by WMO in 1982 and 1983 on 
the flow of Antarctic meteorological data into the GTS 
indicates that significant deficiencies remain;

(2)     the reactivation of the WMO Executive Committee Working 
Group on Antarctic Meteorology and the outcome of its 
Third Session in April 1982, including preliminary work 
on a review of the requirements for raw and processed 
data set out in Annexes 1 and 2 of Recommendation VI-3;

(3)     the efforts of the WMO Meeting of Experts on Antarctic 
Data Telecommunication Arrangements in June 1983, in 
reviewing and updating the meteorological 
telecommunications routing diagrams set forth in Annexes 
1, 2 and 3 of Recommendation X-3;  and
24.

(4)     that the aforesaid WMO Meeting of Experts arrived at a 
        number of conclusions and recommendations aimed at 
        improving Antarctic telecommunications for meteorological 
        purposes, and at improving the manner in which Antarctic 
        meteorological data is transmitted within the GTS of the 
        WMO World Weather Watch;

Recognising the need to keep under review:

(1)     the requirements for raw and processed Antarctic 
        meteorological data; and

(2)     the arrangements for transmission of meteorological data 
        within Antarctica and between Antarctica and the WMO 
        World Weather Watch system;

Recommend to their Governments that they:

(1)     use their best endeavours, subject to any overriding 
        scientific, administrative or budgetary considerations, 
        to secure full implementation of the network of stations 
        and observational programs set forth in Annex 1 of this 
        Recommendation;

(2)     maintain and improve, subject to any overriding 
        scientific, administrative or budgetary considerations, 
        the system for collection and distribution of 
        meteorological data to, from and within Antarctica having 
        regard to the routing arrangements shown  in Annexes 2 and 
        3, which are based on the conclusions of the WMO Meeting 
        of Experts on Antarctic Data Telecommunication 
        Arrangements in June 1983;
25.

(3)     seek, through their Permanent Representatives with WMO,
        the completion of Annex IV to the Final Report of the
        aforesaid WMO Meeting of Experts, as a helpful
        contribution to planning the exchange of available
        meteorological data;

(4)     seek, through their Permanent Representatives with WMO,
        to ensure that consideration is given, as appropriate, to
        other conclusions and recommendations made by the
        aforesaid WMO Meeting of Experts;

(5)     invite WMO through their Permanent Representatives with
        that Organisation, to keep under review the arrangements
        for routing of meteorological data within Antarctica and
        between Antarctica and the GTS of the World Weather
        Watch, and to suggest actions which might be taken to
        improve the timely receipt of data at stations in
        Antarctica and at World Meteorological Centres Melbourne,
        Moscow and Washington and other centres in the World
        Weather Watch System, having particular regard to
        changing requirements for meteorological information and
        to opportunities offered by new technology; and

(6)     note that the statements of requirements for raw and
        processed Antarctic meteorological data provided by the
        WMO pursuant to Recommendation X-3 paragraph 9 require
        refinement, and invite WMO, through their Permanent
        Representatives with that Organization, to undertake such
        refinement.
26.                                                                      ANNEX 1 *

STATIONS AND OBSERVATIONAL PROGRAMMES COMPRISING THE BASIC SYNOPTIC NETWORK
IN THE ANTARCTIC


INDEX NAME OF THE STATION*                                  SURFACE**                      RADIOWIND/     RADIO-
NUMBER                                                      00 03 06 09 12 15 18 21         RADIOVENT      SONDE
                                                                 00 06 12 18         00    12
                                                                 3                   4

1                                                            2                      

                                                                                     
85984   CENTRO MET.                                             x  x  x  x           x       x       x    x
        ANTARTICO PDTE.
        EDUARDO FREI***

85986   B.A. ARTURO PRAT                                        x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     
85988   B.A. BERNARDO                                           x  x  x  x                                   
        O'HIGGINS                                                                                  

                                                                                     
88925   SIGNY ISLAND                                            x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     

88952   FARADAY                                                  x  x  x  x           x   x       x    x
        (ARGENTINE ISLAND)                                                                          
                                                                                     
88962   FOSSIL BLUFF                                            x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     
89022   HALLEY                                                  x  x  x  x           x   x       x    x
                                                                                     
89062   ROTHERA POINT                                           x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     
88963   ESPERANZA B.E.                                          x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     
88968   ISLAS ORCADAS D.N.                                      x  x  x  x           x   x       x    x
        (OBSERVATORIO                                                                                
        METEOROLOGICO)                                                                               

                                                                                     
88970   TENIENTE B.                                             x  x  x  x                                   
        MATIENZO B.A.                                                                               

                                                                                     
88971   ALMIRANTE BROWN E.C.                                    x  x  x  x                                   
                                                                                     

*       The names of stations are considered to be as geographical designators
        and are not indicative of functions.

**      Where possible when other requirements make it desirable, observations
        should also be made at some or all of the four intermediate standard
        times of observation, i.e. 0300, 0900, 1500 and 2100 GMT.

***     Stations carrying out data-processing and meteorological service
        functions.

* Note this Annex is reproduced from the Annex to Resolution 5 of the W.M.O.
Executive Committee Session of June 1982 (ECXXIV).
27.

INDEX   NAME OF THE STATION*                      SURFACE**                  RADIOWIND/    RADIO-
NUMBER                                            00 03 06 09 12 15 18 21  00 06 12 18   00   12
                                                  1                         2              3         4

89034   GENERAL BELGRANO II B.E.              X   X   X   X   X              X   X         X    X   
89045   GENERAL BELGRANO III B.E.             X   X   X   X                X   X         X    X   
89055   VICECOMODORO MARAMBIO                  X   X   X   X   X        X   X   X   X   X    X   
        B.A. CENTRO METEORO-
        LOGICO ANTARTICO***
89066   GENERAL SAN MARTIN B.E.               X   X   X   X                                     
89001   S.A.N.A.E. STATION                    X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89002   GEORG VON NEUMAYER                     X   X   X   X                                     
89009   AMUNDSEN-SCOTT                         X   X   X   X   X        X             X          
89664   MCMURDO                                X   X   X   X   X        X             X          
89050   BELLINGSHAUSEN                        X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89132   RUSSKAYA                               X   X   X   X                                     
89512   NOVOLAZAREVSKAJA                       X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89542   MOLODEZNAJ***A                         X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89592   MIRNYJ                                 X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89606   VOSTOK                                 X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89657   LENINGRADSKAJA                        X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89532   SYOWA                                  X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89571   DAVIS                                  X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
89611   CASEY                                  X   X   X   X   X        X             X    X   
94986   MAWSON***                              X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   
95502   DUMONT D'URVILLE                       X   X   X   X   X        X   X         X    X   

*       The names of stations are considered to be as geographical designators 
        and are not indicative of functions.

**      Where possible when other requirements make it desirable, observations 
        should also be made at some or all of the four intermediate standard 
        times of observation, i.e. 0300, 0900,1500 and 2100 GMT.

***     Stations carrying out data-processing and meteorological service 
        functions.
EXISTING LINKS FOR THE DAILY INTERNATIONAL
EXCHANGE OF METEOROLOGICAL DATA WITHIN
THE ANTARCTIC (June 1983)

LATITUDE 60* SOUTH........................................................





LITTLE ANTARCTICA
Antarctic Peninsula

                                  GREATER ANTARCTICA
                                  (Main Auroral Zone)





NAME (S/W)              TELECOMMUNICATION MEANS              RADIO BROADCASTS
ANTARCTIC COLLECTING STATION    POINT TO POINT LINK              FREI    F1 + H + 05 (SYNOP)
WITH THE NUMBER OF STATIONS     OMNIDIRECTIONAL RADIO BROADCAST  MARAMBIO  A1, F1 + H + 30 (SYNOP), H + 160 (TEMP)
FROM WHICH DATA ARE COLLECTED   Irr :IRREGULAR                    MOLODEZHNAYA  F4,F1 + H + 45 (SYNOP), H + 180 (TEMP)
S:SUMMER
W:WINTER

ANNEX 2
28*
PRINCIPAL ROUTES BY WHICH ANTARCTIC METEOROLOGICAL 
DATA ENTERS THE GTS


                  WASHINGTON                  OFFENBACH                  MOSCOW                  TOKYO
                      |                           |                         |                     |
                      |                           |                         |                     |
                      |                           |                         |                     |
              BUENOS AIRES                 PRETORIA                 MELBOURNE
                      |                           |                         |                     |
                      |                           |                         |                     |
                  SANTIAGO                   SANAE                   WELLINGTON
                      |                   (S.A)                   CHRISTCHURCH
                      |                           |                         |
                      |                           |                         |
  80* S               |                           |                         |               80* S
                      |                           |                         |
                  FREI                MARambio                NEUMAYER               SYOWA               CASEY
              (SCEF)             (ARG)                   (F.R.G)              (JAPAN)             (A.U.S.)
              (CHILE)
                      |                       3                       1                       3               |
                  FARADAY             BELLINGSHAUSEN             HALLEY             MOLODEZHNAYA         MAWSON
              (STAF)                (U.S.S.R)                 (U.K)              (U.S.S.R)            (A.U.S)
              (U.K)
                      |               ARC TOWNSKI             |                   |                       |
                  PALMER             (POL)                   |                   |                       |
              (U.S)             SIGNY                     |                   |                       |
                      |               (U.K)                   |                   |                       |
                      |_______________________________________|                   |                       |
 LONGITUDE 150*W TO 30*W          LONGITUDE 30*W TO 60*E          LONGITUDE 60*E TO 150*W
  LESSER ANTARCTICA               GREATER ANTARCTICA
  [America: Peninsula]



  R.M.C.                                  R.M.C. or STATION WITH SIMILAR FUNCTIONS
  R.T.H. or R.M.C.                        ANTARCTIC COLLECTING AND TRANSMITTING STATION
  PRIMARY ROUTE TO AND FROM G.T.S.        PRIMARY ROUTE TO G.T.S.

 1  NO OF STATIONS INCLUDED IN ORIGINAL SOURCE BULLETINS TO THE GTS
     SUSPENDED BY RESOLUTION 33(CG-IX) FROM ENTERING 
     113 NIGHTS WEATHER AS A MEMBER OF THE WMO ITS IMPLICES AS A
30.

XII-2

ANTARCTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VI-1, VII-7 and X-3;

Recognising that Antarctic telecommunications are designed to carry operational, scientific and meteorological traffic and that improvement of the telecommunications system would serve to ensure timely and full exchange of information;

Recognising that recent developments in the use of satellites, of which some Consultative Parties have made use, have improved the reliability of communication links between Antarctic stations and the outside world, but that consequent diminished reliance on conventional telecommunication methods may have affected the capability of stations to communicate with each other;

Noting with appreciation, the response of the SCAR Working Group on Logistics to the request in Recommendation X-3, paragraph 6, to prepare an Antarctic Telecommunications Guidance Manual (SCARCOM);

Noting that the increasing shipping and aircraft activity in Antarctica will require improved telecommunications and meteorological support by Consultative Parties undertaking such increased activity;
31.

Recommend to their Governments that:

(1)	they strive to ensure effective use of the Antarctic telecommunication systems already in existence, and to utilise as appropriate the developing satellite communication systems with a view to achieving improved communications between the Antarctic stations, as well as between those stations and points outside Antarctica;

(2)	they invite SCAR, through their National Antarctic Committees, to:

	(i)	consider, in consultation with agencies responsible for national Antarctic programs (hereinafter referred to as "national Antarctic programs"), how best SCARCOM can be periodically updated so that it may provide adequate guidance to telecommunications operators on telecommunication practices of national Antarctic programs and relevant internationally agreed procedures;

	(ii)	examine issues relating to increased use of satellite communications including:

		(a)	an exchange of information and experience arising out of the adoption of satellite communications for the benefit of those national Antarctic programs which have not adopted this means of telecommunication,

		(b)	the cost-effectiveness of satellite communications and the benefits to operational efficiency and scientific research that may by derived therefrom,
32.

(c) identification of any problems which may be encountered in communication between the stations of different national Antarctic programs in the event of more widespread adoption of satellite communications, and

(d) exploration of means by which any such problems might be overcome while maintaining the cost-effectiveness and other benefits of satellite communications;

(iii) examine the adequacy of the Antarctic telecommunications system to meet demands arising from the expansion of shipping and aircraft activity in Antarctica, and to suggest improvements where these might be desirable.  In this examination particular attention should be given to:

(a) communications between Antarctic stations,

(b) use of the existing facilities for communications between Antarctica and the outside world,  and

(c) communications between stations, ships and aircraft for the purpose of co-ordinating emergency and search and rescue operations.
33.

XII-3

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendations
VI-4, VIII-11, VIII-13 and IX-5;

Noting that in these Recommendations, which have become
effective in accordance with Article IX, Paragraph 4 of the
Antarctic Treaty, certain principles were elaborated and
adopted, namely that:

(i)     the ecosystem of the Antarctic Treaty Area is vulnerable
        to human interference;

(ii)    the Antarctic derives much of its scientific importance
        from its uncontaminated and relatively undisturbed
        condition;

(iii)  in considering measures for the wise use and protection
        of the Antarctic environment their Governments shall act
        in accordance with their responsibility for ensuring that
        such measures are consistent with the interests of all
        mankind; and

(iv)   no act or activity having an inherent tendency to modify
        the environment over wide areas within the Antarctic
        Treaty Area should be undertaken unless appropriate steps
        have been taken to foresee the probable modifications and
34.

to exercise appropriate controls with respect to the 
harmful effects such uses of the Antarctic Treaty Area 
may have;

Recalling that in accordance with these principles there has 
been established for the Antarctic a substantial series of 
measures for the protection, conservation and wise use of 
Antarctic fauna and flora consisting of the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Convention 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the Convention on 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

Noting that the States involved in Antarctic research activities 
are in the best position to assess potential environmental 
impacts of such activities and to develop assessment procedures 
which might, with benefit, be applied to determining whether the 
activities they plan to conduct are likely to have significant 
impacts;

Considering that a measure of comparability between such 
procedures might, in the future, become desirable;

Affirming that environmental assessment procedures should not 
prejudice one of the fundamental principles of the Antarctic 
Treaty providing for freedom of scientific investigation as set 
out in Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and that such 
procedures should not encroach upon nor prejudice provisions for 
the protection of the environment and the conservation of living 
resources contained in instruments that have been or may, in the 
future, be negotiated as parts of the Antarctic Treaty system;
35.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.      in relation to any scientific activity they plan to conduct, including the planned provision of logistic facilities to support such activity, they urge their respective national organizations responsible for Antarctic activities to continue to scrutinize the plans for such research and logistic activities, in accordance with procedures they have developed or may develop, to determine whether the planned activities are likely to have significant impacts;

2.      if a preliminary determination indicates that a planned research or logistic activity could have potentially significant impacts on the environment, their relevant agencies undertake a detailed environmental assessment, in accordance with procedures they have developed or may develop, with a view to determining the factors likely to cause such impacts and, if the seriousness of such impacts so indicates, to elaborating feasible research and logistic alternatives aimed at minimizing harmful effects on the environment.  In the event that such an assessment is completed they notify other Consultative Parties;

3.      through their National Committees, they invite the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to offer:

      (i)     scientific advice regarding the definition of categories of research and logistic activity in Antarctica which might reasonably be expected to have a significant impact on the environment;
36.

(ii)    bearing in mind, inter alia, the discussion at 
this Meeting as reflected in paragraphs 17 to 19 
of its Report, such advice as seems to SCAR to be 
relevant to the elaboration of assessment 
procedures which may be applied by the relevant 
agencies of the Consultative Parties, on an 
experimental basis, with regard to research and 
logistic activity;  and

4.    the question of Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment 
should be considered further at the next Consultative 
Meeting.
37.

XII-4

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

CODE OF CONDUCT ON WASTE DISPOSAL

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VIII-11;

Noting a general increase in awareness amongst Consultative
Parties of the potential environmental impacts of the disposal
of waste in the Antarctic region;

Noting that the increasing level and degree of complexity of
Antarctic operations is likely to introduce into the Antarctic a
wider range of potentially environmentally damaging substances
than previously;

Noting that improvements in logistics and technology increase
the feasibility of on-site treatment of human and other waste,
and of the removal of solid waste, residues and noxious
substances from the Treaty area;

Recommend to their Governments that they seek the advice of
their respective Antarctic operating agencies as to:

(i)     any problems which have been experienced in implementing
        the Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and Station
        Activities contained in the Annex to Recommendation
        VIII-11; and
38.

(ii) the desirability and feasibility of revising the Code of 
Conduct in the light of the points noted above,
particularly the increased potential for on-site 
treatment and removal of waste from the Treaty area.
39.

XII-5

SITES_OF_SPECIAL_SCIENTIFIC_INTEREST

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4 and X-6;

Noting that, pursuant to Recommendation X-6, the designation as 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest of the Sites numbered 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5 and 6 will expire on 30 June 1985, and the designation 
of Site No. 8 will expire on 31 March 1985, before the probable 
date of the Thirteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 
and that the designation of Site No. 7 expired on 30 June 1983;

Desirous that the designation of these sites as Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest not be allowed to expire before the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has reviewed 
the Sites and presented the results of its review to the 
Consultative Parties;

Noting the intention of SCAR to review all Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest at the Eighteenth Meeting of SCAR in 1984 
and to present the results of its comprehensive review to the 
Consultative Parties for consideration at the Thirteenth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in 1985;
40.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.      the date of expiry of the following sites should be extended from 30 June 1985 to 31 December 1985:

        Site No. 1 : Cape Royds, Ross Island,
        Site No. 2 : Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island,

        Site No. 3 : Barwick Valley, Victoria Land,
        Site No. 4 : Cape Crozier, Ross Island,
        Site No. 5 : Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands,

        Site No. 6 : Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands;

2.      the date of expiry of Site No. 7 : Haswell Island, should be extended from 30 June 1983 to 31 December 1985.

3.      the date of expiry of Site No. 8: Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, should be extended from 31 March 1985 to 31 December 1985;  and

4.      they use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VIII-3, that the management plans of these sites are observed.
41.

XII-6

OPERATION_OF_THE_ANTARCTIC_TREATY_SYSTEM

The Representatives,

Noting that the Antarctic Treaty, based on principles of the
United Nations Charter, in the interest of all mankind,
establishes Antarctica as an area dedicated exclusively to
peaceful purposes, to international harmony and to international
scientific cooperation;

Noting further that the Antarctic Treaty, the numerous measures
adopted in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the
Treaty and other instruments and acts associated with it
constitute a far-sighted and effective system of international
co-operation, which promotes international peace and security,
increase in scientific knowledge and understanding, and
effective environmental protection;

Desiring to involve the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty which are not Consultative Parties more closely with the
Antarctic Treaty System;

Conscious of the value of increasing public knowledge of the
achievements and operation of the Antarctic Treaty System;

Recalling Article III, paragraph 2 of the Antarctic Treaty which
encourages co-operative working relations with those Specialised
Agencies of the United Nations and international organisations
having a scientific and technical interest in Antarctica;
42.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.  in addition to sending Consultative Parties certified 
copies of the Report as well as documents of Consultative 
Meetings as called for in Recommendation I-XIV, paragraph 
1, the Government of the host country of each 
Consultative Meeting shall also send certified copies of 
the Report as well as documents of that meeting to all 
other Contracting Parties which were invited to that 
Meeting;

2.  in furtherance of Article III, paragraph 2, of the 
Treaty, the Government of the host country shall:

    (a)  on behalf of the Consultative Parties send a 
certified copy of the Final Report and 
Recommendations of regular Consultative Meetings 
to the Secretary General of the United Nations, 
and

    (b)  as and when the Representatives of the 
Consultative Parties consider it appropriate, 
draw the attention of any Specialised Agency of 
the United Nations or other international 
organisation having a scientific or technical 
interest in Antarctica to any part of the Report 
of the Consultative Meeting, or any information 
document submitted to the Meeting and made 
available to the public, relevant to the 
scientific or technical interest which that 
agency or organisation has in Antarctica;

3.  the "Handbook of Measures in Furtherance of the 
Principles and Objectives of the Antarctic Treaty" be 
renamed the "Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty" and:
43.

(a) be brought up to date by the host government as 
soon as possible after each Consultative Meeting,

(b) contain an introduction outlining the background 
and history of the Antarctic Treaty as well as a 
preface to each section as appropriate giving a 
brief background to the measures set out in that 
section. The host government of the Twelfth 
Consultative Meeting will undertake the necessary 
consultations with a view to the early 
preparation of such introduction and prefaces,
and

(c) contain the Final Report (excluding attachments 
and annexes) from each Consultative Meeting;

4. (a) starting with the Thirteenth regular Consultative 
Meeting, Delegations should indicate, when 
submitting an Information Document, if they 
intend that document to be publicly available;

(b) after the closure of the Meeting and provided no 
Consultative Party has objected, any Consultative 
Party or non-Consultative Party which has been 
invited to that Meeting may make such document 
publicly available on such terms as it may 
prescribe;

(c) as regards Conference Documents or Information 
Documents of the First to the Twelfth 
Consultative Meeting, and Conference Documents of 
the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting, and 
subsequent Meetings, as well as Information 
Documents that have not been identified in 
accordance with paragraph (a) above as intended 
to be publicly available, Consultative Parties 
will consider in what
44.

circumstances such Documents may be made publicly 
available, with a view to discussing the matter 
further at the Thirteenth Consultative Meeting;

5.    invite the depository Government to examine the question 
      of information about the Antarctic Treaty System, 
      including publicly available documents arising from 
      Consultative Meetings, with a view to identifying and 
      cataloguing publicly available information about the 
      System and identifying the sources from which such 
      information can be obtained;  and

6.    "The Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System" be 
      included on the Agenda of the Thirteenth Consultative 
      Meeting.
45.
XII-7

HISTORIC_SITES_AND_MONUMENTS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14 and VII-9

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic 
monument be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified 
and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" 
annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter it be 
accorded the respect and protection required by the 
Recommendations recalled above:

    44.  Plaque erected at the temporary Indian station 
"Dakshin Gangotri", Princess Astrid Kyst, Dronning Maud 
Land, Listing the names of the members of the First 
Indian Antarctic Expedition which landed nearby on 9 
January 1982.  (Lat. 70045'S., Long.  11038'E.)
46.

Plaque installed at Dakshin Gangotri in the rock.

Automatic weather recording station at Dakshin Gangotri set up by the
Indian Team on the foothills of the Antarctic mountain ranges.
47.

XII-8

SCAR_ASSISIANCE_TO_CONSULTATIVE_PARTIES

The Representatives,

Recognising that the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
(SCAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions 
comprises a unique assemblage of knowledge and expertise in 
Antarctic scientific fields;

Noting_with_appreciation the advice provided to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties by SCAR in response to various 
requests;

Being_aware that under its Constitution SCAR is charged with 
"furthering the co-ordination of scientific activity in 
Antarctica, with a view to framing a scientific program of 
circumpolar scope and significance";

Being_aware_also that the assistance requested of SCAR by the 
Consultative Parties imposes additional demands on scarce 
resources;

Recommend to their Governments:

    That they consider in the light of its expertise and past 
assistance any requests that may be made by their national 
committees for additional funding to meet costs to SCAR of 
responding to requests for advice by the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties.

Printed by C. J. THOMPSON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra
TWELFTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

13 TO 27 APRIL 1983

CANBERRA

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

DOC NO                                  TITLE                                           COUNTRY

ANT/XII/1           Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment - Draft      United Kingdom
                    Recommendation

ANT/XII/REV.1      Agreed Measures for the Protection of the              Australia
                    Antarctic Environment: Interim Guidelines - Draft 
                    Recommendation

ANT/XII/2           Twelfth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
                    Agenda

ANT/XII/3           Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica        United Kingdom
                    and Distribution of Meteorological Data - 
                    Explanatory Note and Draft Recommendation

ANT/XII/4           Non-Governmental Expeditions (NGE's) -                  United Kingdom
                    Explanatory Memorandum

ANT/XII/4/REV.1     Non-Governmental Expeditions (NGE's) - Revised          United Kingdom
                    Draft Recommendation

ANT/XII/5           Telecommunications and Meteorology - Draft             Australia
                    Recommendation

ANT/XII/6           Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment              Australia

ANT/XII/6/CORR.1    Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment              Australia
                    (Replacement page 5 for document ANT/XII/6)

ANT/XII/7           Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment - Draft      Australia
                    Recommendation

ANT/XII/8           Operation of the Antarctic Treaty                       Chile

ANT/XII/9           Impact of Man on the Antarctic Environment             Chile, Argentina

ANT/XII/10          Public Availability of the Documents of the            United Kingdom
                    Consultative Meetings - Explanatory Note and 
                    Draft Recommendation

ANT/XII/11          Matters Relating to the Appointment of Observers        United Kingdom
                    at Consultative Meetings - Discussion Paper

ANT/XII/12          Exchanges of Information under Articles III and         United Kingdom
                    VII of the Antarctic Treaty

ANT/XII/13          Exchanges of Information under the Antarctic            United Kingdom
                    Treaty - Explanatory Note and Draft 
                    Recommendation
DOC NO                  TITLE                                      COUNTRY         PAGE

ANT/XII/14             Sites of Special Scientific Interest - Draft   Chile, United
                       Recommendation                              Kingdom, Argentina

ANT/XII/14/REV.1      Sites of Special Scientific Interest - Revised Chile, United
                       Recommendation and draft paragraphs for    Kingdom, Argentina
                       inclusion in the Final Report

ANT/XII/15             Improvement of Telecommunications in       Argentina, Brazil,
                       Antarctica and Distribution of Meteorological Chile
                       Data : Telecommunications Group

ANT/XII/16             Any Other Business : Historic Sites and     India
                       Monuments - Draft Recommendation

ANT/XII/16/REV.1       Any Other Business : Historic Sites and     India
                       Monuments - Draft Recommendation

ANT/XII/17             Extension of the Expiration Date of the    United States
                       Designation of Sites 1-7 as Sites of Special
                       Scientific Interest - Draft Recommendation and
                       Paragraphs for the Final Report

ANT/XII/17/REV.1       Extension of the Expiration Date of the    United States
                       Designation of Sites 1-8 as Sites of Special
                       Scientific Interest - Draft Recommendation and
                       Paragraphs for the Final Report

ANT/XII/18             Draft Recommendations on Man's Impact on the
                       Antarctic Environment

ANT/XII/19             Item Relating to the Strengthening of Ties  Argentina
                       between SCAR and the National Committees of
                       Contracting Parties which are not Consultative
                       parties to the Antarctic Treaty

ANT/XII/20             Item Relating to a Greater Participation in Argentina
                       SCAR by the Non-Consultative Contracting
                       Parties of the Antarctic Treaty

ANT/XII/21             Matters Relating to the Appointment of     United Kingdom
                       at Consultative Meetings - Draft
                       Recommendation

ANT/XII/22             Draft Recommendation on the Collection and
                       Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data

ANT/XII/23             Draft Recommendation on Antarctic
                       Telecommunications

ANT/XII/24             Final Report of the XII Antarctic Treaty
                       Consultative Meeting

ANT/XII/24/ADD.1       Final Report of the XII Antarctic Treaty
                       Consultative Meeting

ANT/XII/24/ADD.2       Final Report of the XII Antarctic Treaty
                       Consultative Meeting
DOC NO                  TITLE                                      COUNTRY    PAGE

ANT/XII/24/ADD.3       Final Report of the XII Antarctic Treaty 
                       Consultative Meeting

ANT/XII/24/REV.1      Final Report of the Twelfth Antarctic Treaty 
                       Consultative Meeting

ANT/XII/24/REV.2      Final Report of the XII Antarctic Treaty 
                       Consultative Meeting

ANT/XII/25            Draft Recommendation on the Antarctic 
                       Environment (Code of Conduct)

ANT/XII/26            Draft Recommendation on Operation of the 
                       Antarctic Treaty System

ANT/XII/26/REV.1      Draft Recommendation on Operation of the 
                       Antarctic Treaty System

ANT/XII/27            Message from the Twelfth Consultative Meeting 
                       to Stations in Antarctica

ANT/XII/27/REV.1      Message from the Twelfth Consultative Meeting 
                       to Stations in Antarctica

ANT/XII/28            Draft Recommendation : SCAR Assistance to 
                       Consultative Parties                      Australia

ANT/XII/28/REV.1      Draft Recommendation : SCAR Assistance to 
                       Consultative Parties                      Australia

ANT/XII/INF.1        Information for Delegates

ANT/XII/INF.2        Information for Delegates : Weekend Activities

ANT/XII/INF.3        Meeting on Antarctic Data Telecommunication 
                       Arrangements, Geneva - Final Report

ANT/XII/INF.3/       Meeting on Antarctic Data Telecommunication 
CORR.1                Arrangements, Geneva - Final Report

ANT/XII/INF.4        List of Delegates

ANT/XII/INF.4/       List of Delegates - Consultative Parties
REV.1

ANT/XII/INF.4/       List of Delegates
REV.2

ANT/XII/INF.5        The Utilisation of Antarctic Ice (a technical 
                       information paper)                        Australia

ANT/XII/INF.6        Recommendations for Standards to be Met by 
                       Cruise Operators in the Antarctic         Australia
DOC NO                  TITLE                                           COUNTRY       PAGE

ANT/XII/INF.7          Scientific Research and Cooperation in         Norway        
                       Antarctica (Paper given by Mr Tore Gjelsvik of 
                       Norway at the Antarctic Symposium organised 
                       by University of Kiel, 22-24 June 1983       

ANT/XII/INF.8          Requirements for Raw and Processed Antarctic   Australia      
                       Meteorological Data                          

ANT/XII/INF.9          Facilitation of Scientific Research : Sites of  United Kingdom  
                       Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) : Management 
                       Plan referred to in the discussion of this agenda 
                       item and approved by SCAR                   

ANT/XII/INF.10         Antarctic Meteorology : Resolutions 4, 5, 6, 7 and Australia      
                       8 of the Thirty-Fourth Session of the WMO      
                       Executive Committee, Geneva 7-24 June 1982    

ANT/XII/INF.11         Sites of Special Interest : Telegram from the             
                       President of SCAR to Mr R Tucker Scully (Chief 
                       US Delegate, 12th Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
                       Meeting, Canberra 112-27 September 1983      

ANT/XII/INF.12         Exchanges of Information under the Antarctic    United States   
                       Treaty                                      

ANT/XII/INF.13         Satellite Telecommunications at the Antarctic   Argentina      
                       Meteorological Centre, “Vicecomodoro          
                       Marambio”                                    

ANT/XII/INF.14         Rules of Procedure (Draft paragraphs for                    
                       inclusion in the Final Report)               
