ANT/INF. 5
19 October 1970

Speech by H. E. Mr. Michita Sakata,
Japanese Minister of Education, at the
Opening of the Sixth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting on 19 October 1970
Your Excellencies, Distinguished guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen;

It gives me a great pleasure and honour to address
to you today on this occasion of the opening of the
Sixth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

I should like, first of all, to extend, on behalf
of the Japanese Government and people as the host
country, the heartiest welcome to you all.

As you recall, the Antarctic Treaty was signed
almost eleven years ago in December 1959 by the
representatives of the twelve countries which are
represented here today; the Treaty became effective
in June 1961. This Treaty was conceived in the
firm belief, as I quote from the Preamble, that
"it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica
shall continue forever to be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or
object of international discord."

Needless to say, today Antarctica is still an
unknown world to most of us in many respects. Still
greater scientific efforts are needed to unveil the mistery
of
- 2 -

of Antarctica. And I believe that further study and research on Antarctica will be an important key to the better understanding of the earth itself on which we all live.

    It is from this point of view that, since the International Geophysical Year in 1957-58, scientific research activities in Antarctica have been carried out in world-wide cooperation and have accomplished many outstanding results. It was on the basis of these fruitful results of international cooperation that the Antarctic Treaty was concluded, in the hope that we would continue and develop more than ever international cooperation in Antarctica, and thereby reserve Antarctica exclusively to the use for peaceful purposes.

    Nowadays, science and technology are making spectacular progress day by day. However, on the other hand, science and technology, if they are abused, can bring us mankind immeasurable unhappiness and disaster. Therefore, in the field of science and technology, it will become even more urgent and indispensable in the future to continue and enlarge international

cooperation
- 3 -

cooperation and goodwill among nations.

        In this sense, I find it most significant that
the spirit underlying the Antarctic Treaty was
succeeded into another important treaty which was
concluded subsequently, namely, "the Treaty on
Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies".

        Personally, as the Chairman of the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition Headquarters, and also
as Japanese Minister of Education who is in charge of
science and education of this country, I hope and
pray earnestly that nations throughout the world will
continue to cooperate one another in scientific research
in Antarctica, with the great cause in mind that
there should be no boundary in the world of learning.

        We, Japanese people, have been participating,
for our part, in scientific research activities
in Antarctica since the International Geophysical
Year, and recently we have succeeded in a round-trip
research expedition between our Syowa Station and

        the
the South-pole and also in the test-launching of 
scientific research rockets.

More recently, we have taken one more important 
step to consolidate our organization for Antarctic 
research activities by establishing a Polar Research 
Center within the National Science Museum.

In view of these recent developments, I find it 
particularly fitting and proper that the Sixth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is now being 
called to order here in Japan.

Before concluding, I wish to express my sincere 
hope that all of you here assembled will participate 
in active discussions on various problems which face 
us in the field of Antarctic research and, by so 
doing, will successfully make valuable contribution to 
the benefit of all mankind of this and next generation.

I now solemnly declare the Sixth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting to be open.
