Item 12

AHT/IHF.11
23 October 1970
Original : English

DATE OF SCAR MEETINGS AND CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS

Note: The following is the excerpt from the Report of Meeting of
Group of Delegates held in Oslo on 17 and 18 August 1970.

The delegates welcomed the liaison which was developing with
the Antarctic Treaty Governments and confirmed that SCAR was anxious
that it continues to give effective scientific advice to them.

It was agreed that SCAR meetings should continue to be held at
two yearly intervals. Their timing must take account of the availab-
ility of members of SCAR and its working groups, and of scientists
attending associated symposia which are affected by the Antarctic
operating season and by academic and other timetables. It was also
desired to phase meetings in order to provide as rapid advice as
practicable to the Antarctic Treaty Governments on scientific problems.
On the last point it was suggested.

(1) That the Antarctic Treaty Governments might welcome
advice some six months in advance of their Consultative meetings.

(2) That it was likely to take twelve months for SCAR, its
specialist groups, working groups, national committees and
Executive Committee to give full consideration to any scientific
problem of major importance.
- 2 -

(5) That on receipt of a request for advice from Treaty Governments, it may take several months to set up and arrange a meeting of the appropriate specialists.

No one solution to the problem appeared ideal, but SCAR, being anxious that its advice be both effective and rendered in good time, had established a mechanism whereby the SCAR Executive could form groups of specialists to give preliminary consideration to such requests regardless of the timing of SCAR and Treaty meetings, and it was agreed:

Recommendation XI-Gen. 4:

"That each National Committee suggests to its government that SCAR consideration of requests for advice arising from Treaty Consultative meetings might best be implemented it Treaty meetings were to be held in the austral autumn and SCAR meetings in the austral spring of the same year."

It was further proposed to recommend:

Recommendation XI-Gen. 5:

"That SCAR requests its National Committees to propose to their governments that the annual reports to SCAR might, with benefit, be considered part of the material to be exchanged under the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Consultative Meetings,"
