TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              TRATADO ANTARTICO
SIXIÈME  RÉUNION  CONSULTATIVE      SEXTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                    
SIXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING          
                                    ШЕСТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

TOKYO

THE SIXTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING
OCTOBER 1970, TOKYO

2 July 1970

Informal Summary Record
of the 5th Preparatory Meeting
for the 6th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Scientific Affairs Division
U.N. Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo

The following is an informal summary record of the
discussion at the Fifth Preparatory Meeting held at the
Keidanren-Kaikan, Tokyo, on 24 and 25 June 1970.

The list of participants and other documents which
were distributed by the Secretariat at the Meeting are
attached hereto.

I
- 2 -

I    Morning Session on 24 June 1970, at 10.30 a.m.

Opening of the Session

1.    Mr. Yatabe (Japan) introduced Mr. Hiroshi Yokota,
      Ambassador, United Nations Bureau, Japanese Ministry of
      Foreign Affairs, as Chairman of the 5th Preparatory
      Meeting.

2.    The Chairman welcomed all participants, especially,
      Mr. Lawrence (Australia), Cpt. Jullian (Chile),
      Dr. Roberts (U.K.) and Dr. Francis (U.S.A.), who had
      come to Tokyo from their home countries for the present
      meeting.
- 3 -

3. The Chairman introduced the Work Programme and 
invited comments thereon.  No objection having been 
raised, it was adopted.  Then the items proposed and yet 
to be adopted (Annex II B.) were taken up one by one.

Antarctic Tourism

4.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) introduced and explained the 
British Paper (PM/1/No.21).  He said that although 
tourists visits were at present limited to McMurdo and 
Antarctic Peninsula area, what U.K. thought, with some 
visional ideas, should be done about tourism was mentioned 
as six points listed in paragraph 8 of the British Paper.

The British intention was not to stop the growth of 
a legitimate industry.  What they wanted was a code 
with general instructions to be followed by all tourists. 
This could not of course be binding on governments, but 
would be a firm recommendation.
- 4 -

5.    Mr. Lawrence (Australia) drew the attention of the
      Meeting to the Australian Note (PM/1/Nc. 23) which
      contained a draft set of conditions for visiting
      Macquarie Island. These conditions were not directly
      applicable to tourists going to the Antarctic area, but
      nevertheless, there were common elements, e.g. the
      isolation of the island and the non-availability of
      commercial services. Mr. Lawrence pointed out that the
      meeting was not concerned with tourism as such, but the
      effect upon the scientific activities and upon the
      established environment. Tourists had to realize that
      member governments were there for scientific purposes.
      He could see advantage, however, in leaving the exact
      description of the item of tourism until later.

      6.
- 5 -

6. Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) welcomed both the British 
Paper and the Australian Note as very constructive.  He 
thought the aim was to contribute not only to the safety 
of tourists, but to enhance the pleasure of their visits. 
However, he thought the title of the agenda item should 
be re-phrased to read "Effects of Antarctic Tourism".

7. Mr. Rinaldini (Argentina), on the other hand, 
wondered whether we could be more specific by calling 
the item "Effects of Tourism on Activities Contemplated 
in the Antarctic Treaty".

8. "Antarctic Tourism" was adopted as an agenda item, 
but the exact wording was to be decided afterwards.

Exchange
- 6 -

Exchange of Information:  Experiments Using Radio Isotopes

9.    Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) said that the United States had 
originally thought this item could be combined with a 
discussion on Environmental Quality Control, but he now 
thought that it could be usefully discussed as a separate 
item.

10.   Mr. Ryan (New Zealand) welcomed Dr. Francis' view, 
although he recalled the opinion of the 3rd Preparatory 
Meeting that these two items could be combined and 
amalgamated.

11.   It was decided that these two items - Experiments 
Using Radio-Isotope and Environmental Pollution - were 
to be dealt with as separate items.

Antarctic
- 7 -

Antarctic Meteorology

12. Regarding "Antarctic Meteorology", Mr. Kourov
(U.S.S.R.) favors this broader expression of agenda item.
But there followed some discussion as to whether the two
sub-items were necessary.

13. Mr. Lawrence (Australia) referred to the relationship
between the final report the U.S.S.R. proposed to be
discussed as agenda item and WMO document No. 17.823
which the Secretary General of WMO addressed to Ministers
of Foreign Affairs of WMO Members Signatory to the
Antarctic Treaty, and pointed out that these two were
actually the same thing and that what twelve members
should decide collectively was contained in the attachment
of WMO Secretary General's letter.

Mr. Lawrence further pointed out that the attachment
to the WMO document No. 17.823/T/AA/TP consisted of a
summary by the secretariat which had been referred to
individual member governments by the Secretary General.
It was up to Antarctic Treaty partners whether they
wished to discuss this collectively.
- 8 -

14. It was therefore agreed for the time being that the 
agenda should read "Antarctic Meteorology" with sub-item 
I deleted, but sub-item II retained.  Mr. Kourov (U.S.S.R.) 
had no objection to this decision.

Environmental Pollution

15. Regarding "Environmental Pollution", Dr. Francis 
(U.S.A.) said he still preferred the heading "Environmental 
Quality Control".  His aim was to start a discussion which 
would identify matters of greatest common concern and then 
draw the attention of SCAR and other bodies to it.  
Mr. Lawrence (Australia) preferred "Protection" to 
"Control".  He wondered therefore whether it should be 
called "Environmental Quality Protection".  Dr. Francis 
said
- 9 -

said he had no objection.  The Chairman therefore adopted 
the item on the understanding that the exact phraseology 
would be discussed later.

Specially Protected Areas proposed by Chile

16.  Regarding "Specially Protected Areas", Cpt. Jullian 
(Chile) referred to the Chilean Paper (PM/1/No.12), and 
said that his Government had prepared a reply to the 
British memorandum of 15 May.  Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) 
suggested the discussion under a general heading and 
said that his Government had been considering designating 
two special areas, but in view of the British comments, 
they were now thinking about the idea again.  He wondered 
whether it would be possible to combine items 5 and 6 of 
the Agenda, but keeping the three sub-headings of item 
6 intact.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) supported Dr. Francis' view, 
subject to the views of the Chilean delegation.  He 
emphasised the British concern was to have a discussion 
of
- 10 -

of the basic principles underlying Specially Protected
Areas before moving on to the Chilean proposals.  He
thought that perhaps the British might have to introduce
the concept of two areas - the first where there would
be rigorous restrictions and the second which would be
special study areas, but where people would be allowed
in.  He therefore proposed the deletion of item 5 and
the use of sub-item III of item 6 to discuss the Chilean
proposal.  Mr. Gaarder (Norway) supported this.

17.  Mr. Kourov (U.S.S.R.) then expressed the view that
a separate item on Conservation would overlap with
consideration about the Environmental Pollution.  He was
in the end convinced to the contrary. Mr. Rinaldini
(Argentina) referred to the British Memorandum and said
that the area covered by the Chilean proposal was large.
In it were located Argentinian and British stations and
pollution had already taken place as a result.
- 11 -

18. Finally, it was agreed that these individual items 
should be discussed separately under the Agenda item 
suggested by U.K.

19. The Chairman referred to the fact that the British 
delegation had drawn his attention to a procedural 
question under the Recommendation I-16.  He reminded 
the decisions reached of the provisional agenda item at 
this Meeting should be subject to further discussion and 
change.

20.
- 12 -

Mineral Prospecting in Antarctica

20.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) spoke on the Antarctic subject on minerals, referring to the British Paper (PM/1/No.26), 
and hoped that we would start the discussion on this, 
although within the Treaty machinery it might take six 
years to reach the conclusion.  Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) gave 
his support and thought it would be useful for some time 
to be spent in discussing the problem. Mr. Rinaldini 
(Argentina) asked whether it was proposed to table this 
as a formal agenda item. Cpt. Jullian (Chile) supported 
inscription.  Dr. Nagata (Japan) supported Dr. Robers' 
view and said that even if it might take 2-3 years, it 
was worth starting.

21. Mr. Ryan (N.Z.) pointed out that he had never made 
a formal proposition about mineral prospecting and he 
would be happy if the British Government would now do so. 
Dr. Roberts then, on behalf of U.K., wished to propose 
this item.
- 13 -

22. Mr. Lawrence (Australia), referring to the exchange 
of information on this subject, mentioned the procedural 
difficulties which might arise and the need of 
multilateral action.  He said that while he could agree 
with the U.K.'s intentions, the problem of mineral 
prospecting was not yet immediate or pressing. 
Nevertheless, the sooner we started talking about it, 
the more likely a solution would be found.  But he 
foresaw procedural difficulties if there was to be an 
informal discussion.  If the item was tabled as a formal 
point on the Agenda, all twelve members would have to be 
present.  If it was not, then it could not constitute an 
item under the consultative meeting.  Professor Nagata 
supported the British proposal.

23.
- 14 -

23. Mr. Gaarder (Norway) stated Norwegian Government 
did not propose this subject as an item of the Agenda.
He then suggested the matter could be discussed informally
under Any Other Business. Mr. Gaerdes (S.A.) reminded
the meeting that the subject had been held to be too
delicate and sensitive for informal discussion.
Mr. Rinaldini (Argentina) agreed to a discussion on the
subject, but he preferred informality. Mineral explora-
tion would inevitably be done by commercial firms and
not by Governments and there was no legal way of stopping
their activities.

24. Mr. Kourov (U.S.S.R.) suggested that since this
subject was rather delicate and complicated and no
consensus was reached, it should be discussed as one of
the specific subjects under the general item of Any
Other Business. Mr. de la Fortelle (France) agreed to
Mr. Kourov's view, and stated that the French Government
preferred the discussion on this subject not as a specific
item,
- 15 -

item, but as a general item.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said 
it was obviously not possible to take a decision on the 
matter that morning, but he was glad it had stimulated 
the interest of representatives to consult their Govern-
ments.  Mr. Lawrence (Australia) then said that if mineral 
prospecting was proposed as a formal item, his Government 
would object.  He would however be happy with a compromise 
whereby everybody understood that the matter would be 
discussed under Any Other Business but not identified.

25. The Chairman, summing up, said that all delegates 
had agreed to a discussion of some kind on mineral 
prospecting but that the modality of this would have to 
await further discussion.  It was agreed that this subject 
should be discussed under the agenda item "Any Other 
Business" with the understanding that although it was 
not specifically mentioned, it would definitely be 
discussed.
- 16 -

26. The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
- 17 --

II Afternoon Session on 24 June 1970, at 2.30 p.m.

A discussion took place upon specific items on the
Agenda.

Pelagic Sealing

27. Mr. Champenois (Belgium), referring to the Bout de
Papier (PM/1No.22), wished to have the discussion started
with respect to how the Sealing Convention could be
negotiated, signed and brought into effect, apart from
the substance of the Convention i.e., whether or not
the Convention should be within the framework of the
Antarctic Treaty or outside of it.

28. Dr. Roberts (U.K.) emphasized the importance of
enabling other states not parties to the Treaty to accede
to the Convention. He throught it right that the club of
twelve should initiate matters connected with the
Southern Ocean and this could form a desirable precedent
for other subjects. Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) agreed to the
principle
- 18 -

principle of accession by other states to a Convention.

Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said he understood the difficulties

facing the Japanese Government in agreeing to signature

taking place in Tokyo. He therefore suggested that it

should be freely negotiated in Tokyo and later signed

at a meeting of Ambassadors which could take place in

London.  This would ensure that the depository Govern-

ment would not be Japan.  He proposed that during the

course of the October Consultative Meeting, several

afternoons would be devoted to handling the Convention

and the Government of Canada should be invited.

Mr. Lawrence (Australia) wanted to know why we were

sure that Canada was the only nation who would wish to

participate. He was convinced that it would be worth

the extra effort of trying to associate other countries

with the Convention.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said a Con-

vention of this kind could either be initiated through

the U.N. or arranged by countries primarily interested

and then thrown open to others.  Uruguay and Peru had

small sealing industries and hence might be interested

in the Convention.  Finland, Sweden, Denmark and Poland

had local sealing interests in the Baltic.  Canada was

the only country who was likely to switch her attention

from
   from
- 19 -

from Arctic sealing to Antarctic Sealing.  Mr. Yatabe 
(Japan) stated Japan had an open mind on the members 
participating at negotiations for the Convention.

But Japan was reluctant to chair the meeting or to 
issue invitations in the name of the Japanese Govern-
ment.  It was agreed that discussion would take place 
in October in conjunction with the Treaty meeting, but 
that the Convention would be signed elsewhere.

    Finally, with regard to the rule of unanimity,
there was consensus that the Convention should not be 
subject to this rule, but that the parties should agree 
on a number of signatures and when this was achieved,
the Convention would come into force.
- 20 -

Telecommunications
------------------------------------------------

29.    Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) introduced this item and 
emphasised the importance of an exchange of information 
about telecommunications procedures being adopted under 
Article IX of the Treaty.  The U.S. draft recommendation 
was more or less identical to proposals 6 and 7 of the 
report of the second Antarctic Treaty meeting on tele-
communications held at Buenos Aires in September 1969. 
Mr. Lawrence (Australia) referred to the Recommendation 
V-2, and sought clarification on the status of the 
report of the Buenos Aires Experts Meeting 1969 and the 
U.S. draft recommendation (PM/1/No. 13), then asked 
whether in view of recommendation V-2 this should not 
be reported to the Consultative Meeting, for instance 
by the representative of Argentina or formally tabled 
by the host government.  It was agreed that Argentina 
would propose the report of the experts' meeting and 
that the U.S. draft recommendation would provide the 
basis of discussion in October.  Before the discussion 
of this item closed, Mr. Lawrense (Australia) explained 
his Government's support for the U.S. draft, but 
reminded the meeting that the two proposals produced in

Buenos
- 21 -

Buenos Aires had been dliberately separated to avoid
procedural objections to the establishment of an office
for correspondence. The object of this was to avoid
institutionalising Antarctic matters. Mr. Lawrence
compared the exchange of information on telecommunica-
tions with that of ships and aircraft.

Historic Monuments

30. Dr. Nagata (Japan) asked for clarifisation of the
definition of Historic Monuments as the Soviet and
British views appeared to diverge. Mr. Lawrence
(Australia) introducting a list of monuments (PM/1/No.24)
prepared by his Government, said that the principal
problem was to avoid wanton destruction of the monuments,
assert the responsibility of individual nations for
preservation of monuments, and invoking the co-operative
help of all Treaty parties in their protection. He
listed
- 22 -

listed three types:

(i)     graves and similar monuments whether they 
        contained human remains or not;

(ii)    man-made utilitarian structures, e.g. huts;

(iii)   non-utilitarian structures, e.g. commemorative 
        cairns.

31.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) tabled the British Paper 
(PM/1/No.25), recommending the formulation of an amalga-
mated list of monuments.  It was agreed to examine the 
U.K. draft and to aim at an amalgamated list of monuments.
And then the Secretariat was asked to produce and 
circulate such a list.
- 23 -

Advance Norification on Research Rockets

32.  Professor Nagata referring to the point made by
the French delegate at the previous preparatory meeting,
about the difficulty of giving exact advance notification
of giving firings, promised that a draft recommendation
by the Japanese Government would be tabled at the next
Preparatory Meeting.  He said that the main items on w
which advance notification would be required would
consist of:

    (i) the place of launching,

   (ii) the time and date of launing or, alternatively,
the approximate period of time during which it
is planned to carry out the launchings,

  (iii) the direction of flight,

   (iv) the maximum anticipated altitude,

    (v) the anticipated impact area,

   (vi) the type and other specifications of the
rockets to be launched.

After discussion, Professor Nagate agreed that firings of
small meteorological rockets which, although routine,
could also cause problems, should be included in advance
notification along with the firing of upper atmosphere
research
- 24 -

research rockets. He stated that the Japanese delegation 
would take account of this point in writing a draft re-
commendation.

Exchange of Information on Ocean Research Vessels

33. Dr. Francis (U.S.A.), referring to U.S. Embassy's 
Note Verbale (PM/1/No.13) and recommendation 1-6, intro-
duced the item "Exchange of Information on Ocean Research 
Vessels".  He promised that a draft recommendation would 
be tabled at the next preparatory meeting designed to 
request information about the activities of ships 
devoting a large part of their time solely to ocean-
ographic programmes of Antarctic research.
- 25 -

Antarctic Tourism

34. Dr. Roberts (U.K.) reminded the meeting that govern-
ments would need time to consider the British paper.
Mr. Lawrence (Australia) asked whether our aim was for a 
uniform set of rules which would be applicable to every 
Antarctic station, or whether we aimed at a statement 
of principles which could be embodied in rules drawn up 
by individual governments for their respective stations.
Dr. Roberts thought we should first look at the 
regulations of each nation regarding tourism and their 
stations, and then distill the common factors.  He 
would expect regulations to vary somewhat from station 
to station but they would contain a common item such as 
a need for obeying the orders of the station leader or 
officer in charge.  As for matters relating to the Treaty, 
such as conservation of flora and fauna and pollution, he 
thought that our long-term aim should be to subject every 
visitor to the Antarctic to the Antarctic Treaty's re-
commendations and regulations.  It had been agreed in 
Paris informally that one sanction by Treaty powers was 
to exclude tourist companies from all stations in the 
Antarctic if they would not abide by our regulations.

We
- 26 -

We could discuss infringements of the Treaty amongst
ourselves and by denying permission for visiting stations,
we had a real deterrent. There then followed a discussion
about the responsibility for notifying the arrival of
tourist groups, e.g. whether it should be the responsi-
bility of the Government whose nationals were organizing
the tour, or whether the country with the last port of
call should notify. Dr. Roberts (U.K.) pointed out that
recommendation I-VI was applicable to all tourist expe-
ditions and should be reconsidered to make sure who was
responsible for reporting. In his view, I-VI applied to
tourists as well as other visitors. He also referred to
Article VII sub-paragraph 5(a) of the Treaty where the
words "proceeding from" were intended to mean "passing
through". Professor Nagata, on behalf of the Japanese
Government, gave his support for the establishment of
rules and principles for tourism.

Finally, the re-formulation of the Agenda heading
was agreed as follows:

"Effects of Antarctic Tourism on Scientific
Programmes and on the Environment of the Antarctic
Treaty Area

(i)    Exchange of Information                                  (ii)
- 27 -

(ii)    Effects on the activities of the Contracting
        Parties

(iii)   Effects on the Antarctic Environment"

35.     The Meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.
- 28 -

III  Morning Session on 25 June 1970, at 10.30 a.m.

Exchange of Information: Experiments Using Radio Osotopes

This item was left until consideration of Environ-
mental Pollution.

Antarctic Meteorology

36.  Regarding "Antarctic Meteorology", Mr. Depuis
(France) stated that the Resolution 23 of the 21st session
of the Executive Committee of the WMO should be discussed.
Mr. Lawrence (Australia) pointed out that Resolution 23
was included in Appendix B of WMO document No. 17.823.
But Mr. Depuis referred to WMO document No. 10020 of 6
April 1970, wishing specifically to consider Resolution
23.  Then Mr. Kurov (U.S.S.R.) expressed the opinion
again, the the final report of the 2nd Meeting of WMO
Antarctic Working Group should be discussed, along
with these WMO documents.  Following the statements by
Dr. Roberts (U.K.) and Mr. Lawrence (Australia) suggesting
a compromise solution, Mr. Yatabe (Japan) suggested the
re-phrasing of the Agenda item, as follows and it was
accordingly agreed:

Antarctic Meteorology
- 29 -

Antarctic Meteorology

(1)    WMO documents No. 17. 823/T/AA/TP dated 23
       July 1969, including, inter alia, its
       Appendix B.

(2)    Any Other Matters



Experiments Using Radio Isotopes
and Environmental Pollution

37.    Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) in introducing the subject
       said that scientific activities in the Antarctic were
       having an impact upon other matters apart from the pure
       conservation of flora and fauna.  He suggested rephrasing
       the title to read "The Protection of the Antarctic Environ-
       ment from Harmful Interference".  It was necessary to take
       measures to protect the quality of the Antarctic, which
       made it valuable for scientific research.  Already problems
       had
- 30 -

had occurred with air and water pollution, with solid 
waste disposal and with incidental spills of material 
on the land.  He throught the New Zealand proposal was 
essentially concerned with effect of experiments with 
isotopes even under controlled conditions.  Under Article 
Vii, paragraph 5 of the Treaty, the United States had 
included a list of radioactive materials which had 
been used in its experiments.  Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) 
therefore proposed that SCAR should identify through its 
national committees the potential harmful effects upon 
the Antarctic environment of radio isotopes and consider 
measures to minimize their impact.
- 31 -

38. Mr. Ryan (N.Z.) stated that N.Z. views were originally 
to avoid a collision between Scientific programmes.  He 
agreed with Dr. Francis' proposal although he thought the 
exchange of information should be carried separately 
through diplomatic channels to avoid a collision between 
the scientific programmes.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.), referring 
to recommendation IV-18, said that where two scientific 
programmes clashed, it was best settled by bilateral 
agreement.  One feature of the New Zealand proposal, was 
that it had not distinguished between the introduction of 
new radio isotopes and the use of existing  radio isotopes 
in the Antarctic, which had resulted from nuclear explosion 
in former years.

39. Dr. Roberts (U.K.), referring to Recommendation IV-18, 
stated that such a collision should be solved bilaterally 
among the parties concerned, and suggested that SCAR should 
be invited and consideration should be given to Recommendation 
IV-18, in order to take appropriate measures.  Dr. Francis 
(U.S.A.) supported the study of a formula similar to 

Recommendation
- 32 -

Recommendation IV-18 but added that if it was intended 
to have a further exchange of information, he had a 
preference to keep it under Article VII, recommendations 
II - VI.  It was agreed to keep these items separate on 
the Agenda.

40.  A draft recommendation of N.Z. (PM/1/No. 28) was 
circulated and Mr. Ryan (N.Z.) commented thereon. 
Dr. Francis (U.S.A.) said that he intended to circulate 
a draft recommendation on the environment at the next 
Preparatory Meeting.

41.  A new title for the item of pollution was agreed to 
be "The Effects on Man and his Activities upon the 
Antarctic Environment."
- 33 -

Review of Progress in Implementing the Agreed Measures,
etc.

42.     Regarding "Review of Progress in Implementing the
Agreed Measures, etc.", Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said that he
hoped that each delegation might aim at producing a
report of the progress made by their Governments in
implementing these agreed measures to see where we
had all got to.

Review of the Purpose of Specially Protected Areas and
New Specially Protected Areas

43.     Regarding "Review of the Purpose of Specially
Protected Areas and New Specially Protected Areas", both
Dr. Roberts and Dr. Francis commented positively for the
inclusion of these items.  Dr. Roberts said he had
nothing to add to the British paper of 15 May.

Dr. Francis
- 34 -

Dr. Francis said he strongly supported the inclusion of
these items on the Agenda.  Experience of the SPAs to
date showed a wide ambiguity about the definition of them.
There was a need to protect certain areas from harmful
interference for at least a period of time to conduct
experiments.  This was a different subject to protecting
other areas of ecological value.

Captain Jullian (Chile) introduced the Chilean Paper
(PM/1/No. 27), and invited any comments thereon.  He had
nothing to add to this, but he would appreciate the views
of other Governments to be circulated by diplomatic
channels. He was not clear about the spirit of the
Antarctic Treaty in this matter.  Mr. Lawrence (Australia)
said that there was divergent views, even in Australia,
about the SPAs.  Some experts thought there should be
complete prohibition in the SPAs, others would permit
controlled access.  Dr. Roberts said he thought we were
in broad agreements with the aims expressed in the
Chilean paper.  But to accept the proposals as they
stood would, he thought, make necessary an amendment
to Article VIII of the agreed measures.  He still held
the view that two types of area were needed.  Some
nations had not yet approved  recommendation III-8 which
might lead to a discussion being blocked.
- 35 -

Any Other Business: Mineral Prospecting

44.  Regarding "Mineral Prospecting", it was agreed that 
this would be taken up under Any Other Business but 
would not constitute a sub-item.

Pelagic Sealing

45.  Regarding "Pelagic Sealing" -- the problem of other 
governments according to the Convention --, Mr. Rinaldini 
(Argentina) and Mr. Lawrence (Australia) said that they 
had to refer to their home governments as to whether other 
countries apart from Canada should be invited to the 
October meetings.  It was agreed that Japan would ask the 
eleven other Treaty partners formally whether they could 
agree to her acting on behalf of the group to invite

Canada
- 36 -

Canada (and others if necessary) to participate.

Order of the Agenda

46. This was agreed as follows:

1. Examination of a draft Convention for the
   Regulation of Antarctic Pelagic Sealing.

2. Telecommunications.

3. Antarctic Meteorology.
   (1) WMO document No. 17.823/T/AA/TP dated 23
       July 1969, including, inter alia, its
       Appendix B.
   (2) Any Other Matters.

4. Review of Progress in Implementing the Agreed
   Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
   Fauna and Flora.

5. Historic Monuments.

6. The Effects of man and his Activities upon the
   Antarctic Environment.

7. Experiments using Radio-Isotopes.

8.
- 37 -

8. The Effects of Antarctic Tourism on the
   Scientific Programmes and on the Environment
   of the Antarctic Treaty Area

   (1) Exchange of Information;
   (2) Effects on the Scientific activities of
       the Contracting Parties;
   (3) Effects on the Antarctic Environment.

9. Review of the Purposes of "Specially Protected
   Areas".

10. Proposed New "Specially Protected Areas"
    (Chilean MFA Note 468 of 20 April 1970).

11. Advance Notification of the Launching of
    Scientific Research Rockets in the Antarctic
    Treaty Area.

12. Exchange of Information on Ocean Research
    Vessels.

13. Any Other Business.

14. Next Consultative Meeting.

47.
- 38 -

47. The Chairman asked when we would meet next.
Dr. Roberts (U.K.), -- past experience any guide --, 
suggested that one meeting would be held about two months 
from the present Meeting, and one more meeting about two 
weeks before the Consultative Meeting, in order to 
alleviate the burdens of the Secretariat and so on.

It was agreed that the time and place of the next 
Preparatory Meeting would accordingly be informed, through 
the diplomatic channels.

48. Regarding the participation of observers, e.g. in 
connection with WMO, Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said he thought 
it was not necessary to invite WMO observers.

49. Reverting to the invitation of other countries in 
connection with the considerations of the Pelagic Sealing, 
Dr. Roberts (U.K.) said that Canada alone would be worth 
being
- 39 -

being invited. The Chairman stated that the consensus 
was to limit to as small as possible the number of the 
nations which should be invited to the considerations 
of the draft convention of Pelagic Sealing.

50.  Dr. Roberts (U.K.) thanked the Chairman and the 
Secretariat on behalf of all the participants in the 
present 5th Preparatory Meeting.

51.  The Meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.
