





Referencing ATCM Measures, Decisions and Resolutions








Referencing ATCM Measures, Decisions and Resolutions

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 


Summary

The United Kingdom proposes that the ATCM consider how best to link Measures, Decisions and Resolutions to the relevant paragraphs in the Final Reports of the ATCMs at which they were adopted.

Issue

    1. In proposing issues for discussion at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, it is often helpful to make reference to any previous Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions relating to similar subjects.  The ATS website provides an extremely useful search facility to locate previous instruments by subject matter.  However, if it would also be useful to note any discussion relating to the adoption of an instrument, it can be extremely time-consuming to find the relevant section of the appropriate ATCM Final Report – especially if it is not immediately obvious under which agenda item the issue was discussed.

Proposal

    2. The United Kingdom proposes that Measures, Decisions and Resolutions should be better linked to the paragraph numbers of the Final Reports of the ATCMs at which they were adopted.  This could be done in a variety of ways, for example:

        a. A new column could be added to the ATS database, which would list “Relevant Final Report Paragraph” in the search results table (perhaps between “Subject” and “Current”); 

        b. Each Measure, Decision and Resolution could have a footnote reference along the lines of “Adopted at Paragraph [x] of ATCM [xxx] Final Report”.  This would need to be inserted by the Secretariat at the end of the meeting and prior to uploading the instruments onto the ATS database; or 

        c. In the contents of each Final Report, which lists the Measures, Decisions and Resolutions adopted at that meeting, a reference could be added to identify the paragraph at which each instrument was adopted (e.g. “adopted at paragraph [xx]”).

    2. There may be other ideas on how this might be done.  Of the above three options, the United Kingdom has a slight preference for option (a), however, we would be interested in the views of others.  

