





Inspection of Yachts under the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection










Inspection of Yachts under the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom



Summary

The United Kingdom would be grateful for the views of Parties on whether the circumstances of when formal Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts could be undertaken should be clarified.

Background

Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty establishes the rights of Consultative Parties to undertake inspections in Antarctica.  Observers designated under this Article are to “have complete freedom of access at any time to any or all areas of Antarctica”.  In the context of ships, however, access rights are determined as “at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica”.  At the time of agreeing the Antarctic Treaty in 1959, there was likely no yachting activity in Antarctica.  In the Environmental Protocol, 1991, however, a ship is defined as meaning “a vessel of any type whatsoever” (Annex IV, Article 1).  It follows, therefore, that the definition of a ship in Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty has been understood for some time to include yachts.  This paper has been drafted on the basis of such an understanding.

Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, also provides for inspections, undertaken pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, to include “all records maintained [on stations, installations, equipment, ships and aircraft] which are called for pursuant to [the] Protocol”.

Inspection of Yachts in Antarctica

The 2005 inspection programme by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru reported several yacht sightings, although none were fully boarded and inspected.  One yacht was inspected as part of the 2012 United Kingdom, Netherlands and Spain inspection programme.  A further five yachts were inspected as part of the 2014/15 United Kingdom and Czech Republic inspection programme (ATCM XXXVIII/WP19).  Not all of these yachts were in the process of discharging passengers ashore at the time of inspection, although all were positioned at sites where landings were possible.  However, the master of each yacht consented to an inspection; and during the inspections, each reported that they had, or would be, making landings during their time in Antarctica.

In March 2015, the United Kingdom requested the designated Antarctic Treaty Observers (Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Circular 22 (2014)) on board HMS Protector to make an inspection of a yacht sighted at Deception Island, Antarctic Peninsula (ATS Circular 9 / 2015).  In this instance, the yacht was within a location commonly used for landings, though with all crew aboard.  It was not possible to determine whether the yacht had made landings in Antarctica – but it was also neither desirable, nor practical, to follow the yacht around Antarctica waiting for it to do so.  The yacht stated that it did not have authorisation from any Antarctic Treaty Party to be in Antarctica (despite claiming to be registered to a Treaty Party and the yacht master was a national of another Treaty Party).  This yacht refused the Antarctic Treaty inspection.


Discussion

In 2014 (ATCMXXXVIII/IP055), 36 yacht sightings were reported in the Antarctic Peninsula region and this number is expected to grow.  The provisions governing the location of Antarctic Treaty inspections of ships in Antarctica restricts inspections to points of discharging or embarking, to ensure a clear distinction with at-sea boardings under international maritime law.  However, whilst it is conceivable that a yacht may visit Antarctica without making any landings, only a tiny minority of yachts would actually do this, and almost all yachts would likely land, or at least, anchor at some point in the Antarctic.  All yachts registered to, or operated by, Antarctic Treaty Parties are subject to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and in particular its Annexes III and IV.

In the view of the United Kingdom, the provision to inspect yachts, to ensure compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, is increasingly important, given the growth in yacht numbers in Antarctica.  The United Kingdom considers that it is undesirable to pursue yachts, or have to wait for them to make a landing before an inspection takes place.  The United Kingdom would therefore be grateful for the views of Parties as to whether it would be desirable for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to consider a Measure to clarify that formal Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts may be undertaken whilst they are at potential landing sites, or at anchor at a site where a landing would be possible, whether or not, the yacht was in the process of “discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel”.  The United Kingdom would also propose that Parties inform all yachts that they authorise to visit Antarctica of such a Measure.

The United Kingdom notes that the actual timing and location of any yacht inspection in Antarctica must be by mutual arrangement of the designated observers and the yacht master.  Such arrangements would need to take into account the safety of the yacht and all involved.  The United Kingdom in no way advocates any inspection without the master’s cooperation, however, we would propose that where the master refuses an inspection, the designated observers request the yacht’s master to report the reasons for refusal immediately to the Antarctic Treaty Party that had authorised the yacht to be in Antarctica, and/or the Party to which the yacht was registered.  The Party of the designating observers would then be invited to make a report to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, including any subsequent justification provided by the Party to which the yacht reported their reasons for refusing the inspection.

The United Kingdom would be grateful for the views of Parties on the matter of formal Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts in Antarctica; and in particular whether a Measure to clarify the circumstances in which yacht inspections may take place, along the lines of the attached draft, would be helpful.




Draft Measure: Inspection of Yachts under the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection

 The representatives,

Noting the increasing number of yachts visiting Antarctica each year;

Desiring to ensure that yachting activity undertaken in Antarctica is done so in full compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection;

Recalling Resolution 1(2003) regarding the provision of advice to yacht and vessel operators about the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling also Resolution 10(2012) and its Checklist of yacht specific items for preparing Antarctic voyages, and the Yachting Guidelines for Antarctic Cruises, which are available on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website;

Further recalling the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That;

    1. Parties agree that Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts, pursuant to Article VII(3) of the Antarctic Treaty, may be carried out when yachts are positioned at sites in Antarctica where a landing would be possible, whether or not discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel is occurring or planned at that point.

    2. Parties inform operators of yachts, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, that they are subject to potential Antarctic Treaty inspections, in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, whilst at anchor, or otherwise positioned at sites in Antarctica where a landing would be possible.  

    3. Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts may only take place by mutual arrangement of the designated observers and the master of the yacht.  Observers should request the master of the yacht to make best efforts to facilitate the inspection to take place, noting that this may involve arranging a future time and location for an inspection where the current time and/or location is considered unsafe for an inspection to take place.  In making arrangements for any inspections, the safety of the yacht all parties involved must be prioritised.

    4. For the purposes of this Measure “yacht” means any vessel carrying less than 12 passengers.

    5. Whilst inspections may only take place by mutual arrangement between the designating inspectors and the master of the yacht, where an inspection is refused:
        a. the designated observers should request the master of the yacht to provide full details of the reason for the refusal, and also request that the master of the yacht immediately report the reasons for the refusal to the Antarctic Treaty Party which provided the authorisation for the yacht to be in Antarctica and/or the Party of registration of the yacht;
        b. the designated observers shall immediately inform their relevant Antarctic Treaty Party(ies) and report the information provided as to why the inspection request was refused;
        c. all Antarctic Treaty Parties involved in steps a) and b) above should subsequently liaise in production of a report to the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting that takes place after an inspection was refused.



