





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond 
Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains










Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains
Working Paper submitted by the United States 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the United States has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan.
Background
Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 23 through Recommendation XVI-9 (1991) after a proposal by the United States of America. The boundaries of the Area were extended through Measure 2 (2005) to include the ice-free region encompassing the Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond. The management plan was updated by Measure 6 (2010), although no changes to the boundary were made.
The primary reason for the designation of the Area is that it contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds with autotrophic microbial life known to exist in Antarctica, which represent unique examples of near-pristine freshwater ecosystems and their catchments. In addition, the geomorphology of the Area represents a unique scientific resource for the reconstruction of previous glacial and climatic events. The Area has received very few visits, and as a result the Area has outstanding potential as a scientific reference site. Furthermore, the Area possesses outstanding wilderness and aesthetic values. The Area is one of the most southerly ‘dry valley’ systems in Antarctica and, as of April 2015, is the most southerly Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) in Antarctica. The Area is the only ASPA designated within Environment R of the Environmental Domains Analysis for Antarctica (Resolution 3 (2008)), and also the only ASPA within ACBR10 of the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions classification (Resolution 6 (2012)). These grounds for designation of the Area remain valid.
No visits to the Area have been reported by Parties since the previous plan was adopted in 2010. Therefore, no direct human disturbance to the Area is known to have occurred since the last documented field visit undertaken in 2003/04 (D. Hodgson and P. Convey, British Antarctic Survey).
A revised management plan for ASPA No. 119 is attached.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA No. 119
Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
Introduction: Updated to include classifications under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR).
Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM 
Section 5 Maps: New topographic data were added to Map 2 to fill gaps that existed in the earlier site map, in particular the area NW of Forlidas Pond and on the surrounding ice sheet. The layout and symbology of both maps were improved. The relict ponds in Davis Valley were added to the Map 2 to help improve visitor awareness of these sensitive features. A clarification on aircraft overflight restrictions is now provided on Map 2.
Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. The original orthophoto on which mapping was based did not cover the full ice free area at Davis Valley. Therefore a new WorldView-1 orthoimage (© 2013 Digital Globe, courtesy of US NGA Commercial Imagery Program) was used to map the ice margin more faithfully, including all significant areas of ice free ground and excluding areas of surrounding snowfield that are not important to the values of the Area. The boundary of the Area was adjusted accordingly, resulting in a small reduction in the size of the Area by ~2.6%. 
Section 6(i) Description of the Area: Updated to include recent scientific literature. 
Section 7 Permit conditions: Revisions were made to the text and sub-sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011).
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.
Recommendation 
The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains.

    1. ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation XVI-9 (1991, SPA No. 23)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-9 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 6 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif
Other relevant measures:

4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes, minor changes to boundary.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. New topographic data added to fill gaps. Sensitive relict ponds added. Improvements to layout and symbology. 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Updates from scientific literature. Revision based on guidance in Resolution 2 (2011).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities; 
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems; 
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Yes. Environment R – Transantarctic Mountains’.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main ACBR should be noted here). 
Yes. ACBR10 – Transantarctic Mountains.



