





Proposed Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (2016) on climate change and monitoring









Proposed joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop (2016) on climate change and monitoring


Introduction

At their respective annual meetings in 2014, the CEP (CEP XVII Report, paragraph 52) and SC-CAMLR (SC-CAMLR-XXXIII Report, paragraph 10.3) endorsed the proposal to hold a second Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop in 2016. The agreed general scope of the workshop is to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

Both the Environmental Protocol (Article 12) and the CCAMLR Convention (Article XV) state that the respective bodies should consult with, and have regard to the work of, other scientific and technical organizations within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. Such a joint workshop provides an important opportunity for cooperation and further understanding on topics that are of shared interest between the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
 
The proposed 2016 workshop would follow up on the first joint workshop held in Baltimore in 2009 (ATCM XXXII WP55), which aimed to develop a shared understanding of the conservation objectives and priorities of CEP and SC-CAMLR; to identify areas of common interest; to define mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information; and to identify the lead body on topics of mutual interest. Discussion at the 2009 workshop focused on climate change and the Antarctic marine environment; biodiversity and non-native species; Antarctic species requiring special protection; spatial management and protected areas; and ecosystem and environmental monitoring.

The 2016 joint workshop will focus further attention on two of these areas of common interest. Climate change and related research and monitoring are key elements of the current agendas and work plans of the SC-CAMLR and the CEP, where the development of joint approaches and understanding is particularly pertinent. The importance of these issues has also been highlighted by SCAR in its recent Horizon Scan (Kennicutt et al 2014) as well as in its Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment reports and updates (Turner et al, 2013). 


Background and relevant activities

The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change (2010) made several recommendations relevant to both SC-CAMLR and the CEP (ATCM XXXIII/WP63), including:
Recommendation 19: more sophisticated and coordinated ecosystem monitoring, including increased collaboration between CEP and SC-CAMLR;

Recommendation 20: encourage national Antarctic programmes to undertake marine and terrestrial biodiversity surveys and to submit, as a matter of urgency, all relevant biodiversity data to appropriate databases (e.g. the Biodiversity Database). In conducting such surveys, priority attention should be paid to regions considered to be at high risk of climate change impacts as well as to existing protected areas established to protect biological values. 

Recommendation 27: that the CEP and SC-CAMLR be encouraged to ensure that sufficiently frequent biodiversity surveys and adequate monitoring programmes are established to provide an understanding of climate change induced responses in species distribution and abundance.

Recommendation 28: that CEP and SC-CAMLR continue to develop means for collecting and sharing data and information on the status and trends of species of interest to both bodies (seals, penguins and seabirds), including the need to cooperate with other experts bodies such as SCAR and ACAP. 

Additional ATME recommendations on research into regions, habitats and species at risk (17), data use and management (21), and protected and managed areas (24, 25 and 26) also have relevance to the general scope of the joint workshop.
The CEP’s Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on Climate Change has been working to develop a Climate Change Response Work Plan (CEP XVIII WP xx), building upon the ATME recommendations that are relevant for CEP to deliver. The discussion of the draft CCRWP and accompanying recommendations at CEP XVIII will be important in guiding the development of an agenda for the joint workshop.

In addition, the need for further coordinated data sharing has been highlighted by the SCAR Standing Committee on Antarctic Data Management (SCADM). Data collecting efforts such as the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS), and datasets such as the SCAR Antarctic Digital Database and the SCAR Biogeographic Atlas of the Southern Ocean (De Broyer, Koubbi et al 2014) have made significant progress on data sharing and access, however there remains a need for further development and input to public databases, for example through national Antarctic data centres.


Development of workshop Terms of Reference and Agenda

The Scientific Committee agreed (SC-CAMLR-XXXIII Report, paragraph 10.3) that the workshop Terms of Reference (TOR) could be based on elements identified during intersessional CEP discussions led by the CEP observer to SC-CAMLR (Dr Penhale, United States): 
(i) Identifying those drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR; 
(ii) Reviewing existing monitoring programs to determine whether the data is sufficient to assess climate change impacts or whether new approaches are needed; and 
(iii) Defining mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information. 

Circular letters sent out by the CEP and SC-CAMLR Chairs (March 2015) invited further input to refine these TOR and identify specific agenda items for the workshop. The following suggestions for discussion topics were received:
    • Review of mechanisms of CEP/SC-CAMLR collaboration following the 2009 joint workshop
    • Development of a common CEP/SC-CAMLR work programme to address the goals of both bodies on climate change and monitoring
    • The role of MPAs as scientific reference areas to understand the impact of climate change on marine ecosystems, to improve resilience of Antarctic marine environments, and to manage human activities in the face of climate change impacts
    • Improvement of risk assessment, and identification of risks where uncertainty can be reduced
    • Mitigation of human impacts, including sharing of best practices
    • Impact of Antarctic krill fisheries in the context of climate change
    • Indicators that can be applied for assessing climate vulnerability of protected areas. A set of basic indicators of climate variability and change, with standard time scales and units of measurement, may help to establish comparison among different protected areas.
    • Mechanisms to access long time-series data of weather-climate especially for those scientific bases that have no long term monitoring weather data.
    • Enhancement of capacity building on methods of risk assessment to identify potential climate change implications for current and future Antarctic infrastructure, logistics and environmental values


Steering Committee

At SC-CAMLR XVII, there was agreement to establish a steering committee, co-convened by Drs Polly Penhale (CEP Vice-Chair, United States) and Susie Grant (SC-CAMLR Vice-Chair, United Kingdom) and including the Chairs of the CEP (Mr Ewan McIvor, Australia) and SC-CAMLR (Dr Christopher Jones, United States). In response to the circulars issued in March 2015 by the CEP and SC-CAMLR Chairs, the following nominations of additional members of the Steering Committee were received:

Dr So Kawaguchi (Australia) – WG-EMM Convener
Dr Anton Van De Putte (Belgium)


Workshop location and timing 

The timing and venue of the workshop should be considered to facilitate maximum engagement from CEP and SC-CAMLR members, and ideally could be held in conjunction with another existing meeting. At CEP XVII, Chile noted that it would be hosting the CEP meeting in 2016, and that such a workshop could be hosted in conjunction with CEP XIX. Other possible locations/dates include: 
    • WG-EMM (July 2016, location to be confirmed)
    • SCAR Open Science Conference (August 2016, Kuala Lumpur),
    • SC-CAMLR or WG-FSA (October 2016, Hobart).


Depending on the timing of the workshop in 2016, there may not be another opportunity for the CEP to discuss further planning at its next annual meeting. Consistent with the approach utilised for planning the first joint workshop in 2009, it is envisaged that final arrangements could be managed by the Steering Committee, in consultation with committee members as appropriate, and communicated via Circulars.


Recommendations 

In order to make further progress on planning for the 2016 joint workshop, we encourage the CEP to: 
    1) Consider the proposed Terms of Reference, and refine as appropriate
    2) Consider items to be included in a draft Agenda 
    3) Make further nominations for the Steering Committee, if required
    4) Discuss options for location and timing of the workshop
    5) Provide recommendations on the above points to ATCM XXXVIII and SC-CAMLR-XXXIV (October 2015)



References

De Broyer, C., Koubbi, P. et al. 2014. Biogeographic Atlas of the Southern Ocean. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge.

Turner, J. et al. 2013. Antarctic climate change and the environment: an update. Polar Record 50: 237-259.

Kennicutt, M.C. et al. 2014. Polar research: six priorities for Antarctic science. Nature 512: 23-25.

