





Shared science priorities and cooperation: systematic observations and modelling in the Southern Ocean









Shared science priorities and cooperation: systematic observations and modelling in the Southern Ocean
Working paper presented by the United States and Australia
Summary
The Southern Ocean is an important component of the earth system and processes active there influence climate and the transport of carbon, nutrients and heat on a global scale.  Limited observations indicate that the Southern Ocean is changing yet the specific processes and rates remain poorly understood.  This knowledge gap has important ramifications for governance and management of this region and beyond.  Consequently, there is a pressing need for improved observations and understanding.  We recommend that the Parties note the importance of Southern Ocean observations and modelling to understanding climate change and the need for international cooperation in this area; and the need to support and engage in the Southern Ocean Observing System. 
Background
ATCM discussions on shared science priorities
The ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan identifies a priority action for the Parties to ‘… identify and pursue opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change.’ For ATCM XXXVIII, a related action is to ‘collate and compare strategic science priorities with a view to identify cooperation opportunities.’ 

In this context, the United States and Australia wish to highlight the importance of systematic observations and modelling in the Southern Ocean, and propose such activity as a shared priority for cooperation.  This is consistent with Resolution 3 (2007) on Long-Term Scientific Monitoring and Sustained Environmental Observation in Antarctica, and with recommendations of the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance, which strongly encouraged ‘collaboration and development of sustained integrated observing systems using in situ, air and space-based techniques.’  The CEP work plan also places a high priority on considering the implications of climate change for management of the Antarctic environment, and CEP XVIII will discuss a Climate Change Response Work Plan, including actions to address information needs.
Importance of Southern Ocean research
The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) links the global ocean and drives vertical exchange that brings deep water to the surface and returns surface waters to the ocean interior.  Active processes involve the uptake of heat and carbon dioxide (CO2) as well as the distribution of nutrients.  The Southern Ocean is also a globally significant sink for CO2 and heat.  As a result, the Southern Ocean exerts a major influence on climate, biogeochemistry and ecology on global scales.

The Southern Ocean has reduced the rate of atmospheric warming at high southern latitudes by virtue of its thermal mass, yet it is also a critical driver of major changes in continental ice sheet margins where warmer ocean waters come in contact with floating ice shelves.  Improved understanding of ocean-driven changes and their effect on the stability of the ice sheet margins are key to accurate prediction of future sea level rise. 
Sea ice is a ubiquitous yet seasonally-variable feature south of 60°S, where it is critical to both climate and biological processes.  It modulates atmosphere-ocean heat, gas/moisture and freshwater exchanges, and dramatically modifies reflectance of sunlight.  Moreover, it plays a crucial role in marine ecosystems by modifying water properties and nutrient flux, providing habitat for a wide range of organisms adapted to its presence and seasonal rhythms. Sea ice not only responds to variability of atmospheric and oceanic conditions; it also plays a key role in modulating change. 

Ecologically, the Southern Ocean plays a globally significant role.  Biology is responsible for around half of the carbon draw down in the Southern Ocean and provides important mitigation of the primary driver of climate change.  The Southern Ocean has a distinctive food web, characterised by the central role of Antarctic krill, a species of particular interest to the Antarctic Treaty system for its conservation.  These ecosystems are changing and will continue to change in the future as the ozone layer recovers and as climate change and ocean acidification continue to modify ocean habitats.  The simplicity and well-reported nature of human activities on Southern Ocean ecosystems facilitate attribution of observed change to different causes.  Identifying and understanding these changes is important for development of effective global and regional policy frameworks. 

Systematic cooperative observations and modelling of Southern Ocean processes can contribute to: 
    • The advancement of shared objectives for conservation under Treaty agreements;
    • Understanding and predicting regionally and globally significant ocean and earth system processes;
    • Informing input to management and governance of the Southern Ocean and to global science–policy initiatives such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC); 
    • Understanding implications for Antarctic operations; and
    • Effective allocation of resources to priority Antarctic research.
Challenges and opportunities

Current observations are sparse, time-series are short and sampling is uneven because observations have been made where operationally convenient or to address some specific process or problem.  Observations designed to characterize large-scale processes have not, to date, been a priority.  Even so, available data show the region is changing: the Southern Ocean is becoming warmer, fresher, more acidic and carrying less oxygen.  Ocean-driven ice sheet melt is evident at the Antarctic margin, particularly at the West Antarctic ice sheet, raising the prospect of sustained and significant sea-level rise.  Change is also evident in sea-ice, with large regional loss in west Antarctica, but an increasing overall extent, although thickness and volume changes remain un-quantified on the large scale.

The importance of Southern Ocean research, and the scale of effort involved, means that international collaboration is required to satisfy both research goals and policy needs.  The challenge is to adequately model Southern Ocean systems, including through the use of both physical and ecosystem models and the ability to link these.  These models require inputs from extensive, sustained and coordinated observations and observing systems.  

The approach to deliver on these goals includes:

    • robust and sensitive indicators of change collected systematically throughout the Southern Ocean;  
    • assessments of how these changes will affect physical processes and the climate system;
    • assessments of the likelihood of different future ecosystem states given different management options or scenarios; and 
    • mechanisms for adjusting management options to take account of new information. 

The Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC describes how these capabilities are currently poorly developed but essential for the Southern Ocean.  Importantly there is a need for better characterisation of key processes and sensitivities, improved ability to distinguish the effect of environmental change from the impacts of human activities in the region, and data collection strategies that will best serve model development and decision-making.

Coordinated international observing coupled with improved physical and ecosystem models for the Southern Ocean will inform approaches for managing human activities such as krill fishing, tourism and the conduct and support of national science programs. 
CCAMLR
The CCAMLR ecosystem-monitoring program (CEMP) seeks to understand the effects of krill fisheries on dependent and related species such as marine mammals and seabirds.  It is a challenge to separate the effects of environmental change on dependent species from those that may be caused by fisheries.  The Scientific Committee of CCAMLR has acknowledged SOOS as a key mechanism to enable the development of the physical and ecological models essential for the design of better management approaches for krill and other marine living resources (SC-CAMLR-XXXII, paragraph 3.24-3.27). 
Current Initiatives
SOOS – Southern Ocean Observing System
An initiative of the Scientific Committee on Ocean Research (SCOR) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the mission of SOOS is “to coordinate and expand the efforts of all nations and programmes that gather data from the Southern Ocean, with the specific aim of developing a coherent and efficient observing system that will deliver the observations required to address key scientific and societal challenges.” 

SOOS was designed to address many of the issues and opportunities noted briefly in this paper and to articulate a vision requiring international cooperation and investment to achieve the goals.  SOOS is developing a set of long-term observations to address 6 themes, on (i) heat and freshwater balance, (ii) overturning circulation, (iii) ice sheet stability and sea level rise, (iv) carbon uptake, (v) sea ice and (vi) biological systems.  It aims to coordinate the observations of essential variables in each theme throughout the Southern Ocean.  The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) has established a Think Tank to investigate opportunities for collaboration across national Antarctic programs to support the goals of SOOS.

The Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observation and Modelling (SOCCOM) project is responsive to SOOS and entails an extensive program of observations accomplished via a robotic observing system operating over six years and development of new generation earth system models to both increase our current understanding of the Southern Ocean and improve projections of the future trajectory of the Earth’s climate and biogeochemistry. 

Recommendations
International cooperation is needed for a sustained, coordinated effort around key projects and initiatives. The United States and Australia recommend that the Parties:

    1) Note the importance of Southern Ocean observations and modelling to understanding climate change, and the need for international cooperation and investment in such activities; 
    2) Participate as appropriate in the Southern Ocean Observing System to advance systematic observations and modelling, through projects such as SOCCOM; and
    3) Encourage increased international collaboration involving on-going long-term regional research programs (e.g. the U.S. AMLR program and the U.S. Palmer LTER program in the Western Antarctic Peninsula).

