





Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica









Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by 
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States
Summary
This paper draws attention to a recently completed analysis of Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica. IBAs are defined on the basis of a consistent set of global criteria developed by BirdLife International and global population assessments that have been made for bird species that breed in Antarctica, combined with available scientific data on colony populations and locations. The initiative was developed through collaboration between BirdLife International and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) that started in 1998, and was recently renewed with the support of a number of Parties. The analysis has identified 204 IBAs that meet the selection criteria as they apply to the avifauna of Antarctica (see Information Paper IP27). 
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States recommend that the Committee considers how appropriate recognition might be given to the Important Bird Areas in Antarctica provided in IP27 as a tool to assist Parties when planning and conducting activities in Antarctica, including to assist environmental impact assessments and to contribute to environmental monitoring. The Paper’s co-authors further recommend that the CEP gives consideration to assessing the extent to which these IBAs are, or should be, represented in the current series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, in particular those areas that might qualify as ‘major colonies of breeding native birds’.
Background
The Important Bird Area programme was originally established by BirdLife International more than 35 years ago to provide a means of identifying sites of international conservation significance for the world’s birds. To date more than 12 000 IBAs covering over 200 countries have been documented and delineated globally. To achieve this, BirdLife International worked closely with organisations and individuals in the countries concerned, resulting in publication of seven continental or regional IBA inventories and over 130 national or sub-national directories.
All sites documented in these works were identified using a standardized set of data-driven criteria and thresholds. These ensure a consistent approach worldwide. The four criteria are based upon the confirmed regular presence at sites of more than threshold numbers of globally threatened species, groups of species of restricted range, species assemblages confined to a single biome and congregations of one or more species. These criteria have been used successfully over the past three decades and have proved remarkably effective and versatile in all environments where they have been applied.
Collectively, IBAs now cover ~5.2% of the world’s land surface. All data are held in BirdLife’s dedicated World Bird Database and further information is available through the Data Zone of the BirdLife website (http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/site). 
The term ‘IBA’ is not a formal designation, and nor does it imply that the site should necessarily become a protected area. It is simply an indication of the significance of the site for biodiversity and of the need for it to be treated (formally or otherwise) in a manner sympathetic to that biodiversity.
A significant gap in coverage of the terrestrial environment has, until recently, been continental Antarctica together with offshore island groups such as the South Shetland, South Orkney and Balleny islands. This gap is now filled as a result of the current study, which has been carefully reviewed by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party subject matter experts and found to be a valuable resource.
The CEP five-year work plan promotes action on several issues for which a better understanding of the Antarctic will be valuable, including developing our knowledge of biodiversity. The IBA analysis presented in Information Paper IP27 has, for the first time, assembled and analysed available data on the avifauna of the Antarctic to identify those sites that possess characteristics that indicate they are of particular importance to species conservation.
Developing the list of Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
The effort to compile an IBA inventory for Antarctica was initiated by BirdLife International and SCAR at the SCAR Bird Biology Symposium meeting in Concepción, Chile in 1998. Criteria for selection were agreed at the next meeting held in 2000 in Tokyo, Japan. SCAR and BirdLife International then held workshops on IBAs in Jena, Germany, in 2002 and in Texel, The Netherlands in 2004. After a gap of several years and with support from the United Kingdom, the initiative was renewed in 2010 to develop a definitive list for the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands and South Orkney Islands, which was published in 2011 (Harris, C.M. et al. 2011. Important Bird Areas in Antarctica: Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands, South Orkney Islands. Final Report. Environmental Research & Assessment, Cambridge). This study identified 101 sites that met the BirdLife IBA criteria, and full details were published on the Data Zone of the BirdLife web site, from where the full report can also be downloaded.
With further support from the Governments of Australia, New Zealand, Norway and the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts, the analysis was extended to include the remainder of Antarctica over 2013-15. First, global population estimates for each species were reviewed and defined, which determine the thresholds at which a site qualifies as an IBA. Drawing predominantly on peer-reviewed literature, in some cases supplemented by unpublished data made available by the science community and personal communications, breeding colony data were analysed to identify those that meet the criteria, including a spatial analysis to assess where the criterion of 10 000 seabird pairs present within a defined areal unit was met.
The analysis proceeded on a regional basis, circulating initial results to specialists working in these regions for review and comment. As a result, revisions were made and the results for each region were then combined into a consolidated list for the whole of Antarctica. This list proposed 205 IBAs, and was circulated for further comment to more than 90 Antarctic bird scientists world-wide. Following the final round of consultation, the list was revised to give a final total of 204 IBAs. The report listing these IBAs is presented separately as Information Paper IP27.
Application of the list of Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
The list of IBAs in Antarctica is useful as a tool to assist Parties when conducting environmental impact assessments and, more generally, when planning and conducting activities in Antarctica. In addition, the IBA list can be used in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty system for the identification of areas that could be considered for inclusion within the Antarctic Specially Protected Area network. In particular, the IBA list is useful to help identify sites in Antarctica that represent ‘major colonies of breeding native birds’ that might qualify for consideration as ASPAs under Article 3.2(c) of Annex V. However, IBAs are not intended to be prescriptive, and may be used in conjunction with a number of tools designed for these purposes, including the Environmental Domains Analysis for Antarctica (Resolution 3 (2008)), and also the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions classification (Resolution 6 (2012)). The Paper’s co-authors also note the benefits of – and would encourage other Parties in supporting – further research and monitoring that can contribute to future assessments, and to the regular update of the IBA list as a resource of ‘best available knowledge’ on the most important bird breeding areas in Antarctica.
Recommendations
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States recommend that the CEP:
    1) Considers how appropriate recognition might be given to the Important Bird Areas in Antarctica provided in IP27 as a tool to assist Parties when planning and conducting activities in Antarctica, including to assist environmental impact assessments and to contribute to environmental monitoring;
    2) gives consideration to assessing the extent to which these identified IBAs are, or should be, represented within the series of ASPAs, in particular those areas that might qualify as ‘major colonies of breeding native birds’.

