





The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol

(Summary of the intersessional contact group convened by Belgium)










The concept of "outstanding values" in the Antarctic marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol
Working Paper submitted by Belgium
Summary
Belgium and France submitted to the seventeenth session (2014) of the CEP the Working Paper N°39: “ The concept of "outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol”; the Committee decided the formation of an intersessional contact group to discuss the implementation of the Protocol Annex V1, Art. 3 to facilitate the further examination of this issue by the CEP. 
This working paper summarises the exchange of view held during it and draw some conclusions to suggest an eventual prolongation of the intersessionnal contact group’s mandate.
Framework
Belgium and France submitted to the seventeenth session of the CEP Working Paper N°39 (WP39), in order to assess if there was a need for Parties to develop a more coherent approach to the implementation of Annex V, article 3 in order to account for the impact of land-based activities and associated logistic support on the marine environment. 
As a first step, it discussed the concept of "outstanding values" as they applied to the marine environment where activities regulated by the ATCM and CEP are taking place, and then suggested the formation of an intersessional contact group to discuss the implementation of Annex V Art. 3 to facilitate the further examination of this issue by the CEP.
The Committee agreed2 that the ICG would operate with the following terms of reference (ToR):
    ToR #1 Identifying key "outstanding values" within different contexts/scopes of the marine environment and analysing how they may be affected by activities under the competence of the CEP linking both terrestrial and marine environments;
    ToR #2 Identifying criteria by which marine areas with "outstanding values" would require protection through the ASPA instrument and, if appropriate, identifying activities that may have impacts on marine environment and associated risks to be managed/mitigated through the range of tools available to the CEP, including the outstanding values;
    ToR #3 Understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, while using the appropriate tools available to the CEP's work to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex 5 to the Protocol;
    ToR #4 Discussing options for the CEP within the existing framework and tools of the Treaty and the Protocol to include “outstanding values" of the marine environment, when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs, in accordance with Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol; and
    ToR #5 Providing an initial report to CEP XVIII.
The intersessional contact group was convened by Belgium and received contributions, during its various stages, by the following Parties and Observers: Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States of America and ASOC. 
The discussions and exchanges of view held during the ICG are accessible through the CEP discussion forum and documented by IP 10, submitted by Belgium.

    1. Priority issues for discussion and policy issues
Due to the broad scope of the ToR, Belgium acting as convenor proposed, firstly to prioritise the issues for discussion by the ICG and to identify as appropriate, any broader policy or other issues that may warrant further discussion by the CEP. To help initiate this discussion, a short discussion paper was circulated with initial ideas about how the various issues identified by WP39 could be discussed within the ICG. 
As convenor, we circulated then a summary of the issues raised during the first stage, including issues that participants generally agree could be addressed by the ICG and also any broader policy and/or other issues that should be brought to the attention of the CEP.
Based on the contributions received, a draft Working Paper was finally submitted to the ICG for reaction. 
    2. Key outcomes of the ICG
No further work on a definition is necessary to apply the ASPA mechanism for marine areas, annex V and its 2000 Guidelines3 are providing relevant and practical guidance for designation of marine ASPAs, there is no need for any further additional (stricter) criteria to be applied by the CEP to decide if that area should be protected according to Annex V (ASPA) of the Protocol. Most of the contributors considered that CEP should use or better implement the already existing criteria under the Madrid Protocol, its Annex V and the 2000 Guidelines. Adding new criteria won’t necessarily help in achieving the main objective which is to designate ASPAs taking into account their outstanding marine values. The quality criteria of a potential protected area can be thought as an overall degree of excellence in terms of the value it contains. The quality of the area is being assessed by examining its representativeness, its diversity, its distinctiveness, its ecological importance, its degree of interference and its scientific and monitoring use, as identified by the 2000 Guidelines, which also provides a checklist of questions for each of these. 
Most of the contributors wished to proceed case by case and step by step, the greatest need for spatial protection being given by the combination, in a given area, of a value (in this case, an outstanding marine value) and a situation or activity that threatens that value. This threat may be an actual threat or a potential one that could affect the value in the future. According to this, we do not necessarily have to discuss about types of marine values generally and isolated, but to analyse particular cases where certain values are threatened or at risk in certain areas, and any and all values of the marine/coastal environment that meet the criteria may merit additional protection through the ASPA mechanism.
Most of the contributors thought that, regarding ASMAs & ASPAs in coastal areas that do not include marine values within their boundaries, it would be relevant to re-examine those areas when they come up for review and see if these areas should be expanded in any way. The ASPA review process allows for the boundaries and management plans of individual sites to be updated and changed if required. Marine values that are located outside the boundaries of an existing ASPA could therefore be proposed for inclusion at the time of an ASPA review. This could be especially relevant where there is a clear link between marine and terrestrial values, in coastal and near-shore areas. The review of existing ASPAs requiring the inclusion of additional marine values in this way would be a decision for the respective proponent(s) of such areas, and should be done on a case-by-case basis.
Most of the contributors considered important that the CEP’s efforts to advance the objectives and provisions of Annex V complement, rather than duplicate, the on-going work by CCAMLR to consider the designation of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). Furthermore, the roles and responsibilities of the ATCM and CCAMLR are distinct and quite clear, the relation between these bodies, in what respects ASPAs and ASMAs, has been settled by ATCM’s Decision 9 (2005)4. Further communication between these two bodies would allow for better understanding of approaches to marine protection, avoid duplication of effort, and help to maintain separate but complementary roles.
    3. Evaluation and Recommendations to the CEP
Based on the views and consideration exchanged during the ICG, we would recommend to the CEP to note the key outcomes of the discussions and consider whether further steps should be taken along the following lines: 
                1. We consider that presently no further work on the definitions and criteria for applying “outstanding value” for marine area is needed.  Annex V of the Protocol and the 2000 Guidelines with its single criteria (quality) and six “elements” are sufficient grounds for further work.
                2. We encourage Parties and CEP to consider outstanding values of the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol when proposing new ASPAs or revising existing one and to make use of the 2000 Guidelines. 
                3. We consider that the CEP’s efforts to advance the objectives and provisions of Annex V are separate but complementary to the on-going work by CCAMLR to consider the designation of MPAs.
                4. We recommend that the CEP endorse the continuation of an intersessional contact group to discuss the implementation of Annex V, Art. 3 of the Protocol in what respects the concept of "outstanding values" applied to the marine environment, particularly in terms of potential threats to that environment from activities covered by Art. 3 (4) of the Protocol and any other major issue deemed pertinent by CEP, like for instance climate change.
                5. Provide an initial report to CEP XIX of this second round of the ICG.

