





Updated Management Plan and maps for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land










Updated Management Plan and maps for ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
Working Paper submitted by
New Zealand and the United States
Summary
The McMurdo Dry Valleys were originally designated as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2 through Measure 1 (2004) due to its exceptional environmental and scientific values as the largest ice-free area in Antarctica, and the need to coordinate management of activities in the region to ensure that these values can be sustained for the long-term. The current Management Plan adopted through Measure 10 (2011) reaffirmed the high environmental and scientific values of the Area. A number of updates to the Management Plan and maps for ASMA No.2 have been necessary to ensure that visitors to the McMurdo Dry Valleys follow the latest policies agreed and have access to current information. The following sections briefly describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan and maps. New Zealand and the United States recommend that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan and maps for ASMA No. 2.
Background
Information Paper IP 043 (ATCM XXXVII, Brasilia, 2014) was submitted by New Zealand and the United States to report on work undertaken by the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Management Group. The paper identified a number of updates to maps and management measures that are necessary within the Management Plan for ASMA No.2 to ensure that visitors to the McMurdo Dry Valleys follow the latest management policies agreed and have access to current information showing facilities, features and protected areas located within the Area. IP043 invited comments on the proposed revisions from interested Parties with a view to submitting final revisions to CEP XVIII (2015) for adoption. No further comments have been received.
In summary, IP043 noted revisions needed as a result of adoption of ASPA No.172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, Taylor Valley (Measure 9 (2012)), improvements to access procedures at the Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone, and a minor revision to the eastern boundary of the Area where a section of the ice coastline south of Cape Roberts no longer exists.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASMA No. 2
Further to the changes identified in Information Paper IP043, several additional minor updates to the plan and maps have been made over 2014/15. These minor changes were made to identify facilities, camps and landing sites that have been added, moved or removed, and to update data on shorelines and several other physical features. In particular, the Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone boundary has been enlarged from 20 ha to 23 ha (a 15 % increase) based on analysis of new topographic data and imagery. All other Zone boundaries remain unchanged.
Proposed revisions to the Management Plan text are summarised in Appendix 1, while proposed revisions to the Management Plan maps are summarised in Appendix 2. These appendices identify the relevant sections where changes to the Management Plan have been made. The full text of the revised Management Plan, Appendices A - F that form part of the management plan, and the revised maps (24 in number) are attached.
Recommendations
New Zealand and the United States recommend that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan and maps for ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land.
ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 1 (2004) ASMA No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 1 (2004) ASMA No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 10 (2011)
Current management plan:
Measure 10 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes: minor revision to eastern boundary where the ice coastline has changed. Minor revision to the boundary of the Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map updates and changes to the graphics were necessary.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. ASPA No.172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls has been included on maps and added to management plan text.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Minor changes to several of the Zones within the Area have been made.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
N/A
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Yes. Environment S – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main ACBR should be noted here). 
Yes. ACBR9 – South Victoria Land.

Appendix 1
MANAGEMENT PLAN SECTION AND ITEM
DESCRIPTION OF CHANGE
Section 5. Maps and photographs – Table 1: List of maps included in management plan
Map 8 Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley

    • Scale changed from 1:25,000 to 1:35,000.
    • Inset 1 added showing ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls at 1:10,000.
    • Inset Lake Bonney Camp Facilities Zone changed to become Inset 2.
Map 18 Inset Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone
    • Scale changed from 1:12,500 to 1:10,000.
Section 6 Description of the Area

    • Classification under the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Resolution 6 (2012)) has been added.
Section 6 (iv) Location of other protected areas within the Area

    • ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls added to list.
Section 7(iv) Field camps
Table 5: Designated field camp sites outside of Facilities Zones or other zones within the Area.
    • Reference to Map 8 Inset 1 added to table.
Section 9. Supporting documentation
Management Plans
    • ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls added to list.
Appendix C Facilities Zones
Table C-1: Description of Facilities Zones within the McMurdo Dry Valleys
    • Lake Fryxell Camp: Helicopter landing site coordinates and structures in Zone revised.
    • Lake Hoare Camp: Structures in Zone revised.
    • Lake Bonney Camp: Structures in Zone revised.
    • Bull Pass Hut: Structures in Zone revised.
Appendix E Guidelines for Restricted Zones
Restricted Zone Don Juan Pond
    • Updates to Zone Area, Boundaries, Access requirements and Special Site Guidance, including designated helicopter landing sites, field camp site and preferred walking route. 
Restricted Zone Victoria Valley Sand Dunes
    • Designated helicopter landing site and field camp site added to Special Site Guidance.
Appendix 2
Map No. & Title
Description of changes
OVERVIEWS
Maps 1 and 2: Overviews
Update coastline and ASMA boundary to reflect change in coastline.
ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls included.
FACILITIES ZONES
Map 4: Lake Fryxell, Commonwealth Glacier, Inset: F6 Camp Facilities Zone;

Map 5: Lake Fryxell, Canada Glacier, Inset: Lake Fryxell Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Fryxell shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Clow Island included within Lake Fryxell.

Lake Fryxell FZ facilities updated to 2015, shoreline updated to 2015 lake level. 
Map 6: Lake Hoare, Canada Glacier; 
Map 7: Lake Hoare Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Hoare shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Zone facilities updated to 2012.
Map 8: Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley, Inset 1:  ASPA No. 172 Blood Falls, Inset 2: Lake Bonney Camp Facilities Zone
Lake Bonney shoreline updated to 2010 lake level.
Map scale reduced to 1:35,000 to include ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls.
ASPA No. 172 sub-aerial protected area added in new Inset map.
Lake Bonney FZ facilities updated to 2015, shoreline updated to 2015 lake level.
Map 9: Mount Newall, Asgard Range, Inset: Mount Newall Radio Repeater Facilities Zone; 
Map 10: Marble Point, Inset: Marble Point Refueling Station Facilities Zone; 
Map 11: Lower Wright Valley, Inset: Lower Wright Hut Facilities Zone; 
Map 12: Lake Vanda, Wright Valley, Inset 1: Lake Vanda Hut Facilities Zone Inset 2: Bull Pass Hut Facilities Zone
Map 13: Cape Roberts, Granite Harbor, Inset: Cape Roberts Hut Facilities Zone
Minor updates to features and facilities.
SCIENTIFIC ZONES
Map 14: Explorers Cove Scientific Zone
Minor updates to features and facilities
RESTRICTED ZONES
Map 16: Trough Lake Catchment Restricted Zone 
Map 17: Mount Feather, Beacon Valley Inset: Mount Feather Sirius Deposit Restricted Zone 
Map 19: Argo Gully, Wright Valley Inset: Argo Gully Restricted Zone
Map 20: Prospect Mesa, Wright Valley, Inset: Prospect Mesa Restricted Zone 
Map 21: Hart Glacier, Wright Valley, Inset: Hart Ash Deposit Restricted Zone
Map 23: Battleship Promontory Restricted Zone
Minor updates to features and facilities.
Map 18: Don Juan Pond, Wright Valley  Inset: Don Juan Pond Restricted Zone
Minor revision to zone boundary.
Define new helicopter landing site, camp site, rock cairns and preferred walking route.
Improve detail in stream network and topographic contours.
Refinement to Restricted Zone boundary.
Map 22: Victoria Valley Sand Dune Field Restricted Zone 
Map position shifted south to include Mautino Peak and Purgatory Peak.
Designated camp site and helicopter landing site marked.
VISITOR ZONE
Map 24: Taylor Valley, Lake Fryxell Inset: Taylor Valley Visitor Zone
Update Lake Fryxell shoreline to 2010 lake level.
Clow Island included within Lake Fryxell.


