





Report of the Informal Discussions for Another Intersessional Period on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A









Report of the Informal Discussions for Another Intersessional Period on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A

Working Paper submitted by the People’s Republic of China

Summary
This document contains a short report of the informal discussions on the proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A during the intersessional period of 2014-2015 at the CEP forum, under China’s leading. 

1. Introduction
At CEP XVII Meeting in Brazil, China presented WP 15 (Report of the Informal Discussionson the Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A) in which China gave a short report of the informal discussions on the proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A during the intersessional period of 2013-2014 at the CEP forum. The Committee agreed to accept China’s offer to lead further informal discussions on the proposed ASMA for another intersessional period（line 9-10,Paragraph 132, Page 44, Final Report of the Thirty-seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting）. With the help of ATS, China invited participation in the discussion at the CEP forum on December19, 2014. By the early April of 2015, only Argentina participated and provided their comments and offered to make some additional contributionson the management plan. It’s China’s great appreciation to have the participation of Argentina. 

2. Overview of the discussion
In the last year’s CEP meeting China mentioned that a full response to the second round of discussion of the previous intersessional period was not yet given before the CEP meeting due to the date change of the meeting. So the discussion for the intersessional period of 2014-2015 summarized the points being raised in the said second round of discussion firstly. China responded to them one by one（see attachement）. The first one was the analysis of “appropriate” and the legal aspect of China’s proposal. The second one was the argument that if it’s reasonable and fair to bring the issue of the increased burden/workload on Treaty Parties and the CEP only to the discussion of China’s proposal. The third one emphasized the logic relationship between the consideration of China’s proposal and other regions or comparable situations elsewhere in Antarctica being described as multinational activities or activities of multiple operators and not currently designated as ASMAs. The last one was to deal with a number of questions with respect to the understanding of the existing ASMAs. The following discussion was a detailed analysis on the question if China’s proposal is consistent with the Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol and how we would interpret and apply this article. China offered to be open to further discussion especially considering the different wording in different versions of the Article 4(the second part) to which China repeated its critical importance and tried to draw the attention of all parties. China believes that China’s proposal is at least consistent with the English version. Lastly China welcomed any specific scientific/technical questions on the proposal. 
Argentina agreed to China that the workload should not be an impediment to the creation of a protected area and the wording of Art 4.1 should be solved. Argentina listed some concerns on the condition that if China’s proposal is based on "future activities" it can be interpreted as to fit within the terms of Article 4 of Annex V of the Protocol. Finally Argentina kindly offered to share their experiences and make some additional contributions on the management plan. 


3. Issues concerned in the discussion
It’s China’s regret that only Argentina kindly participated the discussion and there seemed losing the chance of broader opinions exchange particularly regarding to the issue of the different wording in different versions of the Article 4. As there had no further arguments of the issues like “appropriate”, the workload, other regions or comparable situations, China think that the CEP should only consider if China’s proposal is acceptable under the Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol and if it is, what more China should do to perfect the proposal and improve the management plan. 

4. Recommendation
China’s proposal has been through two intersessional periods to allow for full and thorough discussion and it may come to a conclusion. China recommends that the CEP members give their thoughts on the question if China’s proposal is acceptable and if there have more concerns to be addressed in terms of its perfection and improvement. 

