





Proposal on inclusion of the oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010 to the List of Historical Sites and Monuments









Proposal on inclusion of the oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010 to the List of Historical Sites and Monuments
This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument in the Antarctic 

    1) Name of Proposed HSM: Oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010
    2) Description: The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” was designed and produced at the Malyshev Transport Machine-Building Plant in Kharkov specially for organizing inland sledge-tractor traverses in Antarctica. This was the first non-serial transport vehicle of the Soviet machine-building produced exclusively for operations in Antarctica. This tractor was not  used outside Antarctica. Thus, the STT “Kharkovchanka” is a unique historical sample of engineering-technical developments made for exploration of Antarctica.
    3) Coordinates: 69°22′41,0″ S, 76°22′59,1″ E.
    4) Original Proposing Party: the Russian Federation.
    5) Party undertaking management: the Russian Federation.

Proposal on inclusion of the oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010 to the List of Historical Sites and Monuments
Background
The STT (oversnow heavy tractor) “Kharkovchanka” was designed and produced at the Malyshev Transport Machine-Building Plant (Kharkov) in 1958 as commissioned by the Soviet Antarctic Expedition (SAE) to be used in the logistical and scientific inland sledge-tractor traverses.
In accordance with the commitments adopted by the USSR for fulfilling the International Geophysical Year (IGY) Program, the Soviet Union opened scientific stations in the area of the South Geomagnetic Pole (16 December 1957, Vostok station) and the Pole of Relative Inaccessibility (16 February 1958, Sovetskaya station). For logistical support of these inland stations, subsidiary Pionerskaya (27.05.1956) and Komsomolskaya (06.11.1957) stations were established to the south of Mirny station.
Opening of these stations was performed by means of caterpillar tractors and heavy artillery haulers, which by their technical characteristics were not quite suitable for motion in deep loose snow cover of East Antarctica. Due to this, an oversnow heavy tractor was designed in Kharkov and an experimental series of such machines was produced, which was first used in the fourth SAE (1958–1960). Among the machines of this first group was the STT No. 22.
The SAE participants using this machine carried out a significant number of inland sledge-tractor traverses to Vostok and Sovetskaya stations, the US Amundsen-Scott station, located at the South Geographical Pole (1958–1959), Mirny – Komsomolskaya – Sovetskaya – Vostok – Mirny (1961), Molodezhnaya (Enderby Land) – Novolazarevskaya (Queen Maud Land) (1964) and Mirny – Pole of Inaccessibility – Molodezhnaya (1967). During all these inland traverses using these machines, the ice sheet thickness and sub-ice relief characteristics were investigated, numerous geophysical, glaciological and meteorological measurements were made in the non-explored until that time central regions of East Antarctica.
Caterpillar transport vehicles created in the USSR, methodology of their application in Antarctica developed in SAE and unique results of investigations of inland regions of the sixth continent placed Soviet (Russian) specialists to the leading positions in the Antarctic community in using this type of transport support for activities and studies.
In the season 2009–2010, the concluding traverse was made from Mirny station to Vostok station, in which the STT No. 22 participated. In March 2010, this hauler arrived to Progress station, where its 51-year labor activity in Antarctica was finished. This tractor was left at Progress station, as a historical sample by means of which studies and activities in the framework of the IGY were carried out.
Initial data
The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” was designed and produced specially for use in the activity of SAE. Its technical characteristics:
Overall dimensions (L×B×H) – 8750×3640×4000 mm;
Mass – 34 000 kg;
Ground clearance – 400 mm;
Specific ground pressure – 0.410 kg/cm2;
Motion speed, calculated – 5.5 to 36.0 km/h;
Passenger body area – 28 m2;
Passenger body height – 2.1 m (the passenger body is intended for accommodation of 6-10 people, has space for drying of clothing and a toilet room);
Trailer mass (sledge with cargo), not more than – 45 000 kg;
Power plant, not less than – 520 hp.
In 2013–2015, the oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” No. 22 was restored by RAE wintering team at Progress station and installed on the hill to the west of facilities of the Russian Antarctic Progress station in less than 100 m from the shore of Lake Stepped.
Location and description
The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” No. 22 is located on a hill with a height of 23.1 m in geographical coordinates: 69°22′41,0″ S and 76°22′59,1″ E at a distance of 183.6 m from the service-living building of Progress station and in 86.9 m from the shore of Lake Stepped (Figure 1).
Figure 1 – Location of the oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” No. 22

The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” No. 22 corresponds completely to the original produced in 1958 at the Kharkov Malyshev transport machine-building plant, and its coloring meets standards adopted in SAE-RAE for transport vehicles (Figure 2). Remains of diesel fuel, technical oils and hydraulic fluids were fully removed from fuel tanks and aggregates of the tractor in order to avoid a possible adverse environmental impact. The doors and windows of the driver’s and passenger’s cabs are fully isolated from possible snow getting inside the tractor.
Figure 2 – Oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” No. 22

Grounds for inclusion into the List
In accordance with resolution 8 (1995) and Annex to Resolution 3 (2009) the STT No. 22 is worthy to be included to the List of Historical Sites and Monument in the Antarctic due to the following reasons:
    1) The STT No. 22 was delivered to the Soviet (Russian) Antarctic Mirny station in December 1958 and took part in the activities under the program of the year of the International geophysical cooperation, which began at once after the end of the IGY Program. This hauler participated in numerous logistical and scientific inland sledge-tractor traverses that were carried out from 1959 to 2010 by specialists of the Soviet and Russian (after 1992) Antarctic expeditions. The USSR Post depicted the STT No. 22 on a special postage stamp, devoted to the Soviet Antarctic studies, issued in 1963. Using this transport vehicle, more than 100 thousand km of the routes were overcome in inner regions of Antarctica to the difficult-for access regions of East Antarctica to deliver cargos and perform scientific studies.
    2) The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” was designed and produced at the Malyshev Transport Machine-Building Plant in Kharkov specially for organizing inland sledge-tractor traverses in Antarctica. This was the first non-serial transport vehicle of the Soviet machine-building produced exclusively for operations in Antarctica. This tractor was not used outside Antarctica. Thus, the STT “Kharkovchanka” is a unique historical sample of engineering-technical developments made for exploration of Antarctica.
    3) For its 51 years of operation the STT No. 22 was capitally repaired many times, including repair of undercarriage, replacement of engines and transmission, which were carried out directly under the Antarctic conditions by SAE-RAE specialists. This fact stresses an exceptional reliability and suitability of this type of a hauler for operation under the most extreme natural-climatic conditions of our planet. The impossibility of continuing operation of this tractor in the RAE conditions was due to a lack of spare parts for this type of transport vehicles.
    4) Successful outcome of the International Geophysical Year 1957–1958, followed by the International Geophysical Cooperation Year served as a basis for preparation and adoption of the Antarctic Treaty on 1 December 1959. These scientific programs have become a guarantee of international cooperation in the South Polar Region of the Earth. The historical monument of these glorious pages of coordinated efforts of 12 countries for investigating natural processes and phenomena in the Antarctic is a unique example for current generations of polar explorers. It is for this purpose that the oversnow heavy tractor No. 22 was left for eternal storage at the Russian Antarctic Progress station from where the Russian and Chinese inland sledge-tractor traverses are made now.


