





Five-Year Work Plan adopted at the 17th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVII)









Five-Year Work Plan adopted at the 17th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVII)
Summary
In accordance with an agreement reached at CEP XIII (2010), this Working Paper presents the Five-Year Work Plan adopted at CEP XVII, held in Brasilia, Brazil, from 28 April to 2 May 2014. Members are encouraged to review the work plan, with a view to discussing and agreeing during CEP XVIII any appropriate changes to issues, actions or priorities.
Background
The idea of taking a strategic approach to future work of the CEP work was raised at CEP VII (2004). Following further discussion at CEP meetings, and related intersessional work – including the 2006 Workshop on Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges – the first CEP Five-Year Work Plan was adopted at CEP XI (2008). The work plan has been reviewed and revised at each subsequent CEP meeting. 
At CEP XIII (2010) the Committee agreed that the work plan should be reviewed and updated at the end of each meeting, appended to the CEP Final Report, published on the CEP website, and submitted to CEP meetings as a Working Paper. At CEP XV (2012) the Committee agreed that during future meetings the work plan should be discussed at the end of each agenda item.
The version of the work plan attached to this Working Paper was adopted at CEP XVII (2014), held in Brasilia, Brazil, from 28 April to 2 May 20141. It outlines a series of issues identified by the CEP as a priority for its attention, and related actions. Each issue is assigned to a category indicating relative importance from 1 (highest) to 4 (lowest).
The Committee has regularly acknowledged the value of the work plan as an effective means of managing its workload and priorities. The Committee has also noted the importance of retaining flexibility in the work plan, and that the work plan does not prevent Members from bringing forward papers on any issues they consider to be important.
Recommendation
Members are encouraged to review the attached work plan, with a view to discussing and agreeing during CEP XVIII any appropriate changes to issues, actions or priorities.

