





Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land









Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land


India introduced a Working Paper at XXV ATCM (WP47) on a draft management plan for a proposed site of Special Scientific Interest for Dakshin Gangotri Glacier Snout, Schirmacher Oasis, Dronning Maud Land.  The Committee noted that this should be termed an ASPA rather than SSSI. Accordingly, during XXVI ATCM India submitted a draft management plan for Antarctica Specially Protected Area (XXVI ATCM/WP-38) and thereafter resubmitted revised management plan during XXVII-ATCM (WP 33).  The management plan was adopted by Measure 2 (2005) and designated ASPA 163 during XXVIII ATCM (WP 25). This Management Plan was further reviewed after five years with minor changes, while submitted to XXXIII-ATCM (WP055 rev1.) and adopted under Measure 12 (2010).
According to paper submitted by Antarctica Treaty Secretariat (SP-6) in XXXVI-ATCM, “Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area and Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plans”, this management plan, is scheduled to be reviewed in year 2015. Improved management plan, following the Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, is being submitted for review. Few observational visits have been made to the area since 2010. No significant changes to the plan have been made, boundaries of the plan are not changed. Minor changes to the existing management plan include:
    • Replacement of word “Schirmacher Oasis” has done with “Schirmacher Hills” in full document.
    • Heading and sub headings have been aligned with numbers
    • Introduction: addition of text describing recent adoption of Management Plan 
    • 6(i) Description of the Area: Recent observations on Glacier retreat have been introduced
    • 7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms, which can be brought into the Area: Text added on use of Non-native Species manual
    • Figure 1: Images showing the markers at ASPA boundary, updated
    • Map 1, Map 2, Map5: Replaced with better resolution map
    • Map 6 : Updated with latest image

The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection and further to be adopted by ATCM

Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)  No 163 : Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 3 (2005)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 3 (2005)
Any revisions to management plan:
Second Revision
Current management plan: 
Measure 12 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Three maps (Map 1, Map 2 and Map 5) have been replaced with better resolution maps. Figure 1 has been updated showing markers relocated at eastern side of ASPA boundary
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated with minor addition
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    1) Replacement of word “Schirmacher Oasis” has done with “Schirmacher Hills” in full document.
    2) Heading and sub headings have been aligned with numbers
    3) Introduction: addition of text describing recent adoption of Management Plan 
    4) 6(i) Description of the Area: Recent observations on Glacier retreat have been introduced
    5) 7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms, which can be brought into the Area: Text added on use of Non-native Species manual
    6) Figure 1: Images showing the markers at ASPA boundary, updated
    7) Map 1, Map 2, Map5: Replaced with better resolution map
    8) Map 6 : Updated with latest image
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


