





Towards the submission of a Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica









Towards the submission of a Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Italy
1.	Introduction
In the last years, Italy submitted many IP (IP 57 - CEP XVII, IP 80 – CEP  XVI and IP 41 – CEP XV) to inform the Antarctic community about the intention to realize a gravel runway in Terra Nova Bay and about results of the first investigations conducted in the proposed sites. 
This new infrastructure would allow a more reliable and cost effective management of the Italian scientific and logistic operations and would increase safety and cooperation with neighbouring Antarctic programs. 
In the attached document to this WP, the first draft of the future Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is presented. The aim of this WP is to encourage the Parties to give a first advice on this topic allowing Italy to collect early comments that may be immediately incorporated in the oncoming work, before its formal presentation and circulation in due time for the XXXIX ATCM.
2.	Main outlines of the attached draft document 
The attached document is a first informal draft of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica. 
The document was prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998) and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005).
The document describes the logistical and scientific needs of a runway close to MZS, the proposed activity, the proposed construction and operation methods, some alternatives in terms of different sites and logistical configuration (including the non realization) and consequences, the initial environmental reference state, the predicted environmental impacts and the proposed mitigation and monitoring measures, indicating also gaps and uncertainties. Attention to the environmental values was significant since the planning phase.
The location of the proposed infrastructure  is  Boulder Clay (74° 44’45’’S, 164° 01'17’’E, 205 m a.s.l.). This site was chosen balancing the expected construction and operation impacts and  the logistical advantages. 
3.	Conclusion
Italy welcomes comments and feedback on this “in progress” draft of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica. 
This would allow some first adjustments of the document before its formal submission and following circulation among Parties.
Recommendation and request of information should be directed to:
    • Dr. Sandro Torcini
Environmental Manager
ENEA UTA-RIA
Via Anguillarese 301
00123 – Roma, Italy
Tel. +39 06 3048 4802 – Fax +39 06 3048 6487
e-mail: draftcee@enea.pnra.it



	

