





A symposium celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty 









A symposium celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty 

Submitted by Norway, Australia, Chile, France New Zealand, United Kingdom


Summary
In 2016 it will be 25 years since the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty was signed in Madrid. This paper suggests a commemorative symposium to be held in conjunction with the 19th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection to take place in Chile in 2016. 

Background
In the five-year work plan of the CEP the upcoming 25 year anniversary of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) has been highlighted, suggesting that preparations for this event should be discussed at CEP XXVIII (2015). Preliminary discussions were, however, held already at CEP XVII. Two specific actions were discussed. 

Firstly, Argentina suggested, and was supported by the Committee, the desire to produce a brochure commemorating the achievements gained by the Antarctic Treaty system as a result of the Protocol. Work on this item is ongoing, as reported in a separate working paper. 

Secondly, Norway suggested that the 25th anniversary would be a suitable juncture to assess the effectiveness of the dynamics between the CEP as the advisory body and the ATCM, possibly through a symposium, and noted that it would further consider the idea in advance of CEP XVIII (cf. para 21 of the final report from CEP XVII). In the below some further thoughts on this idea is explored and a recommendation is put forward. 

Discussion
The 25 year anniversary of the Protocol provides an excellent arena and time to celebrate and discuss achievements.  As well as an opportunity to examine the dynamics of the CEP’s advisory role to the ATCM (as suggested by Norway at CEP XXVII)1, the anniversary also provides an opportunity to focus in particular on experiences gained through these twenty-five years and how the Protocol has achieved its purpose as the framework tool for environmental protection in Antarctica. 

Such a anniversary discussion could be usefully coupled to the provisions of Article 12 of the Protocol, to provide advice and formulate recommendations to the Parties in connection with the implementation of the Protocol, including, inter alia, on the need for additional measures and the effectiveness of existing measures. It would also provide an opportunity to identify and consider future environmental challenges for Antarctica. 

Proposal
Norway, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom propose that a symposium to celebrate and discuss achievements in relation to the Protocol’s role as the framework tool for environmental protection in Antarctica should be held in conjunction with the 19th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection in 2016.

We suggest that the framework for such a workshop could be along the following lines:

    • When: In conjunction with CEP XIX in Chile. Potentially the best timing for such an event would be after the CEP meeting. A day-long symposium on the Saturday of the mid-weekend in order to avoid conflict with other events, such as the joint CEP-SC-CAMLR workshop which is assumed to take place before the start of the CEP. 

    • Who: Parties to the Environmental Protocol specifically (including ideally both Heads of Delegation and CEP Representatives) and any additional non-Consultative Antarctic Treaty parties, as well as CEP/ATCM Experts and Observers.

    • Purpose: The general focus would be celebrating  the  effectiveness of the CEP as a framework tool for environmental protection in Antarctica, but more specifically the symposium could consider the following items:

    • The success of  the Environmental Protocol in light of what it set out to achieve when it was established
    • The Environmental Protocol as a modern and up to date framework for environmental protection in Antarctica
    • The successes of the various tools provided for in the Protocol, e.g. the Committee for Environmental Protection as an advisory body to the ATCM, the various tools set out in the Annexes, in particular the EIA process, but touching also on the Protected Areas system, specially protected species, etc.)

    • How: A select number of invited presentations on the topics identified as most important to highlight against purpose, potentially ending with a panel debate.  As a starting point for further development the following items for focus is suggested:

    • The Protocol as a framework
        ◦ history and the vision behind the Protocol
        ◦ The Protocol in context with  other international framework agreements of its time
    • Protection of the Antarctic environment
        ◦ how the Protocol  in practical terms has improved protection of the Antarctic environment
    • The Committee as an advisory body
        ◦ the Committee’s success as an advisory body
        ◦ the benefits to the ATCM of  having the Committee as an advisory body
    • The Protocol as a framework for ensuring that activities are planned and conducted with the least possible impacts (EIA process)
        ◦ Reflections on the EIA provisions of the Protocol in light of modern/up-to-date EIA thinking 
        ◦ The difference the Protocol has made with respect to activity planning and conduct 
    • The next 25 years
        ◦ perspective on how the Protocol may need to adapt to meet anticipated challenges between now and 2041 (i.e. the next 25 years)

Norway (along with others) is willing to take the lead on coordinating the planning of and taking the responsibility for the practical implementation of such a symposium.  
Norway, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom suggest that the ATS Discussion Forum could be used as a platform for discussions relating to the development of the agenda, ensuring that all Members are able to contribute to the shaping of the anniversary celebration symposium. 


Recommendation

Norway Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom suggest that the ATCM/CEP:
    1. Decides to hold a 25 year anniversary symposium in conjunction with ATCM XXXIX&CEP XIX in Chile, on the Saturday immediately following the conclusion of the CEP meeting. 
    2. Agrees to the framework described above as a starting point for further symposium program development.
    3. Appreciates the offer of Norway (along with others) to coordinate the planning of and taking the responsibility for the practical implementation of the symposium.
    4. Agrees to use the ATS Discussion Forum as a platform for Members to provide input to the organizers with regard to the agenda of the symposium.


