





Environmental Remediation in Antarctica









Environmental Remediation in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Brazil and Argentina 



Abstract

Considering the environmental risk associated with soil and water contamination by hydrocarbons in Antarctica, and the need to develop cleaning strategies appropriate for the continent and based in the best scientific knowledge and field experiences, Brazil and Argentina organized a bilateral meeting to specifically discuss bioremediation matters. The results and outcomes of this experts meeting were positive and rewarding, allowing the Parties to consider joint future projects in Carlini and Ferraz stations. 


Introduction

The overall objective for Parties’ actions to address environmental risks posed by sites contaminated by spills of fuel or other hazardous substances is to minimise adverse impact on the Antarctic environment, and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty.

Having in mind the experience the two countries have on the issue and in order to contribute to the discussions and also to increase the exchange of views, one of the main pillars of the Antarctic Treaty, Brazil and Argentina have organized, in Brasilia, on the 19th of March 2015, a workshop on remediation of sites contaminated by hydrocarbons.

The first session of the workshop was devoted to a discussion on the different institutional structures each country has developed in order to implement the Madrid Protocol. Both parties have shown their national forms and procedures designed to determine the environment impact that activities may have in Antarctica and have presented the capacity building activities they have developed.

The second session of the workshop was devoted to discussions on remediation, specifically bioremediation of hydrocarbons soil contamination caused by diesel spills. The participants discussed their remediation experiences and gave presentations on the status of each project and on the findings.

Presentations given by both countries were based in their previous experiences and a short description is summarized below. 

Brazilian experience

Since 2010, Brazilian scientists have been carrying out studies for the purpose of determining the potential of diesel oil hydrocarbons degradation using fertilizers within a strategy of biostimulation (Cury et al., 2012  - http://doi.editoracubo.com.br/10.4322/apa.2014.087).

The results of these studies demonstrated that the soil of the Brazilian station contains microorganisms capable of degrading hydrocarbons and that the degradation of these hydrocarbons is enhanced with the application of nitrogen fertilizers (Cury et al., 2014).

Based on these bioestimulation studies and on the environmental monitoring that has been carried out for several years now in the area, Brazil has initiated, immediately after the fire that destroyed Comandante Ferraz, a remediation plan, based on the installation of biopiles, to deal with the hydrocarbons soil contamination caused by diesel spills



The first intervention was done in the 2013-14’s summer and a detailed description of this intervention was presented in IP 7/ CEP XVII (“Remediation Plan for the Brazilian Antarctic Station area”).

The second intervention took place earlier this year, in January 2015, and is described in IP16, submitted to CEP XVIII.

Soil samples of the biopiles are being collected in the beginning and in the end of each summer season, in order to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of these trials and also to maintain the environmental monitoring series. 


Argentinean experience

Argentina has been conducting laboratory and field experiments on remediation since the 1990s. These works were focused on hydrocarbon-contaminated soils from Marambio and Carlini stations. The overall aim of the work is the development of hydrocarbon-contaminated soil bioremediation procedures suitable for use in Antarctic environments. Some of the results were previously presented in the IP 017/ ATCM XXXIV. Biostimulation and bioaugmentation strategies were tested under different conditions, looking for the most efficient and environmental friendly method. Bacterial strains and consortia able to use hydrocarbons as carbon and energy source were isolated and analyzed as biological tools. The convenience of the use of these microorganisms in bioaugmentation procedures was deeply evaluated and compared to biostimulation strategies (Mac Cormack and Fraile, 1997, Ruberto et al 2003, Ruberto et al 2005, Ruberto et al 2006, Vazquez et al 2009, Dias et al 2012, Vazquez et al 2014).
 
Studies using biopiles as experimental systems showed that biostimulation represents a useful strategy to improve hydrocarbon degradation by the autochthonous microorganisms (Dias et al 2014). In the same way, studies involving inoculation of the soil with hydrocarbon-degrading autochthonous bacteria as well as immobilization of the inocula on different inert matrixes are being conducted in order to investigate the potential use of the bioaugmentation strategy.

Currently, works are focused on the optimization of the biostimulation strategy (mainly determining the best N and P levels) as well as on the improvement of the bacterial inoculum survival, the use of which have not clearly shown to improve the bioremediation processes. On the other hand, several environmental pollution monitoring programs were carried out, regarding mainly to Marambio and Carlini stations (Curtosi et al 2007, Dauner et al 2015).

Since 2008, the Environmental and Management Program of the Argentinean National Direction has joined the bioremediation research project carry out in Marambio Station, contributing to it from a management point of view. In this respect, the Program continues with the identification of other environmental impacts associated with soil and water contamination, in order to comply with the Environmental Protocol and to maintain ISO 14001 certification given to Marambio Station. In the next seasons, the intentions of the joint project involves the assessment of the viability to move forward and implement a bioremediation technique in the field, contributing to the cleaning of soil in Antarctica. 



Results

Joint discussions proved very helpful and fruitful, in particular because experts found out that many defies are common, despite the particularities of each remediated area. 

Experts raised, for instance, some of the difficulties found in establishing adequate parameters to measure levels of contamination in Antarctica, since some international established parameters are not adequate to that environment. On this issue, both Brazil and Argentina excused on the techniques and solutions found to deal with the establishment of reference parameters and proposed the use of the work that has been done together (Dauner et al 2015) as the foundations for the establishment of a reference frame for 25 de Mayo (King George) island pollution monitoring.   

Participants also discussed how each country was dealing with determining the optimal level of remediation, taking into account costs and possible impacts on the environment. These are issues that both national programs intend to continue to work on.

Brazil and Argentina also intend to develop a number of joint activities related to the issue of bioremediation. In addition to trying to share data and resources, both parties are analyzing the possibility of conducting similar remediation experiment and monitoring programs on two different areas (Ferraz and Carlini stations). This would allow for experts from the two countries to compare results and understand the impact different locations have on the experiments. Argentina offered the use of laboratory facilities as well as the equipment at Carlini station for the development of such activities. 

Both parties have also raised the importance of contributing to the clean-up manual in order to expand the array of experiences and solutions found by each party. 

Recomendation

Brazil and Argentina recommend that the CEP:
    1) note and acknowledge the usefulness of the results and outcomes of bilateral and plurilateral workshops that allow for a more thorough exchange of views and experiences; 
    2) encourage National Antarctic Programs to cooperate in issues related to remediation experiences;
    3) encourages Members and Observers to include their national experiences  in the clean-up manual in the future

References

ATCM XXXIV. Bioremediation of Antarctic soils contaminated with hydrocarbons. Rational design of bioremediation strategies. Information Paper 017. Presented in XXXIV ATCM June 20-July 1, 2011. Buenos Aires, Argentina. http://www.ats.aq/devAS/ats_meetings_documents.aspx?lang=e.

Cury JC, Jurelevicius DA, Villela HDM, Jesus HE, Peixoto RS, Schaefer CEGR, Bícego MC, Seldin L, Rosado AS. Microbial diversity and hydrocarbon depletion in low and high diesel-polluted soil samples from Keller Peninsula, South Shetland Islands. Antarctic Science (Print), p. 1-11, 2014, http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0954102014000728.

Cury JC, Jesus HE, Villela HDM, Peixoto RSP, Schaefer CEGR, Bícego MC, Jurelevicius DA, Seldin L, Rosado AS. Bioremediation of the diesel-contaminated soil of the Brazilian Antarctic station. INCT-APA Report, p. 188-194, 2012, http://doi.editoracubo.com.br/10.4322/apa.2014.087.

Curtosi A, Pelletier E, Vodopivez CL, Mac Cormack WP. (2007) Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soil and surface marine sediment near Jubany Station (Antarctica). Role of permafrost as a low-permeability barrier  Science of the Total Environment (ISSN: 0048-9697). 383 (1-3), 193-204. 2007.

Ruberto L, Vazquez SC, Mac Cormack WP (2003) Effectiveness of the natural bacterial flora, biostimulation and bioaugmentation on the bioremediation of hydrocarbon contaminated Antarctic soil.. Int Biodet Biodeg , 52, 115-125. 

Ruberto, L.A.M, Vazquez, S.C., Lobalbo, A., Mac Cormack, W.P(2005) Psychrotolerant hydrocarbon-degrading Rhodococcus strains isolated from polluted Antarctic soils. Antarctic Science  17 (1), 47-56. 

Ruberto LAM, Vazquez SC, Curtosi A, Mestre MC, Pelletier E, Mac Cormack WP (2006) Phenanthrene bioremediation in soils using an Antarctic bacterial consortium.. Biorem J 10 (4), 191-20.

Ruberto, L, Dias R, Lobalbo, A, Vazquez SC, Hernández EA, Mac Cormack, WP (2009) Influence of nutrients addition and bioaugmentation on the hydrocarbon biodegradation on a chronically contaminated Antarctic soil.. J Appl Microbiol. 106,1101–1110. 

Ruberto L, Vazquez SC, Dias RL, Hernández EA, Coria SH, Levin G, Lo Balbo A, Mac Cormack WP (2010) Small-scale studies toward a rational use of bioaugmentation in an Antarctic hydrocarbon-contaminated soil. Antarctic Sci, 22:463-469. 

Dias R, Ruberto L, Hernández E, Vazquez SC, Lobalbo A, Del Panno MT, Mac Cormack WP (2012) Bioremediation of an aged diesel oil-contaminated Antarctic soil: evaluation of the “on site” biostimulation strategy using different nutrient sources.. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation, 75:96-103. 

Vázquez S, B. Nogales, L. Ruberto, C. Mestre, J. Christie-Oleza, M. Ferrero,  R. Bosch, W.P. Mac Cormack (2013) “Characterization of bacterial consortia from diesel-contaminated Antarctic soils: Towards the design of tailored formulas for bioaugmentation”.  Int Biodet Biodeg 77, 22-30. 

Dias RL, Ruberto L; Calabró A; Lobalbo A; Del Panno MT; Mac Cormack WP (2014) Hydrocarbon removal and bacterial community structure in on-site biostimulated biopile systems designed for bioremediation of diesel-contaminated Antarctic soil.. Polar Biol 2014. Online First :DOI: 10.1007/s00300-014-1630-7.

