





On possibilities of monitoring adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic

English translation provided by the author









On possibilities of monitoring adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic
In recent years, the Antarctic community pays a great deal of attention to the issues of organizing and carrying out adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic. Increased interest in the Antarctic region of different social groups of the population of countries on Earth is explained in many aspects by the increased popularization of activity of the governmental expeditions in the Antarctic and unique scientific achievements in the region in the last few years. While the international community does not practically have additional questions to the organized tourism in the Antarctic, as it is well regulated by IAATO, the adventure tourism (ski crossings, mountain climbing, flights on balloons and experimental aircraft, diving and yachting in the Antarctic Seas) causes an increased concern in different structures of the Antarctic Treaty System. The point is that Antarctica is the only continent of our planet where official rescue services are absent. In connection with this any search and emergency-rescue operations in this region are carried out by efforts and facilities of the national Antarctic Programs, which are financed from the state budgets of the countries sending their national expeditions to the Antarctic. Obviously, insurance of any types of adventure tourism and non-governmental activity, as required by Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty creates conditions for financial compensation of unforeseen costs of the national Antarctic programs for performing these operations, but at the same time such distraction upsets in many cases planned research studies and experiments.
The Russian Federation has already drawn attention of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to the existing serious problem related to a lack of authorizing or notifying systems for performing activity in the Antarctic in the national legislature of some Treaty Parties. This creates preconditions for adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic from the territories of the countries where there are no such systems. Some citizens and legal entities of the countries with sufficiently strict national laws regulating activity in the Antarctic, use an opportunity to make their Antarctic expeditions from the territory of those states where such legislative acts are absent. The state where strict permissive normative acts exist cannot practically perform monitoring of the activity of their citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic if such activity is carried out from the territory of other countries. In the Russian Federation the Federal Law “On regulation of activity of Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic” of 5 June 2012 No. 50-FZ contains a sufficiently strict rule of a mandatory permit for implementation of activity in the Antarctic. However, in spite of such order, some Russian citizens and public organizations registered in Russia as legal entities carried out different non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic during the past Antarctic season. The official state authorities of this country received information about such expeditions in some cases exclusively from mass media. As a rule, the adventure tourism and non-governmental expeditions are funded by different sponsors, which in the end are interested in advertising their activity. As a result, such expeditions use different opportunities for advocacy and outreach of their travels via mass media, declaring quite often their “outstanding” results. It should be noted that such expeditions do not have the Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) prepared in advance as required by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Organizers of such non-governmental actions in the Antarctic consider quite often that preparation of the EIAs and obtaining formal permits is the responsibility of those logistical operators, which services they employ from the territories of the other countries. At the same time, lack of necessary national regulations for permitting activity in the Antarctic by some Treaty Parties makes it possible to perform such operations without any EIAs although these countries officially joined participants of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
In some cases even the national Antarctic Programs of a number of countries use on a contract basis for logistical support of their governmental expeditions the transport facilities (ships and aircraft), owned by several Russian or non-Russian companies which have no formal permits for activity in the Antarcticе. Knowing about the existence of a permitting system for activity in the Antarctic in the Russian Federation, the national Antarctic programs of some countries do not demand permits for operations in the Antarctic in the contracting documents from transport companies. Cases are known where one used for such transport operations aircraft under the state registration of the countries, which are not participants to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. It is stressed that in this case we speak not about the tourist operations but about the logistics support of the national Antarctic Programs. It is quite unclear to what responsibility and especially liability the transport company can be brought if the country of its registration is not a participant of the Antarctic Treaty and the more so of the Madrid Protocol?
To eliminate such risks the Russian Federation proposes before the beginning of summer Antarctic seasons to notify governments of the countries of the last port at the transit route to the Antarctic in the southern hemisphere about the availability of necessary permissive documents for activity in the Antarctic of those Russian citizens and legal entities, which have received such permits. It is clear that citizens and legal entities not indicated in such Lists do not have permits required by the Russian legislature. 
It is known that Article VII requires from all Treaty Parties inform the other Treaty Parties in advance  of the beginning of seasonal operations of the plans of their governmental and non-governmental expeditions to the Antarctic. The requirements for information exchange are set forth in Annex 4 to the Final Report of XXIV ATCM (St. Petersburg, 2001). It reads that information (in this case on the expeditions, which have permits and about which we have information) should be made available “as early as possible, preferably by 1 October, and in any event no later than the start of the activities being reported”. At present such information is sent to the address of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, however as shown by practice, the governmental structures from the territories of which states the non-governmental activity of citizens or legal entities of other jurisdictions is carried out, do not apply for information to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. In this connection, the Russian Federation proposes to send additionally the information on the permits issued in its governmental structures for Antarctic activity of the Russian citizens and Russian legal entities. We urge the other Treaty Parties to join our initiative.

