





Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements









Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
An intersessional contact group (ICG) was established by ATCM XXXVII to conduct a comprehensive review of the existing requirements for information exchange, and to identify any additional requirements. This paper reports on the discussion in the ICG, and recommends consideration by the CEP and the ATCM of the outcomes of the intersessional work.
Background
The 37th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting discussed a ‘comprehensive review of existing requirements for information exchange and the functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) and the identification of any additional requirements’, a priority item identified in the Multi-year strategic work plan adopted at ATCM XXXVII through Decision 5 (2013). This priority item was included following discussion in previous meetings of proposals for changes and additions to the information exchange requirements, and the identification of pending issues arising from the work led by the Secretariat on improvements to the EIES. 
The meeting considered ATCM XXXVII/WP55 Reviewing information exchange requirements (Australia) which proposed a process for the discussion, and suggested draft terms of reference for intersessional work. As requested in the work plan, the Secretariat provided ATCM XXXVII/SP7 ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan: Report of the Secretariat on Information Exchange Requirements and the Electronic Information Exchange System which presented a detailed summary of: existing requirements for information exchange; issues raised in previous ATCM and CEP discussions of information exchange; and the functioning of the EIES. 
CEP XVII considered ATCM XXXVII/WP55, noting that the proposal to review information exchange requirements included information relating to environmental matters, and that the paper recommended that the ATCM request the Committee to provide advice on this topic. The CEP noted its interest in contributing to discussions on environmental information exchange requirements, subject to the consideration of the proposal by the ATCM. 
ATCM XXVII agreed to establish an intersessional contact group (ICG), convened by Australia, to discuss the comprehensive review of the existing requirements for information exchange, and the identification of any additional requirements. The meeting also requested the CEP to provide advice on the exchange of information relating to environmental matters (ATCM XXXVII Final Report, paragraphs 334 – 341). 
Scope
The meeting noted that issues relating to the operation and technical features of the EIES had been raised. The meeting decided that the focus of the ICG would be on reviewing the information currently required to be exchanged. Consideration of the design and functioning of the EIES would occur later, after the review of information exchange requirements had been completed. The meeting also noted that some information exchange requirements are specified in the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, and cannot be changed without amendment of those agreements. As such, these were considered out of scope for the ICG. 
Terms of reference 
Consistent with the agreement reached by ATCM XXXVII, the ICG undertook discussions with the aim of: 
    1) reviewing the information currently required to be exchanged; 
    2) considering whether there is a continued value for Parties to exchange information on each item and whether some items need to be modified, updated, differently described, made mandatory (where currently included as optional), or removed;
    3) considering the pending issues relating to information exchange listed by the Secretariat in SP 7; 
    4) considering where other information exchange mechanisms (for example those operated by COMNAP) may overlap with current ATCM requirements; 
    5) considering the timing of information exchange, including where Parties might desire continuous exchange of information rather than annual reporting; and 
    6) considering how each item best fits into the categories of pre-season, annual, and permanent information. 
Method of operation
The ICG operated using the online ATCM Discussion Forum, under the topic ‘ICG on reviewing information exchange requirements’. The discussion was open to all Parties, Observers and Experts. Reference documents were provided on the forum including: 
    • ATCM XXXVII/SP7 ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan: Report of the Secretariat on Information Exchange Requirements and the Electronic Information Exchange System (Antarctic Treaty Secretariat)
    • Appendix 4 of the Final Report of ATCM XXIV amended by Decision 6 (2013): Information Exchange Requirements.
The ICG began work with an opening announcement by the convener on 30 September 2014. The work plan was arranged in four stages:
    • Stage 1: Decide on work plan and schedule
    • Stage 2: Review the existing requirements for information exchange and identify additional items
    • Stage 3: Circulation of consolidated input for further comments
    • Stage 4: Agree on a Working Paper report of the ICG for ATCM XXXVIII and CEP XVIII
To facilitate the provision of advice by the CEP on the exchange of information relating to environmental matters, as requested by the ATCM, the ICG convener encouraged participants to consult with their CEP representatives when preparing their contributions to the ICG discussions. The CEP chair also encouraged CEP representatives to work through their respective national processes to provide input to the ICG's consideration of exchange of information relating to environmental matters (via CEP Circular: 1/CEP XVIII). 
Summary of discussions
Comments were provided to the ICG by nine Parties (Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, and the United States). The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat also provided information in relation to issues raised by participants.
To assist participants in providing input consistent with the terms of reference, the convener compiled the existing items of information to be exchanged, presented in separate documents for each major category of information: operational, scientific, environmental, and other. The documents outlined: the category of information; the existing items of information; whether the information is to be provided pre-season, annually, or as part of the permanent information; whether the item is required or is included as an option in the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES); and where the requirement to exchange that information comes from. Participants provided views on the items of information currently exchanged, taking into account terms of reference 1 through 6, and suggested any additional items of information, taking into account terms of reference 3, 5 and 6. 
Participants were also invited to provide any comment on those information exchange topics that were previously raised during ATCM discussions, and which remain as pending issues (recorded by the Secretariat in ATCM XXXVII/SP7 ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan: Report of the Secretariat on Information Exchange Requirements and the Electronic Information Exchange System (Antarctic Treaty Secretariat).
After an initial round of input, the Convener circulated a consolidated summary of comments, and invited additional comments. No further comments were received. 
The consolidated summaries for the four categories (environmental, scientific, operational and other) are available in full on the online ATCM Discussion Forum, and provide a detailed record of the discussion and suggestions of participants. A summary of the main conclusions follows. 
Discussion of items of information to be exchanged
Comments were received on most categories of information to be exchanged. The summary of discussion on the categories and items of information, and suggested next steps (Attachment 1), is grouped by information to be exchanged (environment, scientific, operational and other) and identifies:
    • items or categories where relatively simple changes or clarifications were suggested by one or more participants without debate, and which might obtain general support by Parties;
    • items or categories where no clear agreement emerged, and where further discussion of suggested changes is likely to be required. 
Additional points raised by participants
Some additional issues of importance were raised by participants, some of which relate to the operation and technical features of the electronic information exchange system (EIES), and others of a more general nature. To assist ICG participants, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat provided advice on some of these issues, which was made available via the online forum by the Convener. A summary of the additional issues raised is at Attachment 2.
Recommendations
    1. It is recommended that the CEP:
        a. considers the report of the ICG with reference to the exchange of information relating to environmental matters;
        b. discusses those categories and items of information where minor changes might obtain general support, with a view to identifying any changes required;
        c. considers those categories and items of information where further discussion is likely to be required, determine if further work on any of those categories and items is necessary, and propose a process to progress that work;
        d. formulates advice to the ATCM on any recommended changes, and any future work that may be identified.
    2. It is further recommended that the ATCM:
        e. considers the report of the ICG, and any advice from the CEP in relation to the exchange of information relating to environmental matters;
        f. discusses those categories and items of information where minor changes might obtain general support, with a view to concluding any changes required. 
        g. considers those categories and items of information where further discussion is likely to be required, determine if further work on any of those categories and items is necessary, and propose a process to progress that work.
    3. If conclusion is reached on any changes to the information exchange requirements, it is suggested that the ATCM should give effect to those changes, giving consideration to the best mechanism (such as a new Resolution capturing all information exchange requirements) for adopting changes in a way that facilitates ease of reference, and future updates.
Attachment 1
Environmental information
Item or Category
ICG issues raised
Discussion outcome 
Possible next steps
Various sections -placing some items of information into the ‘permanent’ category.

An outstanding issue from previous discussion was a proposal that some environmental information should be reported in the ‘permanent’ category. Some participants expressed support for the following items of information to be ‘permanent’:
    • Compliance with the Protocol (notification of measures adopted in the past year);
    • Contingency plans for oil spills and other emergencies (other than ‘implementation report’ details);
    • Procedures relating to EIAs;
    • Waste management plans;
    • Prevention of marine pollution (sovereign immunity);
    • Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V.
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider identifying items of information that should be placed in the ‘permanent’ category (as well as ‘annual’ where appropriate). 
Various sections -contact information 
Some participants noted that an appropriate contact point could be an organisation and position, rather than an individual. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider modifying requirement to allow Parties to nominate contact points by position rather than individuals. 
Various sections - items of information where ‘location’ needs to be specified
Participants noted that for some items of information (for example where activities occur on a route or in a region), defining a location using a specific latitude and longitude is not sufficient. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Request Secretariat to identify ways to record locations, areas, and regions, where appropriate, other than by latitude and longitude points.
Compliance with the Protocol (notification of measures adopted during the past year)
Participants noted that this information may match or overlap with the requirement to exchange information on ‘Relevant national legislation’ (in the ‘Other’ grouping).
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider clarifying wording of requirement to reflect Protocol Article 13 (1) – sharing information on ‘appropriate measures.., including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions, and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with [the Protocol]’. 
Consider also clarifying wording for information on ‘Relevant national legislation’ (in ‘other’) to specify information on legislation other than that associated with the Protocol.
Contingency plans for oil spills and other emergencies
Participants noted that it is not clear what information is to be reported with respect to implementation reports. 
Participants noted that reporting about implementation of plans for incidents associated with NAPs also occurs through COMNAP mechanisms.
It was noted that the description of the item should specify ‘other environmental emergencies’.
Further discussion likely to be required.
Discussion of what content is appropriate to share, and role of COMNAP reporting systems for NAP plans and incidents. 
Procedures relating to EIAs (description of procedures (for preliminary stage consideration of activities)
It was suggested that it was not clear what was required for ‘title’ and ‘content’ for procedures relating to EIAs.
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider a clearer description of the title and content required. 
List of IEEs and CEEs 
Participants suggested the option of continuous exchange for this information.
It was suggested that consideration be given to listing EIAs based on those that have ‘no more than a minor or transitory impact’, and those that having a ‘more than minor or transitory impact’ (as some countries require IEEs for activities with ‘less than a minor or transitory impact’. 
It was suggested that the information exchange requirement might include preliminary environmental assessments. 
It was suggested that ‘activity’ be deleted and that the list of topic keywords be enhanced.
It was suggested that information on the period of authorisation could be exchanged. 
Further discussion likely to be required.
Consider the proposals listed. 
Monitoring activities
Participants noted that the intention of this item was not clear. 
Some participants noted that the relationship of this item with scientific recording stations / observatories was not clear. 
Participants suggested the option of continuous exchange for this information.
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Noting that the requirement to exchange this information arises from Annex I provisions, consider clarifying that this information should relate only to monitoring associated with activities subject to environmental authorisations / EIAs. 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna – taking and harmful interference
Previous discussions, and participants in the ICG have noted that it would be useful to be able to report on permits involving multiple locations per species, or multiple species per location. 
It was also noted that it would be desirable to retain an ability to identify information across Parties on species-specific information for locations.  
Further discussion likely to be required.
Consider how changes might best be implemented to allow such reporting.
Seek advice of the Secretariat on options. 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna – introduction of non-native species
It was suggested that ‘purpose’ be renamed ‘scientific purpose’ to reflect the Protocol’s provisions.
It was suggested that permit number and dates be ‘required’ information. 
It was suggested that a new item of information about how deliberately introduced species are destroyed or exported from Antarctica should be exchanged.  
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider changing ‘purpose’ to ‘scientific purpose’. Consider making ‘permit number’ and ‘dates’ required items of information. 
Consider adding a new item of information detailing how deliberately introduced species were destroyed or exported. 
Waste disposal and waste management – waste management plans
A new item of information reporting on volumes of waste released to the environment was suggested. 
It was suggested that more clarity was required regarding the information to be exchanged for waste management plan implementation. 

Further discussion likely to be required.
Consider proposal to exchange information on waste released to the environment. 
Noting that Protocol Annex III Art. 9 provides specific detail on circulation and review of waste management plans, consider whether more guidance is required to specify what information should be provided. 
Waste disposal and waste management – inventory of past activities
It was suggested that more clarity was required regarding the information to be exchanged. A focus on ‘infrastructure no longer used’ was suggested. 
It was suggested a definition of past activities might need to be considered. 
A focus on pre-Protocol activities was suggested, as other activities should relate to an EIA.
It was suggested that information might be exchanged on the existence of databases or archives maintained by Parties relating to past activities, with contact details for further information.  
Further discussion likely to be required.
Protocol Annex III Art. 9 requires inventories to be exchanged. Consider whether more guidance is required to specify what information should be provided. 
Area protection and management – Visits to Specially Protected Areas (permit information) 
Some participants suggested that information on ASPA permits should be shared ‘pre-season’ to facilitate consideration of possible cumulative impacts. Others suggested that certain elements of this information should be provided annually, eg. number of people entering an ASPA.
A new requirement was suggested – sharing of the post visit report forms required under ASPA management plans. It was however mentioned that some of these report forms would not be available in an ATCM language. 
It was suggested that to record the number of entries to an ASPA, ‘number of person entries in the permit period (or reporting period)’ should be reported, rather than number of individuals that entered.
It was suggested that information required on change or damage to an ASPA, ASMA or HSM could be better defined, and that this reporting could be on a case-by-case basis rather than through information exchange. 
Further discussion likely to be required.
Consider which information should be required pre-season. 
Consider proposal to exchange ASPA post-visit report forms.  
Consider options for exchange of information about ASPA entries on the basis of number of ‘person entries’ in a given period to ensure total number of entries to an ASPA are counted. 
Consider whether changes are required to information exchange requirements relating to change or damage to an ASPA, ASMA or HSM.
Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V
It was suggested that ‘year implemented’ be included.
It was suggested that this item be modified. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider clarifying how this item differs from the requirement to exchange information on ‘Compliance with the Protocol (notification of measures adopted during the past year)’ – drawing on Protocol Annex V Art. 10 (4).
Consider adding ‘year implemented’ as an item.
Other information

Item or Category
ICG discussion
Discussion outcome 
Possible next steps
Relevant national legislation 
Some participants expressed support for this item of information to be ‘permanent’ and not updated annually. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider whether this item should be ‘permanent’ only. 
Consider clarifying wording of requirement to distinguish from environmental information exchange item ‘Compliance with the Protocol (notification of measures adopted during the past year)’.
Relevant national legislation - contact information 
Some participants noted that an appropriate contact point could be an organisation and position, rather than an individual. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Modify requirement to allow Parties to nominate contact points by position rather than individuals. 
Activities undertaken in case of emergencies
Participants suggested that COMNAP is an appropriate forum for sharing this information
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Request Secretariat for information about what information of this nature has been shared in the past. 
Consider whether sharing this information within COMNAP is sufficient. 
Inspection reports
It was suggested that this information should be maintained only in the inspections database.
It was suggested that it should be possible to upload inspection reports.
Possibly no changes.
Noting that the Secretariat has recently implemented the list of inspections as a searchable database, consider whether there is a need for any changes. 
Seek Secretariat advice on whether Parties should upload inspection reports directly, or whether provision to the Secretariat for inclusion in the database is sufficient. 

Scientific information

Item or Category
ICG issues raised
Discussion outcome 
Possible next steps
Automatic recording stations
It was suggested that a drop-down list for ‘parameters recorded’ might be useful. 
Possibly no changes.
Secretariat could be requested to develop a drop-down list as part of the EIES tool, with no change to the information exchange requirement.
Note related discussion of ‘research rockets’ in operational information.
Forward plans
Participants noted that this requirement was not clear, and that no guidance as to what is expected is available. 
The question as to whether this information relates to science strategies, or the work of individual science groups was raised. 
The relationship / potential repetition with ‘science programs in previous year’ was noted. 
Participants noted that not all Parties have specific science forward plans. 
It was suggested such information could be ‘optional’. 
Providing links to national lists of scientific programs and projects was suggested. 
Participants suggested that SCAR could be a good repository for such information. 
Further discussion likely to be required.
Noting that the requirement derives from Treaty Article III 1 (a) which states ‘information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations’, consider clarifying what information should be exchanged. 
Seek advice from the Secretariat regarding what Parties have exchanged in the past under this item. 
Noting the ICG discussion on the potential to exchange information on science activities ‘pre-season’, consider whether this item should be defined as information about planned broad programs rather than specific activities. 
Consider whether SCAR can assist Parties to meet the Article III 1 (a) obligation. 

Science activities in previous year
Some participants suggested that pre-season exchange of information on science activities could assist collaboration. 
It was alternatively noted that improved cooperation might require earlier notice than ‘pre-season’, and that information on science forward plans might be more suited to the medium term planning of cooperation. 
It was questioned whether the EIA process also provides this information.
SCAR was suggested as a good repository for information about science projects.  
Further discussion likely to be required.
Consider the proposal for pre-season exchange of information on science activities. 
Noting the ICG discussion on science ‘forward plans’, consider whether this item should be defined as information about specific activities. 
Consider the role of SCAR as a forum for exchanging information on scientific activities. 


Science activities in previous year – ‘discipline’
It was suggested that entries under ‘scientific discipline’ could be guided or confined using selection options (eg. a drop down menu)
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Give consideration to whether a suitable classification of disciplines exists, and whether it would be restricted, or whether users could nominate new disciplines.
Consider seeking guidance from SCAR on appropriate categories.  
Suggestion that some ‘optional’ items be ‘required’
It was suggested that information should be changed from ‘optional’ to ‘required’ for the following items under science activities in the previous year:
    • Project name/number
    • Discipline
    • Main activity/remarks
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider proposal.
Operational information – national expeditions
Item or Category
ICG discussion
Discussion outcome 
Possible next steps
Operational: national expeditions - Stations
It was suggested that clarity is required around the requirement to provide information on ‘stations’. 
Participants commented that much of this information is also maintained by COMNAP. 
Participants made comments on whether the information should be placed in the ‘permanent’ category for some items where currently information is required pre-season and annually. 
It was suggested that a category of ‘scientific activities’ be added to the ‘stations’ and ‘vessels’ categories.
Further discussion likely to be required
Consider whether COMNAP and its membership can assist the Parties in meeting their obligations under Treaty Article VII 5 (b) to exchange information about stations. 
Note the Secretariat has provided advice on the technical and data access issues associated with data-sharing with COMNAP.
Consider re-naming this category ‘facilities’, to include ‘wintering stations’, ‘summer-only stations’, ‘field camp’, ‘refuge’ etc. and creating a category of ‘field activities’ (see below).
Consider whether for some items of information the ‘annual’ and ‘pre-season’ requirement to exchange can be dropped. For some facilities, information changes from year to year (for example, the planned period of operation of a summer station).
Note that the term ‘permanent’ in the discussion of information exchange relates to information which is expected to remain static for some time – not to whether a facility is permanent or temporary. 
Operational: national expeditions - traverses
A new category of information was proposed for exchanging information about ‘traverses’
It was suggested that fuel depots should be included as an item of information. 
Further discussion likely to be required
Appendix 4 of the final report of ATCM XXIV currently requires the exchange of information on ‘traverses’.
Consider proposal to create new category for things other than facilities, possibly at the same level as ‘stations’, ‘vessels’, and ‘aircraft’.
As an ‘other’ category already exists, this change may simply be one of presentation.
Operational: national expeditions - vessels
It was questioned whether information should be exchanged about docking facilities / port facilities
Further discussion likely to be required
Consideration could be given to including such facilities as an item under a ‘facilities’ category (or ‘stations’ category)
Operational: national expeditions - vessels
It was proposed that ‘crew (Max)’ and ‘passengers (Max)’ be categorised as ‘required’ items
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider the proposal. 
Operational: national expeditions - aircraft
It was questioned whether air facilities should be reported
Further discussion likely to be required
Consideration could be given to including such facilities as an item under a ‘facilities’ category (or ‘stations’ category)
Operational: national expeditions - aircraft
It was suggested that data entry could be facilitated by presenting three categories – intercontinental flights, intracontinental flights, and local helicopter flights. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Discuss proposal in context of the functioning of the electronic information exchange system.
Number (of each aircraft type)
It was questioned if this was a registration number.
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider clarifying the description. Consider also clarifying what is meant by ‘type’. It seems likely that ‘type’ should be understood to mean the model of aircraft, and ‘number (of each aircraft type)’ is how many of that model the national program operates.
Research rockets
Participants questioned whether it remained useful to exchange detailed information on research rockets. 
It was suggested that a new item of information exchange on UAVs might be considered. 
Participants suggested that information on research rockets could be incorporated under ‘scientific information. An alternative view was that the information is useful for air safety and should remain as ‘operational’ information, with the addition of items on other unmanned aerial systems such as balloons and UAVs.
Further discussion likely to be required
Seek COMNAP input on whether exchange of information on research rockets, via information exchange, is suitable for air safety purposes. 
Consider proposals for exchanging information on research rockets under ‘scientific information’.
Consider proposals for inclusion of additional items on UAVs as part of discussion arising from COMNAP and SCAR advice on UAVs. 

Aircraft landing facilities
Participants noted that COMNAP (through its Antarctic Flight Information Manual) was designated as the authority for this information via Resolution 1 (2013) Air Safety in Antarctica. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider removing this item from the information exchange requirements, as Resolution 1 (2013) specifies that information of this nature should be provided through COMNAP.
Search and rescue information items – stations, vessels, and aircraft
Participants noted that it is not clear what information should be exchanged or what reporting format is contemplated. 
Some participants suggested that the information should be ‘required’ rather than ‘optional’.
Participants noted that COMNAP has much of this information, and that COMNAP could be best placed as a repository, as well as with reference to Rescue Coordination Centres. 
Potential for duplication/redundancy with COMNAP information was noted.
It was suggested that the information should be in the ‘permanent’ category.  
Further discussion likely to be required
Consider whether COMNAP and its membership is best placed to exchange and manage information about search and rescue capabilities.
Consider whether using this duplicates COMNAP work or might result in conflicting or confusing information. 
If retained, define what information should be exchanged.

Communications facilities
Participants noted that this information is currently curated by COMNAP.
It was suggested that this information item could be removed from the Information Exchange requirements. 
It was noted that the designation of a primary air information station (as outlined in Resolution 1 (2013) included requirements for communications capabilities. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider removing from the information exchange requirements.

Operational information – non-Governmental expeditions

Item or Category
ICG discussion
Discussion outcome 
Possible next steps
Non-Governmental expeditions
It was suggested that this information should be exchanged continuously. 
It was suggested that details of Measure 4 implementation would be beneficial. 
It was noted that consideration needs to be given to how best to exchange information so that comparative data can be analysed. 
Further discussion likely to be required
The Secretariat provided advice to the ICG that continuous provision of information can be accommodated. 
Consider proposal for continuous exchange, including whether final deadlines need to be retained or new guidance specified eg. ‘within xx days of an authorisation being issued’. 
Details of Measure 4 (2004) implementation might be provided as ‘Relevant national legislation’ in the ‘other’ category.
Non-Governmental expeditions
Participants proposed to create a new category for non-Governmental aircraft activities. 
Further discussion likely to be required
Consider the proposal and specify what items of information should be exchanged. 
Vessel-based operations
It was suggested that a new item of information ‘purpose of activity’ be included.
It was suggested that all post visit reports should be added. 
The question of how to provide information on expeditions combining vessel activity along with multi-day land based activity was raised. 

Further discussion likely to be required
Discuss proposal for including ‘purpose of activity’.
Discuss proposal for adding post visit reports, noting that many elements of these reports are included in existing items of information currently exchanged and only some additional items may be required. 
Consider how to provide information on expeditions involving both vessel and land based components, including seeking Secretariat advice on whether the elements can be reported under the existing items, with the addition of a link or cross-reference between them. 
Vessel-based operations - Name of operator
It was suggested that it would be useful to exchange information on both the operator and the head of expedition, in cases where they are different.
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider the proposal for this new item of information.
Vessel-based operations -Location
It was suggested that it should be possible to provide information on several locations, and provide comment on changes to a voyage (early or late arrival, rerouting)
Further discussion likely to be required
Discuss proposal in the context of the functioning of the electronic information exchange system.
Vessel-based operations - Date
A proposal was made to include duration of landing to allow for multiple days at the same site, and multiple sites visited on the same day. 
Further discussion likely to be required
Discuss proposal in the context of the functioning of the electronic information exchange system.
Vessel-based operations - Activity
It was suggested that Parties should be able to add activities to the list as data is entered. 
It was suggested that it should be possible to accommodate several activities at the same time.
Further discussion likely to be required
Consider whether the list of activities should be open for users to add new activity types. 
Discuss how to accommodate entry of several activities at the same time, in the context of the functioning of the electronic information exchange system. 
Vessel-based operations - Includes landing (yes/no)
It was proposed that this information be ‘required’ 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider including this in the requirements. 
Vessel-based operations - Number of visitors (per landing site) 
A suggestion was made that in addition to the number of visitors per landing, the total number of passengers should be recorded, in the case of large cruise vessels. 
Further discussion likely to be required
Consider the proposal – the number of visitors aboard a vessel is not exchanged (the maximum number of passengers the vessel can carry is exchanged).
Vessel-based operations – 
Crew (max) 
Passengers (max)
Contact address 
Email address
Website address
Participants suggested that these items should be ‘required’
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider including these in the requirements.
Land-based operations – type of activity / adventure
The addition of ‘media activity’ and ‘art activity’ to the list of activities was suggested
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider whether the list of activities should be open for users to add new activity types. 

Land-based operations -  Locations
It was suggested that redundant location names should be deleted from the database
Further discussion likely to be required
Discuss proposal in the context of the functioning of the electronic information exchange system.
Land-based operations - Number of visitors
The ‘nationality of participants’ was suggested as an additional item of information 
Further discussion likely to be required
Discuss proposal for this new item of information.
Land-based operations - Name of operator 
It was suggested that this should be ‘required’
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider including this in the requirements.
Denial of authorisations
It was proposed to add the ‘name of authority’
The option of providing information on a land-based operation (in addition to a vessel) was requested. 
Minor changes might obtain general support.
Consider proposals. 

Attachment 2
Additional points raised by participants
Some additional issues of importance were raised by participants, some of which relate to the operation and technical features of the electronic information exchange system (EIES), and others of a more general nature. To assist ICG participants, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat provided advice on some of these issues, which was made available via the online forum by the Convener. A summary of the additional issues raised is below.
Objectives of information exchange
    • It is important to work towards ensuring that we focus on sharing information that in fact is necessary to facilitate the overarching aim of the Antarctic Treaty system, cooperation therein and for the coordination of activities in the region.
    • The EIES system is effective to the degree in which it is trusted as a source of up to date, reliable and timely information. The ability of Parties to make reliable decisions based on its contents; for that information to appropriately influence their decisions; and to be able to straightforwardly input and access information, is key. 
    • Focusing improvements on the scientific, environmental and protected area information areas, is likely to deliver the most significant improvement. 
    • To make the EIES as useful as possible – Parties would need to better define how data is intended to be used, and then arrange to collect the correct data for those uses. To be most useful, and to conduct the type of analyses mentioned by a number of Parties, data would also need to be entered in a common format.
Information to be exchanged:
    • Retain information on permits to enter ASPAs and EIAs in the current databases only, without duplicating it in the reports. (Convener’s note: the Secretariat advises that the information is not duplicated – while different interfaces exist, it is stored in only one database)
    • Permanent information on stations, ships and aircraft should not be repeated in the annual and preseason reports. (Convener’s note: Secretariat comments on ‘EIES related issues’ may be of value in relation to this issue) 
    • Improving the exchange of scientific information could be in the pre-season report, or even earlier. It would be useful to implement a system which allow us to identify similar programs/ projects in the different Antarctic regions (v.gr: by scrolling menus), in order to enhance international cooperation. 
    • For urgent or critical situations it is likely that the COMNAP database will usually be the preferred source. There is a case for all the additional information on national Antarctic programme infrastructure, vessels and logistical capacity which goes beyond that which is mandated by the Treaty (and so is out of the scope of this review) to be removed from the information exchange requirements. Alternatively, that there would be value in a smoother system for data to be directly brought across from COMNAP systems and other databases to the EIES, without the need for any additional data entry. (Convener’s note: Secretariat comments on ‘EIES related issues’ may be of value in relation to this issue, including comments on the technical and data access issues associated with data-sharing with COMNAP.)
    • With regard to non-governmental activities, the data entry burden is disproportionate to the data’s utility, especially as all NGO data entered by governments duplicates data possessed by IAATO. A discussion about how to avoid such a duplication of effort could be productive. 
Timing of information exchange:
    • Allow continuous exchange for all pieces of information relating to the authorizations granted by competent authorities (Operations / Operational: non-governmental expeditions) so that competent authorities can follow the ongoing requests of activities that have been filed and know in real time whether it has been authorized or not.
    • The current requirement to provide information to a pre-season deadline, on where NAPs are operating in relation to protected areas, does not reflect planning which will have taken place many months or years before and reduces its usefulness in planning and impact terms.
    • We note that there are differences in time scale of research plan/program/project and that not all Parties have the same planning procedure. Specific science programs/projects to be carried out coming season are better presented in “Pre-Season” rather than “Annual” domain for better cooperation. It is better also to have guidance/consensus for reporting plan/program/project.
Databases / relating information:
    • Work with COMNAP to ensure that the connectivity between our respective databases is optimal in order to share common data easily (and avoid the need for double manual inputs). (Convener’s note: Secretariat comments on ‘EIES related issues’ may be of value in relation to this issue) 
    • Different categories of EIES should be stronger linked with each other in case that they have a common context, e.g. the activity of running a station should be linked with its IEE/CEE and with the corresponding inspection report (if existing). 
Information interface:
    • It is essential to incorporate search engines for ASPA and EIA data.
    • Suggest having EIA and EIES webpages, into a single ‘entrance’ or allow a better connectivity between both to navigate easily from one to another. (Convener’s note: Secretariat comments on ‘EIES related issues’ may be of value in relation to this issue)
    • Improve the general design of the EIES to make it more “user-friendly” and accessible (eg: in the main scrolling bar: proposal to have the possibility to return to previous pages; possibility to switch from the EIES to the EIA websites etc).
    • Keep the login session open for several hours, even if not working directly on this page.
    • EIES should be transferred into a proper information database which allows to look for and easily find specific information about certain past or future activities, e.g. the voyage of a specific ship or the name and date of a certain scientific project. (Convener’s note: Secretariat comments on ‘EIES related issues’ may be of value in relation to this issue)

