





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 153 
Eastern Dallmann Bay










Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay 
Working Paper submitted by the United States 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the United States has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan.
Background
Eastern Dallmann Bay was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 36 through Recommendation XVI-3 (1991) after a proposal by the United States of America. The date of expiry of SSSI No. 36 was extended by Measure 3 (2001); the site was renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay; revised management plans were adopted by Measure 2 (2003) and by Measure 11 (2009). The Area is approved under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) in accordance with Decision 9 (2005).
The primary reason for designation of the Area is that it represents one of only two known sites in the vicinity of Palmer Station that is suitable for bottom trawling for fish and other benthic organisms for scientific purposes and the United States has on-going and planned scientific research in the Area. The grounds for designation of the Area remain valid. A revised management plan for ASPA No. 153 is attached.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA No. 153
Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
Introduction: Updated to refer to classifications under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR), although since these are based on terrestrial criteria they are of less relevance to marine areas.
Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
Section 3 Management Activities: Consistent with Article 9.2 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, a new management activity was added noting that National Programs shall ensure the boundaries of the Area and the restrictions that apply within are marked on relevant maps and charts for which they are responsible. The purpose of the activity is to ensure that, to the maximum extent practicable, information on the presence of the protected area is available to all those operating vessels and aircraft in the vicinity. 
Section 5 Maps: The layout and symbology were improved. Bathymetry was updated with data from the International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO) v.1 (2013). Important Bird Areas near the boundary of the Area are identified.
Section 6(i) Description of the Area: Updated to include recent scientific literature. References that were not cited in the Management Plan were removed. An error in the size of the Area that appeared in the former Management Plan has been corrected (the size of the Area is 610 km2), although the boundaries have not been changed.
Section 7 Permit conditions: Revisions were made to the text and sub-sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011).
Section 8 Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.
Recommendation 
The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay. 

ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest SSI No. 36 through Recommendation XVI-3 (1991)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-3 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003), Measure 11 (2009)
Current management plan:
Measure 11 (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Measure 3 (2001)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay off Brabant Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998): Management plan to be sent to CCAMLR for approval; superceded by Decision 9 (2005) setting criteria for submission of plans with a marine component to CCAMLR.
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, changes to graphics.

(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Updates to description of the Area from recent scientific publications. Revision based on guidance in Resolution 2 (2011).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
N/A. The EDA classification is based on terrestrial criteria, and therefore has limited applicability in the marine environment.

10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main ACBR should be noted here). 
N/A. The ACBR classification is based on terrestrial criteria, and therefore has limited applicability in the marine environment.


