





On the problems of approval of Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

English translation provided by the author









On the problems of approval of Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Ten years ago in Stockholm at XXVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Measure 1 Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol) was adopted. In accordance with the main provisions of this document, national operators providing governmental and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic, shall ensure its activity or obtain a bank guarantee in case of search, emergency-rescue and nature protection measures to eliminate adverse implications of their environmental impact in the Antarctic. The governments of the states undertaking activity in this region via their national operators shall envisage measures of administrative and/or criminal punishment for infringement of the main provisions of the aforementioned Annex VI in their legislature or in other normative-legal acts. From information submitted by the USA – country-depositary of the Antarctic Treaty as of March 2015, the following governments have fulfilled the procedures for approval of Measure 1 of the XXVIII ATCM: Sweden (08.06.2006), Peru (10.07.2007), Spain (17.12.2008), Poland (15.01.2009), Finland (14.12.2010), Great Britain (18.04.2013), Norway (24.05.2013), New Zealand (31.05.2013) and Australia (15.05.2014). Therefore, for 10 years, only nine countries of 29 Consultative Parties to the Treaty fulfilled the procedure of adoption. Let us remind that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted on 4 October 1991 became effective already at the beginning of 1998, i.e., less than for seven years. Moreover, the Delegation of Bulgaria at the XXI ATCM in Christchurch (New Zealand) in 1997 was refused in the status of Consultative Party to the Treaty, as the Government of this country has not by that time carried out the procedure of approval of the Madrid protocol. From the formal viewpoint, allocation of the Consultative Party status did not commit the states claiming for such a status to undergo first the procedure of approval of this international law act. Some Delegations of the Consultative Parties and observers at the XXI ATCM considered however, that admission of Bulgaria to the Consultative Parties to the Treaty would delay coming into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as this event could take place only after approval of the Protocol by all Consultative Parties. Thus, the Government of Bulgaria approved the Protocol during the period between the XXI and XXII ATCM and at the XXII ATCM in Tromso in 1998, it came into force and at the same time, Bulgaria was assigned the Consultative Party status. From the end of 1991 to the beginning of 1998, some governmental delegations-participants to the ATCM and especially representatives of international public nature protection organizations, participating in the work of ATCM as observers, pursued a very intensive policy of influencing the governmental structure of Consultative Parties, responsible for activity in the Antarctic, concerning the need for urgent adoption of this important act of the international law. Regretfully no such activity is observed relative to Measure 1 of the XXVIII ATCM.
In our opinion, the main cause of the delay in arranging the procedures of approval of Annex VI of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is the need to introduce additions and/or amendments into the effective national legislation of the Consultative Parties. On the one hand, such decision has sometimes an exclusively political character when the government of the country officially approves the international law act and only then based on the existing approval act, introduces changes into its legislation. However, in the overwhelming majority of cases, the governments of the states, first make a decision about a possible change of their national law and then undergo quite a long procedure of its preparation, agreement, consideration and adoption of new legislative acts or amendments in the effective legislature in the parliaments of their states. 
In discussions of the text of Annex VI of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which began at the XVII ATCM in Venice in 1992, the Delegation of the Russian Federation repeatedly pointed to this problem, which will inevitably influence the period of coming into force of Annex VI. Moreover, the Russian Delegation stressed that numerous problems of regulation of non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area are in many aspects related to a lack of national procedures, regulating the order of actions of their citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic. As is known, an “authorizing” or a “notifying” order exists in the Antarctic community for performing activity in the Antarctic that is adopted by most of the Consultative Parties to the Treaty. At the same time, in spite of requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, formulated in Article 1, para.1 of Annex I of the Protocol: “The environmental impacts of proposed activities referred to in Article 8 of the Protocol shall, before their commencement, be considered in accordance with appropriate national procedures”. Unfortunately, such national procedures have not yet been elaborated by some Consultative Parties, which performed the adoption procedure of the Protocol many years ago. This situation makes it possible for some non-governmental expeditions to organize their activity in the Antarctic from the territory of such states resulting in impossibility of performing monitoring and regulation of non-governmental activity.
The Russian Federation in the end of 2005 after the end of the work of the XXVIII ATCM considered the requests of some bodies of the federal executive power about the need to develop a special federal law on regulation of activity in the Antarctic. In 2006, a concept of the draft federal law “On regulation of activity of the Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic” was developed, and in the beginning of 2008, the work on preparation of its text was finished. Approval of the law and its consideration in the legislative power branches of the Russian Federation took quite a long time and the aforementioned Federal Law No. 50-FZ was adopted only on 5 June 2012.
On 31 July 2012, the Government of the Russian Federation has developed a Plan of preparation of draft normative acts required for implementation of the Federal Law of 5 June 2012 “On regulation of activity of Russian citizens and Russian legal entities in the Antarctic”. It consisted of 11 paragraphs pursuant to which it was proposed to elaborate some subordinate acts (decisions, orders of the Government of the Russian Federation and ministerial normative-legislative acts) on introduction into practice of the Federal Law of 5 June 2012 No. 50-FZ. This work was completed in the end of 2014, and now the Russian Federation has a possibility to fulfill the procedure of approval of Annex VI “Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Simultaneously, the Russian Federation expresses its concern over the progress of coming into force of this Annex VI in the near future. In this regard, we propose to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to perform monitoring of the status of the procedure of approval of Annex VI by all Consultative Parties, which have not yet finished this process, receive from them the official information on the reasons of the delay of this process and the possible dates of adoption. It would be of interest to learn about the outcomes of such monitoring at the session of the XXXIX ATCM in Chile in 2016.

