





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group to promote broader Antarctic cooperation









Report of the Intersessional Contact Group to Promote Broader Antarctic Cooperation

Working Paper submitted by Chile


Background

	As agreed in ATCM XXXVII (Brasilia 2014) Chile opened in August an Intersessional Contact Group in order to facilitate discussions among Parties on ways to promote broader Antarctic cooperation. The ICG focused on two main issues:

    a) Ways to enhance effective cooperation among countries in order to work towards an effective participation of all Parties in ATCM.

    b) The working methods of the ATCM, including, inter alia, the proliferation of working groups during meetings and the problems that may arise for small delegations; the election of Working Group Chairs and the duration of their mandate; and the increasing amount of Intersessional Contact Groups. 
	This Discussion paper will focus on the issue of the working methods of the ATCM.

Issues and proposals

1.- 	Introducing greater flexibility into the organisation of ATCM by modifying the current working group structure and allocating much of each meeting’s agenda to a plenary

	The UK stressed the need for introducing greater flexibility into the organisation of the ATCM by modifying the current working group structure and reviewing the current agenda of the ATCM. The UK suggests that in order to hold targeted discussions  Parties could agree beforehand, at the preceding ATCM, on which issues they may wish to work on the following session, identifying topics that require more time for discussion and leaving for the Plenary other issues. This would provide adequate time and meeting resources to proceed as Parties so wish. As examples the UK mentioned the Special Working Group on Search and Rescue, held in 2012, and what may happen with the Competent Authorities discussions in 2015, led by Norway.

	The USA supported the UK suggestions, indicating that Parties would have a chance to spur active participation among a greater number of delegations, creating space for leadership roles for Parties that might otherwise have hesitated to step forward. This would be of great benefit to smaller delegations that would be confronted less often with a need to decide where to focus, and would also ensure coordination is made for an efficient Plenary discussion.

	In addition to supporting the UK proposal, the USA suggested that the Host Government could lead consultations among Parties - after the submission deadline – to ensure coordination is made for an efficient plenary discussion.

	New Zealand added that a review of the ATCM’s priorities and a modification of its agenda to ensure ATCM is addressing contemporary matters and challenges would then allow the appropriate structure and duration of the meetings, and the need for any working groups, workshops, meetings of experts etc. to be determined. 

	New Zealand suggested that Parties would also need to consider more fully the methodology for allocating time to specific agenda items to better enable the participation of experts and to ensure that items further down the agenda did not run out of time.

	Australia noted that its approach to the mandates and the number of ATCM working groups should always remain flexible and open to consideration and discussion.

	With regards to the suggestion that other agenda items be allocated to the plenary, Australia indicated that there may be certain disadvantages with this approach. Due to the broadness and diversity of the ATCM agenda, dividing work among separate working groups could facilitate Parties’ abilities to get through the agenda during the time allocated. Australia also acknowledged the important leadership role that Working Group Chairs play in discussions, including through their familiarity with the agenda and work of the WG they lead. Australia suggests that allocating the bulk of the ATCM’s agenda would place a heavy burden on the plenary chair, which will necessarily only chair a single ATCM. Argentina agreed with Australia’s comments.

The way forward:

	There seems to be support for reviewing the current agenda of the ATCM to determine if it addresses correctly contemporary priorities and challenges. There are also converging opinions that the number of working groups, as well as their mandate, should remain flexible and be open to discussion on a regular basis. They should focus on the priorities identified by Parties in the Multi Year Strategic Workplan and that result in the presentation of both working and information papers. 

	A more focused discussion on previously agreed upon issues by working groups should be encouraged, in particular given time constraints. Special working groups on specific issues could be considered on a regular basis, though Parties are always free to bring issues of their interest to the attention of other Parties.

	Although not mentioned in the ICG discussions Heads of Delegations may wish to ratify at the beginning of each ATCM the time allocation between working groups to assure sufficient time for the presentation of working papers and to hold meaningful discussions on items of interest.
	 
	Parties could consider initiating discussions on the current agenda of the ATCM in Sofia, Bulgaria, keeping in mind it should remain flexible in nature. Parties could also consider discussing and identifying specific items/issues at ATCM XXXVIII that would require in-depth discussion in a working group setting. These working groups could be created/continued at the next ATCM. 

	No amendments to the Rules of Procedure are required due to the ability of the Meeting to establish working groups as required dealing with specific agenda items.


2.- 	The establishment of a Standing Working Group to handle administrative /institutional matters such as secretariat budget/work plan

	Aware that the ATCM needs to focus on administrative and institutional issues every year, the UK suggested that the ATCM could benefit from a standing committee that covers some of the work traditionally covered by the Legal and Institutional WG.

	Specifically the UK suggested identifying issues that must be considered on an annual basis (e.g. Secretariat budget/work plan) and establish (a) permanent working group(s) for these issues and appoint of (a) chair(s) in an open and transparent election process and on a fixed term basis.

	The USA coincided with this proposal and recalled the Standing Committee on Financial and Administrative Issues (SCAF) within the CCAMLR context. Norway also supported the establishment of a permanent Working Group on financial and administrative matters.




The way forward:

	No opposition was expressed during initial ICG discussions regarding the establishment of a permanent working group on financial and administrative issues.

	Parties could consider at ATCM XXXVIII in Bulgaria the establishment of such a permanent working group.


3.- 	The serving period of Working Group Chairs

	The UK indicated that there is a need for exploring options for assuring a greater diversity among ATCM working group chairs and a more transparent and open process for their appointment. This view was echoed by New Zealand. Uruguay indicated that clear term limits for working group chairs should be established. This rule could lead to more Parties proposing experts to fill these positions for a reasonable timeframe.

	Uruguay favoured an amendment to the rules of procedure that would limit the terms of Chairs to four years, suggesting that Decision 2 (2011) Annex 1 could be revised to limit the term of chairs to such a period.

	Australia noted that mirroring Rule 15 of the CEP’s Rules of Procedure, chairs would be elected for two years and would be eligible for re-election only once, thus limiting their term to a maximum of four years.
	Argentina indicated its support for the suggestions by Australia and Uruguay to limit the serving period of Working Group Chairs. Argentina also stressed the importance of maintaining a geographical balance in the appointment of Chairs.

The way forward:

	There is a general view that chairs of working groups should be elected in an open and transparent manner. Moreover their term should be limited in time to allow for a wider participation by Parties.

	Although there are various ways of achieving this goal, the mechanism established in the CEP Rules of Procedure has worked well for the Committee and could be mirrored by the ATCM.

	Parties could envisage at ATCM XXXVIII revising its Rules of Procedure in such a manner as to elect working group chairs for an initial period of two years, with a one-time possibility of re-election. Thus working groups could benefit from the experience of a chair over a certain period of time (up to 4 years), yet at the same time there would be more mobility in these posts opening the possibility of having more Parties engaged in such positions.
	
	Two alternative proposals with draft changes to paragraph 11 of the Rules of Procedure are appended to this working paper and it is recommended that they be considered further by ATCM XXXVIII.


4.- 	The timing of working group Chair appointments

	Uruguay suggested that working group chairs could be elected at the preceding ATCM, so they would have adequate time to prepare their respective participation. This would require an amendment to the ATCM Rules of Procedure, Paragraph 11 that states that “The Chair(s) of the Working Group(s) will be appointed at the beginning of the Meeting or Committee Meeting”. 

	On the issue of the timing of the Working Group Chair(s) appointments Australia indicated that such a change would provide certainty about the WGs to be established for the following meeting and allow delegations contributing a Chair to determine the composition of its delegation accordingly.

The way forward:

	There are certainly advantages to the appointment of WG Chairs in advance as both Australia and Uruguay have expressed. This would require an amendment to the Rules of Procedure.
	
Two alternative proposals for draft changes to paragraph 11 of the Rules of Procedure are appended to this working paper and it is recommended that this be considered further by ATCM XXXVIII.


5.- 	Greater transparency in the appointment of the ATCM rapporteurs and the role of the relevant chairs in overseeing the report writing process

	The UK suggested exploring options to ensure more transparency in the appointment of rapporteurs in ATCM.

	The Antarctic Treaty secretariat has worked for some years with a pool of rapporteurs and editors – nationals of United States, South Africa, Uruguay, Australia, United Kingdom and New Zealand – that because of their experience working in past ATCM are familiar with language and concepts used by the meeting. The ATS has suggested in the past names of rapporteurs to the host country.

	The UK has indicated that it is important to retain expertise and understanding of the issues discussed at the ATCM, but there are also good practices in other organisations from which the ATCM could learn. A greater diversity of expert rapporteurs could bring some wider experience into the ATCM context.

	The appointment and the role of rapporteurs do not figure in the rules of procedure of the ATCM.

	The United States indicated that it is important that individual chairs take charge of the report writing process and to hold themselves responsible for the accuracy and quality of drafts.

	Uruguay suggested adopting a Decision establishing a more formal procedure to be implemented by host countries to ensure the transparent appointment of rapporteurs and raised the question regarding who should finance their hiring. Argentina expressed its wish to seek a more transparent way of appointing rapporteurs.

	Norway suggested that it may be beneficial for the ATCM to decide on a clearer framework for the expected structure and contents of the reports, giving the rapporteurs a clear starting point for their writing.

The way forward:

	There certainly needs to be a balance between experienced rapporteurs with in-depth knowledge of ATCM language and concepts and more diversity in the composition of the pool of rapporteurs. There also seems to be a general view that their appointment could be more transparent.

	The discussion in this ICG did not address separately the issue of editors, though their contribution is also crucial. 

	It may be useful to have an information paper from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat detailing current procedures for the appointment of rapporteurs for its consideration by Parties.

	This issue could be addressed by the Heads of Delegation meetings at ATCM XXXVIII, in particular the selection process of rapporteurs and editors, their financing and if a decision regulating this matter is required.
	

6.- 	On the establishment of Intersessional Contact Groups/e-working groups.

	The USA proposed limiting the establishment of ICGs to topics that are agreed at each meeting and where there are clear and fully agreed terms of reference in each case.

	Uruguay proposed the establishment of e-working groups, suggesting they should be regulated and their working methods should be more transparent. Uruguay also indicated that informal contact groups could also be useful in some cases.

	Uruguay indicated that working group chairs could also be responsible for coordinating intersessional groups. Argentina indicated that greater participation of WG Chairs in ICGs could be explored.

	Finally Uruguay suggested that that the ATCM could consider a Decision establishing these intersessional groups, with rules of procedure similar to Rule 9 of the CEP Rules of Procedure.

Argentina indicated that ICGs are a valuable mechanism that does not require budget expenditures or travel costs, also agreeing with the US that they should be established by the ATCM with clear terms of reference.

	It should be noted that the Rules of Procedure of the ATCM refer to “intersessional consultations” (46-47), but not to Intersessional Contact Groups or to the ATCM Discussion Forum.

The way forward:

	Intersessional Contact Groups have proved useful in the past in dealing with specific issues that require consultations among Parties and time that is not available during ATCM meetings. 

	Although an extremely useful tool it is not always widely used. Parties could explore ways in which greater participation could be both encouraged and facilitated.

	To be effective ICGs should only be created/maintained in as much as there is a general interest and need for intersessional consultations. Clear and agreed terms of reference should be required.

	
7.- 	Voluntary contributions by non-consultative Parties

	Uruguay indicated that Measure 1 (2003), article 4, establishes that the ATCM budget is funded exclusively by the contributions of Consultative Parties, although the measure also states that any contracting Party may make a voluntary contribution at any time. Uruguay also noted that the host country must at each ATCM contract services for all participants, including non-consultative Parties, Observers and invited experts.

	At present seven non-consultative parties are CEP members, with the right to present documents for translation as working papers and have access to all facilities and services at ATCMs. Uruguay suggests that Measure 1(2003) may not need to be revisited, but the ATCM could consider inviting non-consultative Parties to make voluntary contributions, in particular those who are CEP Members. It is also suggested that a referential amount could be established for non-consultative Parties, though remaining voluntary in nature.



The way forward:

	There was not enough discussion of this issue to identify a way forward. Heads of Delegations may wish to address this issue at ATCM XXVIII in Bulgaria.


8.-	Timing of ATCM and CEP Meetings

Norway raised the question of the timing of the CEP and ATCM meetings, indicating that it could be worth considering if the CEP meetings would be better served being arranged without parallel sessions to the ATCM. Norway suggested that CEP meetings could take place the week before the ATCM meetings, thus allowing for the advice from the CEP to inform discussions at the ATCM in a better manner than at present. 

Norway also indicated that it may also be worth considering if the ATCM should be a bi-annual occurrence. 

The way forward:

	Parties may wish to discuss these proposals as they were brought to the ICG at a late date and were not discussed intersessionaly. Organising the CEP meeting before the ATCM could place further financial burden on the Host Country.	



Recommendations:

It is recommended that the ATCM:

    a) Consider the report of the ICG regarding the working methods of the ATCM.
    b) Discuss the proposals to move forward on the issues identified by Parties during the ICG discussions.
    c) Consider the draft proposals to modify paragraph 11 of the Rules of Procedure contained in attachment 1 of this paper.






















Attachment 1
	
Draft proposals to modify paragraph 11 of the Rules of Procedure




Proposal A:


11.  Working Groups may be established by the Meeting, or its committees to deal with various agenda items.  The Meeting will determine the provisional arrangements for Working Groups at the end of each Consultative Meeting, when it approves the preliminary agenda for the subsequent Meeting (under paragraph 36).  These provisional arrangements will include a) the appointment of Working Group Chair(s); and b) the allocation of provisional agenda items to each Working Group.  Where the Meeting decides that a Working Group should be continued for more than one year, the Chair(s) of those Working Group(s) invited to serve for a period of two consecutive Meetings in the first instance. Working Group Chairs may subsequently be invited to serve for one further additional two-year term, but will not serve for more than four consecutive years in the same Working Group.


Proposal B:


11. Working Groups may be established by the Meeting, or its committees to deal with various agenda items. The Meeting will review its Working Groups, on an annual basis, when discussing and approving the preliminary agenda for the next Meeting. The Meeting will appoint the Chair(s) of the Working Group(s). The Chair(s) shall be appointed for a period of two years. The Chair(s) may be appointed for a period of less than two years in circumstances where the Meeting decides that a Working Group will be established for a single Meeting or in other circumstances the Meeting deems appropriate. Chair(s) shall not be reappointed for more than one additional term, any additional term will be for a maximum period of two years. The Chair(s) shall be appointed at the Meeting preceding the Meeting at which they will commence their functions.



