





Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011)









Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011)

A Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, France and New Zealand
Summary
Acknowledging: (i) the recommendation within Resolution 6 (2011) that Parties ‘encourage the Committee for Environmental Protection to continue to develop the Non-native Species Manual’; (ii) the CEP Five Year Work Plan that includes an action to review the Non-native Species Manual in 2015; and (iii) recent scientific and practical environmental management developments regarding non-native species issues, the United Kingdom, France and New Zealand recommend that the CEP considers the establishment of an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to revise and update the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011).
Background
The introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic Treaty area, including the movement of species between locations in the region, presents a serious risk to biodiversity and to the intrinsic values of Antarctica (for further details see Newman et al., 2014).  
Since the establishment of the CEP in 1998, several aspects of the risks associated with non-native species have been discussed (ATCM XXXII SP11).  At ATCM XXIX, the Committee agreed that ‘the issue of non-native species should be given the highest priority consistent with the high environmental standards set out in the Protocol’ (CEP IX Final Report, para. 129). It also agreed that the CEP should take the lead on this issue, and strongly supported several recommendations regarding future priority actions, including the need to ‘Develop practical guidelines / standards / norms for all Antarctic operators’. These agreements were reflected in the CEP Five Year Work Plan adopted at CEP XI (Final Report, Appendix 1), which rated ‘Introduction of non-native species’ as a priority 1 issue.
The 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management emphasised the importance of preventing introductions, acknowledged that the greatest effort should be placed on preventing the introduction of non-native species (Para. 111, Co-chair’s report), and recommended that:
    • The CEP consider using established methods of identifying a) Antarctic environments at high risk from establishment by non-natives and b) non-native species that present a high risk of establishment in Antarctica (Recommendation 22).
    • Parties be encouraged to comprehensively and consistently implement management measures to respond to the environmental implications of climate change, particularly measures to avoid introduction and translocation of non-native species, and to report on their effectiveness (Recommendation 23). 
The CEP Non-native Species Manual
In April 2006 New Zealand hosted a workshop on ‘Non-native Species in the Antarctic’ (ATCM XXIX WP13). Workshop recommendation No. 6 was that ‘A set of comprehensive and standardised guidance and / or procedures should be developed, aimed at all operators in the Antarctic, based on a ‘Prevention, Surveillance, Response’ approach’.  
In 2009, Australia, France and New Zealand  presented a work programme for CEP action on non-native species based on the recommendations resulting from the 2006 workshop on ‘Non-native species in the Antarctic’ (ATCM XXXII WP5).  To facilitate progress on workshop recommendation No. 6, the working paper included Attachment B ‘Proposed Terms of Reference for ICG ‘Guidance on non-native species’, including that the ICG would:
    1) Develop a suggested overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address non-native species concerns.
    2) Develop a suggested set of generally applicable measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica.
    3) Identify particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance.
    4) Report to CEP XIII on progress with the above.
The CEP agreed to the establishment of an ICG, convened initially by France, in order to discuss the overall objectives and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species, and to develop a suggested set of generally applicable measures to prevent or minimise the risk of the introduction of non-native species (including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica) (see ATCM XXXIII WP 9). The ICG continued to work during a second intersession period, convened by New Zealand (see ATCM XXXIV WP34), and the CEP Non-native Species Manual (available at http://www.ats.aq/documents/atcm34/ww/atcm34_ww004_e.pdf) was formally endorsed by the ATCM through Resolution 6 (2011).  
In Resolution 6 (2011), the ATCM endorsed the CEP’s advice that it ‘will continue to develop and refine the Manual to reflect improvements in the understanding of non-native species risks and in best practice measures for prevention, surveillance and response’.  Furthermore, through Resolution 6 the ATCM representatives recommended that Parties: 
    • ‘disseminate and encourage, as appropriate, the use of the Non-Native Species Manual annexed to this Resolution; and
    • encourage the Committee for Environmental Protection to continue to develop the Non-native Species Manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs on scientific and practical matters, respectively.’
Recent developments
In the five years since the preparatory work for the CEP Non-native Species Manual commenced:
    • a growing body of scientific work on non-native species has developed (including through the work of the IPY ‘Aliens in Antarctica’ project) (see Attachment A to this Working Paper);
    • additional work has been undertaken by the Committee on non-native species issues (see Attachment B to this Working Paper);
    • the experience of Parties and IAATO and in the development of practical methods for addressing non-native species issues has increased; and 
    • non-native species issues have featured in recent ICGs on updating Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines and the development of a draft Climate Change Response Work Plan.
Within this context, and acknowledging the recommendations of Resolution 6 (2011) and the final recommendation in ATCMXXXIV WP 34 that the CEP ‘Undertakes a review of the Manual... ...in 4-5 years’ and the CEP Five Year Work Plan that includes an action to review the Manual in 2015, it seems timely that consideration be given by the CEP to the revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011). 
Recommendation
The United Kingdom, France and New Zealand recommend that the CEP considers the establishment of an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to revise and update the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011) (see the proposed Terms of Reference).
Supporting documentation
Newman, J., Coetzee, B. W. T., Chown, S. L., Terauds, A., and McIvor, E.  (2014). The introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic.  Antarctic Environments Portal Information Summary Version 1.0. Available at: http://environments.aq/information-summaries/the-introduction-of-non-native-species-to-antarctica
Proposed Terms of Reference for the ICG ‘Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual’
With reference to the recommendation within Resolution 6 (2011) that Parties ‘encourage the Committee for Environmental Protection to continue to develop the Non-native Species Manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs on scientific and practical matters, respectively’, and recognising recent scientific and practical environmental management developments regarding non-native species issues, the ICG will:

    1) Review and/or reconfirm the ‘Overall Objectives’ and ‘Key Guiding Principles’ for Parties actions to address non-native species, contained within the CEP Non-native Species Manual
    2) Revise, and supplement with new information, the section of the Manual concerning ‘Guidelines and resources to support prevention of the introduction of non-native species including the transfer of species between sites in the Antarctic’
    3) Review and revise the Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’ to identify particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance
    4) Report to CEP XIX on progress with the above.

Convenor: To be advised


