





Application of the RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) Conservation Planning Tool to James Ross Island








Application of the RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) Conservation Planning Tool to James Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic
Summary
Following the initial results of an Antarctic trial of WWF’s conservation planning tool RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) presented at ATCM XXXVII, the Committee noted that resilience should be a key factor in the designation, management and review of protected areas; recognised RACER as one possible tool to determine key features important for conferring resilience; and encouraged further collaboration to investigate the applicability of RACER in Antarctica.  Further work has been undertaken during this intersessional period to identify key features on James Ross Island that are likely to persist under different climate scenarios. The Committee is asked to endorse further work, led by the Czech Republic with support from the United Kingdom and other interested Parties, to bring forward a proposal to CEP to designate initially (i) Torrent Valley and nearby area, (ii) Johnson Mesa and (iii) Monolith Lake catchment within a single ASPA based on the criteria of resilience to climate change that these sites are predicted to confer to the wider eco-region.

Introduction

The ATME on Climate Change (Svolvær, Norway, 2010) recommended that the CEP should ‘remain alert to the development of climate change related conservation tools elsewhere in the world that may also have application in an Antarctic context’. RACER is a tool developed by WWF to identify and map places of conservation importance on the basis of ecosystem resilience. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXV endorsed a trial of the RACER methodology in the Antarctic Peninsula, the outcomes of which were presented at ATCM XXXVII (Brasilia, 2014). ATCM XXXV WP33, ATCM XXXVI IP073, ATCM XXXVII WP46 and ATCM XXXVII IP96, Rev.1) report on the outcomes of the RACER trial to date.  

The RACER trial identified areas where experts believe key features and drivers conferring resilience will likely persist through to the end of the century under both a moderate and more extreme climate scenario. Specifically 14 individual key features and four clusters (i.e. two or more sites sharing a common key feature and common drivers) were identified as having moderate to high persistence, with high or moderate confidence rating, under both climate change scenarios. James Ross Island was highlighted as important for more detailed RACER analysis.

Recognising both its benefits and its limitations in an Antarctic terrestrial context, ATCM XXXVII endorsed RACER as one possible tool to determine key features important for conferring resilience, noting that it may be adapted for use in more productive and diverse parts of Antarctica. It also noted that protecting areas that are resilient to climate change may ultimately assist in the longer-term protection of biodiversity. The ATCM recommended that Parties take into consideration resilience in the designation, management and review of protected areas, and welcomed ongoing support for further collaboration among interested experts to investigate the applicability of the RACER methodology further in Antarctica1. 

During this intersessional period, the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic (who were unable to participate in the first RACER workshop) have collaborated further by undertaking a RACER analysis focused on James Ross Island. 


RACER outcomes for James Ross Island

Experts from the Czech Republic, who operate a scientific station and a science programme on James Ross Island, undertook a further RACER analysis to review and identify possible climate resilient key features on the island. IP 34 provides a detailed report on the James Ross Island RACER analysis, including a new remote sensing analysis for James Ross Island and the outcomes of a workshop held in November 2014.  

Under selected climate model scenarios the RACER analysis identified three key features on Ulu Peninsula as having a high persistence (with high to medium confidence): 
 
    (i) Torrent Valley and nearby area - a sheltered area below glaciers with lake plain and dynamic river valley, adjacent to a sheltered cove); 
    (ii) Johnson Mesa - a flat volcanic mesa with block fields, vegetated predominantly by lichens; and 
    (iii) Monolith Lake catchment - a large stable freshwater lake with large volcanic blocks and a flat valley heading towards Brandy Bay with numerous seal carcasses. 

Protecting and effectively managing these key features will focus conservation attention on relatively productive and diverse areas, which are likely to persist in a climate-altered future.

Whilst noting there are limitations to the application of the RACER methodology in the Antarctic2, and that RACER is complementary, and not an alternative, to other conservation planning tools, the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic offer the following recommendations in support of conservation planning and management in a rapidly changing climate. It is also hoped that this work may stimulate interest in better understanding resilience in an Antarctic context, which in turn may lead to new insights and new Antarctic-specific resilience-based conservation tools.


    i) Torrent Valley and nearby area

             







    ii) Johnson Mesa

           


    iii) Monolith Lake catchment

           



Recommendations

Recalling the conclusions of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Exerts on Climate Change (2010) and the Priority 1 status given to climate change in the CEP Five Year Work Plan, the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic recommend that the CEP:

    1) Take note of the RACER analysis of James Ross Island, undertaken during the intersessional period, and endorse the outcomes as providing a basis for new protected area designation based on resilience criteria; and
    2) Endorse further work led by the Czech Republic, with support from the United Kingdom and other interested Parties, to bring forward a proposal to CEP to designate initially (i) Torrent Valley and nearby area, (ii) Johnson Mesa and (iii) Monolith Lake catchment within a single multi-site ASPA based on resilience criteria. 
