





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 104 Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 104 Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands, Antarctica.
The reviews were conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998) and circulated for comment.
All revisions are outlined in the table below.

Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 104 Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands, Antarctica.  

ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands, Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
Recommendation IV-4 (1966)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 3 (2009)
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan: 
Measure 3 (2009)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No – The boundary remains as 'all of Sabrina Island, the Monolith, and Chinstrap Islet above sea level.'
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes – All existing Maps and Figures have been removed and two new maps developed.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No 
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
Title: Changed title from 'Sabrina Island, Northern Ross Sea, Antarctica' to 'Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands, Antarctica'

Section 1 Description of values to be protected:
Text revised and updated

Section 2 Aims and Objectives:
Added new aims and objectives
Applied standard wording where applicable

Section 3 Management Activities
Added new management activity
Applied standard wording were applicable

Section 5 Maps and photographs
Updated with new map information

Section 6 Description of the area
Minor grammar edits
Update of penguin census information
Section 6(ii) Access to the Area:
The information has been revised to describe access and access details have been moved to Section 7(ii)

Section 6(iii) – 6(v):
Minor updates to each section

Section 7(i) Terms and conditions for entry permits:
Text revised with standard wording

Section 7(ii) Access to the Area
Text revised to provide site specific details for access conditions

Section 7(iii) – 7 (xi)
Text revised and updated with standard wording

Section 8: Bibliography
Moved to the end of the management plan

Appendix 1
New sections to include details of fauna recorded in the Area
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Annex V, Article 3.2b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems.
Annex V, Article 3.2c) Area with important or unusual assemblages of species.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
No – the Area is not on the Antarctic Continent.
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.



