





Study to determine occurrence 
of non-native species introduced into Antarctica through natural pathways 




Study to determine occurrence of non-native species introduced into Antarctica through natural pathways
Working Paper submitted by Argentina

Summary 
Based on the microbiological and parasitological studies conducted on two specimens of rosy-billed pochards (Netta peposaca) found dead on King George Island (25 de Mayo), South Shetland Islands, in October 2013, Argentina notes the need to advance research to help to determine whether the occurrence of a certain species of microorganisms is due to a natural process, an anthropic process or whether the species was already there. Thus, Argentina urges Parties to conduct similar studies on any non-native species found in similar situations to these pochards and suggests that SCAR enlarge its lines of research to include studies focused on natural pathways of introduction of non-native species. Lastly, Argentina considers that advancing our knowledge about these topics is paramount in discussing and analysing management measures related to non-native species.
Introduction
At CEP XVII, Argentina submitted IP 83, "Observation record of two species of non-native birds at 25 de Mayo/King George Island, South Shetland Islands." This document described how a group of scientists who was performing research tasks in areas surrounding Carlini station (62° 14’ S, 58° 40’ W) sighted a flock of 18 both female and male rosy-billed pochards (Netta peposaca) on 15 October 2013. The birds were in an ice-free area, about 10 m away from the coast and close to a body of freshwater. In addition, a total of 7 specimens of this species were then spotted (5 males and 2 females) between 16 and 21 October. Finally, two male Chiloé wigeons (Anas sibilatrix) were seen in the same location between 18 and 22 October. During this observation period, the scientific team collected two dead male rosy-billed pochards found in the area. 
The researchers based at Carlini Antarctic station inferred that their arrival might have been related to adverse weather conditions, i.e. a storm with strong northerly winds, likely causing these specimens to lose direction. Due to both scarcity of food commonly consumed by these species and weather conditions adverse to their development, two specimens were found dead. 
Actions Taken
With a view to avoid spreading potential disease to native wildlife, the specimens found dead were collected and stored in a cold room. Biological material was sampled and stored into a collection of samples as a record of the arrival of non-native species through natural pathways. Additionally, as indicated in IP 83 (CEP XVII. 2014), several microbiological and parasitological studies were performed on the specimens. 
Analysis Results 
An autopsy was carried out on both specimens of Netta peposaca. The autopsy indicated that they both may have died of hunger, tiredness and dehydration. The birds may have died of exhaustion as a result of the long distance they had travelled. Urate deposits were found in various organs, which may be related to a certain level of dehydration. The stomach and intestines had virtually no contents. 

The lab tests performed showed no apparent parasitic disease, no signs of bacterial disease and no presence of influenza virus. 
Final Considerations 
Although no apparent parasitic disease or signs of bacterial disease were found in this particular case, nor were influenza viruses detected in the tested specimens, Argentina believes that this type of research can provide further insight into potential natural pathways of introduction of non-native microorganisms. It is currently evident that a climate change scenario with rising temperatures may lead to the arrival of numerous species into Antarctic areas where their occurrence was inconceivable a few decades ago. The observations made on A. sibilatrix and N. peposaca referred to in this WP show a clear example of this change. 

It is also obvious that these arrivals of non-native species involve not only the introduction of the macroorganisms, but also of their microbiota, most of which will be non-native microorganisms, either residing as part of their normal microbiota or as pathogens.

Argentina considers that, with a view to develop and implement management measures to prevent introducing non-native species in Antarctica, it is essential to differentiate between natural and anthropic pathways of introduction. It is here where information gaps in identifying species of microorganisms native to Antarctic environments become notorious, as it occurs in many other natural sites.
 
As Argentina pointed out during discussions at previous CEP fora, it is advisable in the future to establish guidelines that help to determine whether the occurrence of a particular species of microorganisms is due to a natural process, an anthropic process or if it has always been there but not detected before, in order to advance the development of management measures and the decision-making process related to non-native species in Antarctica. 

Another challenge lies ahead: to determine whether a microorganism is carried into Antarctica by the wind (natural process), on a skua's foot (natural process), on a black-necked swan's foot (natural process) or stuck to a tourist or scientist's boot. This is a complex process, and at the pace at which climate change is currently affecting the Antarctic Peninsula, it will be difficult to establish whether the introduction of a certain microorganism in the area is indeed a non-natural event or if it should be considered natural under the changing environmental conditions. 
Recommendation
Considering all of the above, Argentina encourages Parties to conduct studies such as this one in the event of similar findings or situations in order to increase our knowledge on pathways of introduction of non-native species without any direct human intervention. 

It also recommends that SCAR include studies in its lines of research particularly focused on natural pathways of introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and establish, whenever possible, a programme to collect data on occurrence and distribution of microorganisms in Antarctica for a subsequent biogeographic mapping of species of microorganisms. Despite any potential limitations it may entail, this information will serve as a baseline for more advanced future studies that will apply the latest technology to carry out what today seems unlikely to achieve.


