





Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica










Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by 
New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States 
Summary
Terrestrial geothermal environments in Antarctica are of high scientific value to a wide range of disciplines, including for example geologists, glaciologists, botanists, microbiologists and atmospheric scientists, amongst others. Recent evidence suggests that terrestrial geothermal sites in Antarctica support unique and diverse biological communities, and have played an important role as biological refugia. These environments, particularly those that have not yet been visited, may be at risk from introduced species or other damage by human activity if appropriate guidelines are not followed.
It is considered that a Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica is needed to establish principles and to provide practical guidance on field procedures and protocols to help maintain the unique environmental and scientific values of terrestrial geothermal sites.
The Code of Conduct is intended as a non-mandatory guide to ‘best practice’ within geothermal environments, and its implementation at particular sites will be a matter for National Programs to consider in consultation with each other and appropriate experts.  It is recognised that some terrestrial geothermal sites in Antarctica have already been frequently visited, for example at Deception Island and in some places on Mount Erebus. In addition, permanent installations are sometimes needed to monitor geothermal activity for reasons of safety, and these require regular visits and maintenance. For these reasons it is not intended that the proposed Code of Conduct should be applied at sites where little scientific or environmental benefit would result. 
The purpose of this Working Paper is to seek any views on the current draft from CEP members and to recommend that the CEP invite SCAR, in consultation with COMNAP, to review the attached draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica and consider endorsing it as a SCAR code of conduct.  It is further recommended that SCAR submit a final version of the code of conduct to CEP XIX for potential endorsement by the ATCM by means of a Resolution.
Background
The SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica provides guidance on practical measures to minimize impacts by scientists undertaking fieldwork in terrestrial environments in Antarctica. This Code has been reviewed by the SCAR community and COMNAP and was approved by the XXX SCAR Delegates Meeting in Moscow July 2008.
SCAR made a version of this Code available as Information Paper IP004 at CEP XII (2009). The SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica is generally applicable across all Antarctica, and provides a unified code of conduct for fieldwork anywhere in Antarctica, including geothermal sites, using a common terminology.
SCAR has also developed a Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments (Information Paper IP033 at CEP XIV (2011)) in recognition of a specific need for guidelines for operations and scientific activities in this unique environment.
Similarly, terrestrial geothermal sites in Antarctica represent a unique case where more specific and customized guidance is needed because safeguarding the values of these sites generally requires measures that extend beyond those required in most areas in which scientists normally work.
Developing a Code of Conduct for geothermal environments in Antarctica
To address protection needs in the specific case of terrestrial geothermal environments on Mount Erebus, New Zealand and the United States developed an interim Code of Conduct for application to the activities conducted by their national programs at this site with a view to ensuring the special qualities of this environment are protected. Information on this interim Code was presented in Background Paper BP010 Update on Developing Protection for a Geothermal Area: Volcanic Ice Caves at Mount Erebus, Ross Island at ATCM XXXVI, Brussels, 2013.
Working Paper WP038 (Developing Protection for a Geothermal Area; Volcanic Ice Caves at Mount Erebus, Ross Island, ATCM XXXV, Hobart, 2012) recommended a number of steps to protect the geothermal environment at Mount Erebus, which were endorsed by the Committee and the ATCM (CEP XV Final Report paragraphs 178 and 179, and ATCM XXXV Final Report Vol 1 paragraph 118). More generally, there was recognition of the need to consider guidelines that might be applicable to terrestrial geothermal environments across all Antarctica, and the Parties endorsed the recommendation to "encourage scientists, interested Parties, and SCAR to work together to develop appropriate guidance material for geothermal areas in Antarctica" (ATCM XXXV Final Report Vol 1 Para 118).
Following up on this recommendation, New Zealand and the United States convened a workshop to discuss the need to develop guidelines for working in geothermal areas in Antarctica, held prior to the SCAR Open Science Conference XXXIII, Auckland, New Zealand in August 2014, with attendance by 20 scientists and policy makers from eight Treaty Parties (Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom and United States). The workshop noted the potential for conflicting interests between different users of geothermal environments in Antarctica (e.g. geologists, microbiologists, tourists), and recommended that guidelines for best practice be developed in cooperation with SCAR. The report from the Workshop is presented separately to this meeting as Information Paper IP24.
Preliminary consultation on a draft Code of Conduct
Drawing on the discussions held at the August 2014 Auckland workshop, and on earlier materials contained in ASPA management plans, Codes of Conduct, and interim guidelines, a preliminary draft of best practice guidelines was prepared for initial consultation. This preliminary draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica was circulated for review to participants in the workshop, to SCAR, and several other scientists with an interest in geothermal environments. This initial consultation involved a group of 43 scientists and environmental managers from a wide range of institutions worldwide, including in particular the SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System, and valuable comments were received from more than 30 respondents. A complete record of responses was compiled, and this was used to analyse and revise the initial draft. The rationale underpinning revisions was explained, and this document was then sent to all those who had participated in the initial consultation process. This document can be made available to interested Parties on request.
The draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica attached to this Working Paper is the product of this initial round of consultation amongst a small group of interested scientists, environmental managers and with SCAR. While this draft has benefitted greatly from input received to date, there remains the need for wider consideration of the proposed code by Parties, the CEP, SCAR and the scientific community, COMNAP and others before acceptance and endorsement.
Recommendations
New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States recommend that the CEP:
    1. provide any comments on the current draft of the code of conduct;
    2. invite SCAR in consultation with COMNAP, to review the attached draft Code of Conduct for Activities within Terrestrial Geothermal Environments in Antarctica attached to this Working Paper, with a view to endorsing it as a SCAR code of conduct;
    3. invite SCAR to re-submit a final version of the code of conduct to CEP XIX, for possible ATCM endorsement by means of a Resolution.
