





Findings from ad hoc Surveys related 
to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica. Potential Courses of Action for Further Discussion





 Findings from ad hoc Surveys related to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica. Potential Courses of Action for Further Discussion
 Working Paper Submitted by Argentina

Summary
This working paper informs the findings from ad hoc surveys conducted by Argentina as agreed upon during the presentation of Working Paper 57 “Contributions to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica” at CEP XVII, Brasilia, 2014. Based on the surveyed information related to assessment and authorisation procedures, identification of problematic situations and mechanisms for information exchange, potential courses of actions may warrant further discussion with a view to advance the development of additional measures for the protection of fossils. Key actions include discussing potential mechanisms for information exchange and requesting advice from SCAR, in particular through “SCAR Action Group on Geoheritage (and Geo-Conservation) in Antarctica”. 
Introduction
At CEP XVII, Argentina presented Working Paper 57 “Contributions to the Protection of Fossils in Antarctica”. This paper addressed several scenarios that could jeopardise the Antarctic palaeontological heritage, such as sample overlapping or unauthorised removals of samples from Antarctica, and suggested exploring additional mechanisms for the protection of fossils, such as information exchange. As a summary of previous discussions, most Members agreed that the protection of fossils in Antarctica was a significant issue and that it was useful to share information related to the removal of fossils. Some members informed passing legislation on the topic and having tools to manage aspects related to the granting of permits and collection of fossils.

The meeting recognised that a further discussion was necessary in relation to the proposal included in WP 57. Therefore, Argentina agreed to conduct intersessional surveys and submit a new paper to CEP XVIII. 
Intersessional Survey Approach
During the intersessional period, Argentina encouraged all members who had actively engaged in the discussions about WP 57 to take part in a round of ad hoc surveys based on a questionnaire about various aspects of the protection of fossils in Antarctica. This questionnaire was developed on the basis of WP 57 itself, as well as taking into account the diverse points of view expressed by Parties during deliberations at CEP XVII. A sample of this questionnaire is included as an Annex. Relevant members were contacted, and contributions were received by Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States.
The questionnaire covered three different aspects: 
    • Description of procedures for approval and authorisation of fossil removal and transport from Antarctica in order to identify differences or similarities between the Parties.
    • Identification of problematic situations to get an idea of the extent and scope of existing issues.
    • Information exchange. Potential approaches or mechanisms for information exchange, and type of information to share. Other potential mechanisms for the protection of fossils. 

Main Findings from Questionnaires
Authorisations and procedures 
Parties were asked about additional assessment or authorisation procedures other than the Environmental Impact Assessment already required by the Madrid Protocol. All informed procedures were analysed, thus showing that there is a wide range of currently applied procedures. In some cases, projects involving the removal of fossils are evaluated using general assessment procedures by the relevant Antarctic Programmes, while other Parties apply specific procedures to geologic samples in general or fossils in particular. Some of the specific procedures mentioned in the questionnaires include a peer review and a submission of management plans. Regarding aspects or details to be evaluated, some Parties indicated that they request information in advance about the future process of fossil curation in an authorised repository and its subsequent availability to students. Most Parties informed the granting of permits by a competent authority as a final step in the process, along with the requirement for scientists to submit reports once samples are collected.
For samples that require transport outside of Antarctica through a territory under the jurisdiction of a different country to the one granting the permit, a varied range of procedures was observed. In some cases, it is the same scientist who must prepare the additional paperwork, while in others it is the Antarctic relevant authority. One of the Parties informed that they have an agent in each “entry gate” to Antarctica who prepares permits for the transport of samples on behalf of scientists, when necessary. One of the Parties considered that merely holding a permit granted by a competent authority should be sufficient to ensure an adequate transport of fossil samples by third parties. Another Party said that a previous communication between the country issuing the permit and the country in transit may be a good approach to facilitate transport.
Differences in the previous evaluation process performed to avoid oversampling or sample overlapping were also reported. Some Parties request researchers to perform this task and support the need for collecting additional samples when submitting their projects, while in other cases it is the same applicable authority who inquires about these aspects when considering environmental impact assessments. In yet other cases, this task is jointly done by researchers and the applicable authority, including environmental experts. In one case, the project external revisers are encouraged to verify these considerations when evaluating the merits of the project. One of the Parties, however, stressed that something to be considered in this regard is that fossils are collected for a wide range of scientific studies, and that some fossils included in existing collections do not have all the comprehensive information required for specific purposes, so in certain situations an additional sample must be collected from the same type of fossils. 

Problematic Situations
In order to evaluate the extent of problems that may arise in connection to fossil handling and to identify any problematic situations other than the ones commonly described, participants were asked about any prior incidents they may be aware of. 
As a result, one of the Parties identified a problematic situation related to the transport of samples through a third country by their own researcher who collected fossils as part of a research project authorised by their country of origin. Additionally, another participant informed about a situation of undue use of fossil samples as construction materials. 
The remaining participants indicated no knowledge of any other occurred conflicts. 

Information Exchange 
Participants were asked about the usefulness of considering mechanisms for information exchange before the removal of fossils either to eventually detect any unauthorised activity or to facilitate the analysis for sample overlapping.
Various views were noted in connection to the use of actual or potential mechanisms for information exchange. Whereas several Parties indicated that sharing pre-season information through the EIES may be useful while a more adequate mechanism for fossil removal is under development, others noted that other specific tools for data exchange are already available, such as the SCAR Standing Committee on Antarctic Data Management (SCADAM) or the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD). Some Parties provided information about their own databases, available to the public through their websites, and considered that for now implementing new measures was not necessary. On the contrary, another Party noted that, despite the merit of sharing all types of scientific information, the level of detail that may be achieved if information is shared through the EIES might not be adequate for scientists. Most Parties regarded unnecessary to create new databases, whereas another Party pointed out that, in a scenario of increasing scientific activities in Antarctica, it would be highly advisable for Parties to establish and populate databases of Antarctic samples, not only for fossils but also for other geological materials. Additionally, one of the Parties suggested that SCAR may develop standards related to metadata for fossils, so that this information may be more useful to palaeontologists when evaluating whether samples had previously been collected for their projects or if a new sampling is required. 
Further Considerations
Two participants mentioned the “SCAR Action Group on Geoheritage (and Geo-Conservation) in Antarctica” as a potential reference source. This Action Group may possibly identify and inform on relevant regulations related to the management/protection of sites with a geological value, including a significant fossiliferous value. As informed on SCAR website, however, this action group may have been suspended since 2014. 

As many other prevention mechanisms, one of the Parties also informed about training and educational courses they provide to their scientists, authorisations they grant to their Station Directors as supervisors under their internal rules, and controls performed by their governmental border protection officials upon arrival from Antarctica. 

Lastly, the possibility of informing all applicable denied authorisations through the EIES has been suggested. In this regard, it has been suggested that IAATO may also be engaged in this area in order to emphasise any bans applicable to visitors to Antarctica.
Findings and Proposal
Although a wide range of views has been noted in relation to the need for establishing or improving existing protection mechanisms, the surveyed information has demonstrated a considerable interest in protecting fossils within the Antarctic Treaty, and several proposals or suggestions warrant further discussion.
Argentina recommends all Parties to take note of the various mechanisms and procedures informed by each participant that might be considered of interest. 
It is also recommended to consider all different modes for information exchange mentioned in this paper, such as the EIES or existing databases, like AMD, taking into account the level of usefulness each may provide.
Lastly, Argentina considers that it may be useful to request SCAR's technical advice. In this regard, it is recommended to further discuss the merits of suggesting SCAR to resume its Action Group on Geo-Conservation, which might be able to advise the Committee on identifying appropriate management and protection measures for geological sites, including fossiliferous ones. 






ANNEX: 

QUESTIONNAIRE ON ASPECTS RELATED TO THE PROTECTION OF FOSSILS IN ANTARCTICA

    1) Authorisations and procedures

    a) Does your Antarctic Programme include scientific activities that require the removal of fossils from Antarctica?

    b) Apart from the procedures provided by Annex I to the Madrid Protocol, does your country have other procedures to authorise/grant permits specifically designed for the removal and subsequent transport of fossils from Antarctica? If so:

    (I) Was this procedure designed by your country's Antarctic Programme and does it apply only to the removal of fossils from Antarctica? 
    (II)  Is this procedure part of your overall national regulations?

    c) If applying a specific procedure, does it provide for actions to perform in the event that collected fossils require transport/transit involving customs clearance in a third country before arriving at destination? If so, can you describe the procedure?

    d) Bearing in mind that many fossils or fossil formations or groups are unique, does your country use any mechanism to determine whether the fossiliferous material required for a particular study has already been sampled and catalogued in existing collections, before granting authorisation? 


 
    2) Identifying problematic situations

    a) Have you identified, or been informed of, any case of unauthorised removal and transport of fossils from Antarctica by any national of your country? If so, can you describe the situation?

    b) Have you identified any transport of Antarctic fossils through your national territory that might have caused inconveniences? If so, can you describe the situation?

    c) Have you been informed of any problematic situation during transport of fossils from Antarctica as part of activities duly authorised by your country?

    d) Could you identify other potentially problematic situations that in your view might take place when removing and transporting fossils from Antarctica? 



    3) Information Exchange

    a) Do you consider useful for the Antarctic Treaty to issue provisions related to the need/merits of having a mechanism that allows Parties to know whether a particular removal activity has been authorised by a national Antarctic Programme, and in what ways?

    b) Do you think it might be useful to exchange pre-season information on existing authorisations for the removal of fossils from Antarctica in order to facilitate the transport/transit of fossils from duly authorised activities and to avoid any accumulative impact from palaeontological sample overlapping? If so, do you think it may be advisable to do this through the Antarctic Treaty Electronic Information Exchange System?

    c) Do you think it may be useful to have a website with centralised access or a link to catalogues of fossil collections held by Parties or, alternatively, a link to organisations that hold or maintain them in order to prevent sample overlapping and any accumulative impacts? 

    d) With the same goal in mind, do you think that further information should be exchanged, such as the geographical location of sampling sites, or should a report be produced after sampling and made available through the ATS website? Can you suggest other mechanisms? 

    e) What other mechanisms do you consider of value to facilitate the identification of unauthorised removals by any Party to the Antarctic Treaty?



