





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 101 Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 101 Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 101 Taylor Rookery. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan.
Background
Taylor Rookery is an emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colony located on the east side of Taylor Glacier, Mac.Robertson Land (67°27'S; 60°53'E). The site was originally designated as Specially Protected Area No. 1, through Recommendation IV-I (1966), after a proposal by Australia. A management plan for the Area was adopted under Recommendation XVII-2 (1992). In accordance with Decision 1 (2002) the site was redesignated and renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 101. Revised ASPA management plans were adopted under Measure 2 (2005) and Measure 1 (2010). Taylor Rookery is designated as an ASPA to protect the largest known colony of emperor penguins located entirely on land. ASPA 101 is designated for an indefinite period. A revised management plan for ASPA 101 is attached.

Review of management plan
The review involved consultation with ornithologists who are familiar with the Area, and those who have participated in associated programs to conserve and document the values of the Area.  
To make the Area boundary easier to identify in the field, there is a minor change to the boundary along the western edge of the Area, which now follows the base of the distinct ice cliff. Updated maps and a table of boundary point markers are provided.
A recent change in the behaviour of emperor penguins is noted in the revised management plan.  Between 1988 and 2010 the penguins occupied the southern part of the Area. More recently, they have moved to the northern part where they now spend the winter. In 2014, penguins were observed for the first time occupying the fast ice outside the Area from October. The ongoing monitoring program will help determine whether this is a recurring behaviour; if so, changes to the Area management arrangements may be required.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 101
    • There are minor changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • Sections 1 and 6(i) have been modified to include updated population estimates for the emperor penguin colony. 
    • Section 6(i) has been modified to include details of recently observed penguin behaviour (see above).
    • Section 6(iii) has been modified to include the location of two automatic cameras that have been installed to monitor long term variations in the breeding parameters of Emperor penguins. 
    • Section 7(vi) has been modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
    • Section 7(ix) has been modified to clarification requirements for the disposal of waste.
    • Improved and updated maps have been incorporated. 
    • An additional map showing boundary points has been added.
    • Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 101 Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land. 

ASPA No. 101, Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-I (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVII-2 (1992)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 1 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:

N/A

Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 101, Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. Minor changes to boundary in order to provide clearer boundary definition
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Minor changes to graphics, and a new map added showing boundary points (Map D).
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Minor changes to boundary in order to provide clearer boundary definition
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 and 6(i) – updated emperor penguin population data and description of behaviour
Section 6(iii) – modified to include the location of two automatic bird survey cameras 
Section 7(iv) – enhanced biosecurity measures
Section 7(ix) – clarification on waste disposal
Section 7(xi) – standard text provided on reporting requirements
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2(c) – to protect the largest known colony of emperor penguins located entirely on land
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
This ASPA is not assigned to a Biogeographic Region.



