





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan. 
Background
Ardery Island and Odbert Island (66°22'S; 110°28'E) were originally designated as Specially Protected Area No. 3 in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, through Recommendation IV-III (1966), after a proposal by Australia.  In accordance with Resolution XX-5 (1996), the site was redesignated and renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 103. A management plan for the Area was adopted under Recommendation XVII-2 (1992) and revised under Measure 2 (2005). The Area is designated on the grounds that the islands are occupied by several species of petrel, and are an example of their breeding habitat along the Budd Coast of East Antarctica. The Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) and the southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides) are of particular scientific interest. The Antarctic petrel is the only species in the genus Thalassoica; they occur most commonly in the Ross and Weddell seas and are much less abundant in East Antarctica. Similarly, the southern fulmar inhabits islands mainly near the Antarctic Peninsula and the islands of the Scotia Arc where about a quarter of its global population resides. Since southern fulmars require steeper slopes as breeding habitat (to allow falling away from the colony when becoming airborne) than Antarctic petrels, this species is more prone to suffer reductions in breeding success in poor weather conditions. ASPA 103 is designated for an indefinite period. A revised management plan for ASPA 103 is attached.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 103
    • There are no changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • Sections 1 and 6(i) have been modified to include updated population estimates for bird species in the Area.
    • Section 6(iii) has been modified to include the location of four automatic cameras that have been installed to monitor long term variations in the breeding parameters of Adélie penguins, southern fulmar and Cape petrels. 
    • Section 7(vi) has been modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
    • Section 7(ix) has been modified to clarify requirements for the disposal of waste.
    • Section 7(xi) has been modified for consistency with the suggested standard wording in the Guide.
    • Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
    • There are no major changes to the maps.
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. 

ASPA No. 103, Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
No
First designation:
Recommendation IV-III (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVII-2 (1992)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 3 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:

N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 103, Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, Maps B and C showing camera locations. Removal of spot heights from Map D.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 and 6(ii) – updated bird species population data
Section 6(iii) – modified to include the location of four automatic bird survey cameras 
Section 7(iv) – enhanced biosecurity measures
Section 7(ix) – clarification on waste disposal
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2(c) – The Area is designated on the grounds that the islands are occupied by several species of petrel, and are an example of their breeding habitat along the Budd Coast of East Antarctica. The Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) and the southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides) are of particular scientific interest.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes. Biogeographic Region 7 East Antarctica.


