





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 164 Scullin and Murray Monoliths, Mac.Robertson Land









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 164 Scullin and Murray Monoliths, Mac.Robertson Land
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 164 Scullin and Murray Monoliths. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan.
Background
Scullin Monolith (67° 47' 37”S, 66° 43 '8”E) and Murray Monolith (67° 47' 3”S, 66° 53' 17”E) were designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 164 under Measure 2(2005), following a proposal by Australia.  The Area is designated to protect the greatest concentration of breeding colonies of seabirds in East Antarctica. Seven species occupy territories in the Area: five species of petrel (Antarctic petrels Thalassoica antarctica, Cape petrels Daption capense, southern fulmars Fulmarus glacialoides, snow petrels Pagodroma nivea, Wilson’s storm petrel Oceanites oceanicus), one penguin (Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae) and one larid (south polar skua Catharacta maccormicki). Compared to some other sites in East Antarctica, Scullin and Murray Monoliths are visited infrequently, and with the one known exception, all visits have been brief (less than a day). ASPA 164 is designated for an indefinite period. A revised management plan for ASPA 164 is attached.

A minor technical change to the boundary coordinates has been incorporated into this revised document. The new coordinates align with satellite imagery that was acquired after the original coordinates were determined. Improved approach/departure paths have also been incorporated into the revised document to reduce potential noise disturbance over bird colonies.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 164
    • There are minor technical changes to the Area boundary, arising from the availability of improved geospatial data for mapping. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • Sections 1 and 6(i) have been modified to include updated population estimates for bird species in the Area.
    • Section 6(i) has been modified to reflect minor technical changes to boundary coordinates.
    • Section 7(vi) has been modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
    • Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
    • There are minor changes to the maps to reflect the minor boundary changes and improved helicopter approach/departure paths to reduce noise disturbance over bird colonies.
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 164 Scullin and Murray Monoliths, Mac.Robertson Land. 

ASPA No. 164, Scullin and Murray Monoliths, Mac.Robertson Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2005)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 13 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 13 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A

Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes – minor technical change to boundary coordinates to align with satellite imagery
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes - minor technical change to boundary to align with satellite imagery. Changes made to helicopter approach/departure paths to reduce noise disturbance over bird colonies. Minor title change to Map C.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 and 6(ii) – updated bird species population data
Section 6(i) – modified to include description of new boundary coordinates 
Section 7(iv) – enhanced biosecurity measures
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2(c) – To protect the greatest concentration of breeding colonies of seabirds in East Antarctica. Seven species occupy territories in the Area: five species of petrel (Antarctic petrels Thalassoica antarctica, Cape petrels Daption capense, southern fulmars Fulmarus glacialoides, snow petrels Pagodroma nivea, Wilson’s storm petrel Oceanites oceanicus), one penguin (Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae) and one larid (south polar skua Catharacta maccormicki).
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
This ASPA is not assigned to a Biogeographic Region.  


