





Proposal to add the Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski on Livingston Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments









Proposal to add the Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski on Livingston Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments


This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument (not previously designated as an HSM by the ATCM).
Relevant details:
    (i) Name of the proposed HSM: Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski on Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands;
    (ii) Description: The Lame Dog Hut was erected in April 1988, and had been the main building of St. Kliment Ohridski base until 1998.  It is presently the oldest preserved building on Livingston Island, used as radio shack and post office, and hosting a museum exhibition of associated artefacts from the early Bulgarian science and logistic operations in Antarctica;
    (iii) Coordinates: 62 degrees 38' 29" S, 60 degrees 21' 53" W;
    (iv) Original proposing Party: Bulgaria;
    (v) Party undertaking management: Bulgaria.
Proposal to add the Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski on Livingston Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments

Working Paper submitted by Bulgaria


Summary
In accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Bulgaria proposes that the Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski be added to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the ATCM.  The hut was the first permanent building established by Bulgaria in Antarctica, and laid the foundations for Bulgaria’s systematic scientific research in the Livingston Island area.
Introduction
This working paper follows the guidance set out in the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments, as annexed to Resolution 5 (2011).
Position and Description
The Lame Dog Hut is situated on Hurd Peninsula, Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands (latitude 62 degrees 38' 29" S, longitude 60 degrees 21' 53" W), 70 m south by east of the main building of St. Kliment Ohridski base and 200 m from the coast of South Bay, at elevation 15.5 m.
It is a Bulgarian-made 6 by 3.5 m sandwich panel structure (metal face sheets, polyurethane foam core) with a mess area and accommodation capacity for 6 persons, which was erected on 26-28 April 1988 by the First Bulgarian Antarctic Expedition.
The hut was renovated in December 1993 and, together with the adjacent ‘Russian Hut’ (a Russian-made 4 by 2.5 m wooden storage building), commissioned as Antarctic base St. Kliment Ohridski.  It had remained the base’s only dwelling facility (with additional accommodation provided by tents if necessary) until a new main building was completed in 1998.
Occupied during all summer seasons since 1993, the hut has proved most suitable under local conditions.  It has also been used as radio shack and post office since 1994, and since 2012 has been hosting a museum exhibition of associated artefacts from the early Bulgarian science and logistic operations in Antarctica.
The popular name ‘Lame Dog Hut’ dates to around 1999, when the hut was found bouncing in the wind with its support legs damaged during the winter.
Reason for designation
Consistent with Resolution 8 (1995) and the Appendix to Resolution 3 (2009), this site merits listing for the following reasons:
(i)	The hut is associated with a particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica, namely the establishment of the first Bulgarian building in Antarctica and beginning of permanent scientific engagement of Bulgaria under the Antarctic Treaty;
(ii)	The hut has a particular technical and architectural value in its materials, design and method of construction, namely in the ingenuity and skills demonstrated by the Bulgarian scientists and technical personnel who, by using material at hand, converted what was, basically, a standard dwelling container designed for use in the then Bulgarian logging industry in northern Russia, into a cozy and hospitable Antarctic facility much favoured by people from various nations visiting or working at the Bulgarian base.  The experience gained during the construction and maintenance of the Lame Dog Hut was instrumental in the subsequent expansion of the Bulgarian base;
(iii)	The Lame Dog Hut has a particular historical and cultural value, namely as the oldest preserved building on Livingston Island (since 2009, when the old buildings of the nearby Spanish base Juan Carlos I were removed and replaced by new ones), the hut and its associated artefacts are part of the cultural and historic heritage of the island and Antarctica.
Annexes
(i)	Location map

Figure 1.  Location of Lame Dog Hut in the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski
(ii)	Photo of Lame Dog Hut

Figure 2.  The Bulgarian base in 2003, with Lame Dog Hut on the right, Russian Hut on the left, and the new main building in the background
Bibliography
Pimpirev, C. and N. Davidov.  Antarctica: The Extreme South.  Sofia: St. Kliment Ohridski University Press, 2003.  60 pp.
Ivanov, L. and N. Ivanova.  Antarctic: Nature, History, Utilization, Geographic Names and Bulgarian Participation.  Sofia: Manfred Wörner Foundation, 2014.  368 pp.  (in Bulgarian)

