





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2014/15 Intersessional Work









Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on 2014/15 Intersessional Work
Working Paper submitted by Norway on behalf of the SGMP

Summary
During the 2014/15 intersessional period the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP), in accordance with its Terms of Reference #1 to #3, was prepared to review 5 draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) management plans referred by the Committee for intersessional review. 

The SGMP advises the CEP that no progress has been made, as the proponent, due to circumstances, was unable to progress the work. Thus, further intersessional work needs to be conducted with regards to the following five management plans submitted for intersessional review:
    • ASPA No. 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (Chile)
    • ASPA No. 144: ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands (Chile)
    • ASPA No. 145: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (Chile)
    • ASPA No. 146: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago (Chile)
    • ASPA No. 150: Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island (Chile)

The SGMP work plan for the 2014/15 intersessional period also included the following task against ToR #4 and #5: Initiate the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans, inter alia by developing a work plan for the process. The SGMP advises the CEP on the need for development of guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA, in due course also the preparation of a document similar to “Guide to the Preparation of Management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” and the need to consider pre-consultation procedures before ASMA designations. 
    1. Background
During the 2014/15 intersessional period the SGMP operated in accordance with the work plan agreed by CEP XVII (Final Report, para. 158), and the Terms of Reference adopted by CEP XIII (Final Report, Appendix 1):
    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole.
    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.
    4) Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.
    5) Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective.
The SGMP was convened by the CEP Vice-Chair, Birgit Njåstad from Norway. Representatives from Argentina, ASOC, Australia, Chile, Germany, IAATO, India, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, United Kingdom and United States were registered to participate within the SGMP framework, noting however that all plans are available for comment from any CEP member during the SGMP process. Discussions took place by correspondence, using the CEP Discussion Forum and email.
    2. Review of the revised draft management plans 

ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island
A draft revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island was submitted to CEP XVII in 2014 and referred to the SGMP for review by the Committee. SGMP reviewed the plan in the 2014-15 intersessional period and provided advice to the proponent in October 2014 in accordance with its work plan. The proponent (Chile) has not been in the position to provide an updated draft management plan after SGMP’s advice became available. In March 2015 it became clear to the SGMP that it would not be possible to finalize the draft management plan in due time for an appropriate review by the SGMP before CEP XVIII. Further work on this plan was therefore to be postponed.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that further intersessional work will be conducted with regard to the draft management plan for ASPA No. 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
 
ASPA 144 “Chile Bay” (Discovery Bay)
A draft revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 144 ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands was submitted to CEP XV in 2012 and referred to the SGMP for review by the Committee. SGMP reviewed the plan in the 2012-13 intersessional period and provided advice to the proponent in October 2012 in accordance with its work plan. In February 2013 Chile provided an updated draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality, and adequately addressed the key points raised in its earlier advice, although at the same time flagging the need to be provided opportunity to consider the updated maps Chile had indicated would be submitted shortly. Since that time, the proponent (Chile) has  not been in the position to provide an updated draft management plan. In March 2015 it became clear to the SGMP that, once again, it would not be possible to finalize the draft management plan for ASPA No. 144 in due time for an appropriate review by the SGMP before the upcoming meeting of the CEP. Further work on this plan was therefore to be postponed.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that further intersessional work will be conducted with regard to the draft management plan for ASPA No. 144 ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands.




ASPA 145 Port Foster, Deception Island
A draft revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands was submitted to CEP XV in 2012 and referred to the SGMP for review by the Committee. SGMP reviewed the plan in the 2012-13 intersessional period and provided advice to the proponent in October 2012 in accordance with its work plan. In February 2013 Chile provided an updated draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality, and adequately addressed the key points raised in its earlier advice, although at the same time flagging a few unresolved issues needing clarification before adoption of the plan, as well as needing to be provided opportunity to consider the updated maps Chile had indicated would be submitted shortly. Since that time, the proponent (Chile) has not been in the position to provide an updated draft management plan. In March 2015 it became clear to the SGMP that, once again, it would not be possible to finalize the draft management plan for ASPA No. 145 in due time for an appropriate review by the SGMP before the upcoming meeting of the CEP. Further work on this plan was therefore to be postponed.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that further intersessional work will be conducted with regard to the draft management plan for ASPA No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.

ASPA 146 South Bay, Doumer Island
A draft revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 146 South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago was submitted to CEP XV in 2012 and referred to the SGMP for review by the Committee. SGMP reviewed the plan in the 2012-13 intersessional period and provided advice to the proponent in October 2012 in accordance with its work plan. In February 2013 Chile provided an updated draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s advice. The SGMP concluded that the updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality, and adequately addressed the key points raised in its earlier advice, although at the same time flagging the need to be provided opportunity to consider the updated maps Chile had indicated would be submitted shortly. Since that time, the proponent (Chile) has not been in the position to provide an updated draft management plan. In March 2015 it became clear to the SGMP that it once again would not be possible to finalize the draft management plan for ASPA No. 146 in due time for an appropriate review by the SGMP before the upcoming meeting of the CEP. Further work on this plan was therefore to be postponed.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that further intersessional work will be conducted with regard to the draft management plan for ASPA No. 146 South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago.

ASPA 150 Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island
A draft revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 150 Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island was submitted to CEP XVII in 2014 and referred to the SGMP for review by the Committee. SGMP reviewed the plan in the 2014-15 intersessional period and provided advice to the proponent in October 2014 in accordance with its work plan. The proponent (Chile) has not been in the position to provide an updated draft management plan after SGMP’s advice became available. In March 2015 it became clear to the SGMP that it would not be possible to finalize the draft management plan in due time for an appropriate review by the SGMP before CEP XVIII. Further work on this plan was therefore to be postponed.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that further intersessional work will be conducted with regard to the draft management plan for ASPA No. 150 Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King George Island.

    3. Terms of Reference #4 and #5 on improving management plans and the process for their intersessional review

The SGMP work plan for the 2014/15 intersessional period included the following task against ToR 4 and 5: Initiate the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans, inter alia by developing a work plan for the process. The discussions relating to this item on the work plan was led by SGMP member Polly Penhale (US).
Three topics were discussed as potential elements of a work plan. 
    • Identification of Need for an ASMA
    • Early Consultation with the CEP 
    • Develop Guidelines for ASMA Management Plan Preparation	

There was agreement that it would be useful to develop guidance, perhaps in the form of criteria/checklist, to aid in the determination of whether an area should be designated as an ASMA, in accordance with Article 4.1 and Article 4.2 of Annex V. With regard to early consultation with the CEP, it was agreed that early consultation would be beneficial, but that such discussions should not be viewed as a pre-approval process. There were no strong views on whether there should be separate guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans or whether such guidance should be folded into the current ASPA management plan preparation guidelines; however, the favored approach was for a separate document for ASMA guidelines.

ToR 5 emphasizes the long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA management plans contain adequate content, and are clear, consistent and likely to be effective. At CEP XIII the SGMP provided an overview of the status of the ASPA and ASMA management plans with regard to the review process they have undergone (ATCM XXXIII/WP 30). An update of this overview has been prepared and is available at Appendix 1.  Members are encouraged to consider this overview, and actions that may be needed to ensure that management plans are moved through an appropriate level of review and consideration, in particular with regard to Type 4 plans, i.e. plans which have not yet been adopted in Annex V format.

Advice to the CEP
The SGMP advises the CEP that the Work plan for 2015/16 should include the development of guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA. After completing this work, the SGMP in the next instance include on its work plan the preparation of a document, with checklists, similar to “Guide to the Preparation of Management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas”, per Resolution 2 (2011). With regard to early consultation with the CEP, Norway’s initiative on the utility of developing a process to consider the merits of an area as an ASPA or ASMA prior to the submission of a management plan was noted. Discussions based on the working paper submitted by Norway to CEP XVIII will provide input to this topic.

    4. SGMP work plan
The SGMP has prepared the following suggested work plan for the 2015/16 intersessional period. 
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional review and provide advice to proponents (including the five postponed plans from the 2014/15 intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of management plans overdue for five-yearly review

Continue the work to develop guidance for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plan in according with agreed work plan for the process, ie. initiate work on developing guidance on determining whether an area should be designated as an ASMA.

Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XIX against SGMP ToR 1 to 3

Prepare report for CEP XIX against SGMP ToR 4 and 5

Advice to the CEP
The CEP is invited to consider the suggested SGMP work plan for the 2015/16 intersessional period, presented, and to instruct the SGMP accordingly.


Appendix 1

Type 1

Type 2 and/or Type 3
ASPA 101: Taylor Rookery, Mac. Robertson Land

ASPA 105: Beaufort Island
ASPA 102: Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land

ASPA 107: Dion Island, Marguerite Bay
ASPA 103: Adery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast

ASPA 108: Green Island
ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Island

ASPA 110: Lynch Island
ASPA 109: Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

ASPA 111: Southern Powell Island
ASPA 113: Litchfield Island


ASPA 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, C. Bird, Ross Isl.

ASPA 115: Lagotellerie Island
ASPA 119: Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley ponds, Dufek Massif

ASPA 117: Avian Island
ASPA 120: Pointe-Geologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie

ASPA 122: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
ASPA 121: Cape Royds, Ross Island

ASPA 126: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Isl.
ASPA 123: Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land

ASPA 139: Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
ASPA 124: Cape Crozier, Ross Island

ASPA 147: Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights, Alexander Island
ASPA 127: Haswell Island

ASPA 148: Mount Flora, Hope Bay
ASPA 129: Rothera Point, Adelaida Island

ASMA 2: McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land


ASPA 132: Potter Peninsula, King George Isl., South Shetland Isl.


ASPA 133: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Isl.

Type 4
ASPA 134: Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast

ASPA 112: Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Island
ASPA 135: North-east Bailey Pen., Budd Coast, Wilkes Land

ASPA 144: Chile Bay (Discovery Bay, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands Currently under SGMP review
ASPA 136 Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land

ASPA 146: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago Currently under SGMP review
ASPA 137: North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound


ASPA 138: Linnaeus Terrace

Have been considered by SGMP
ASPA 140: Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

ASPA 106: Cape Hallett, Victoria Land 
ASPA 141: “Yukidori Valley”, Langhovde, Lutzow-Holmbukta

ASPA 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands Currently under SGMP review
ASPA 142: Svarthamaren

ASPA 126: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Isl.
ASPA 143: Marine Plain; Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elisabeth Land

ASPA 128: Western shore of Admiralty Bay
ASPA 145: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands Currently under SGMP review

ASPA 150: Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island Currently under SGMP review
ASPA 149: Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Isl.

ASPA 151: Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
ASPA 152 Western Bransfield Str. off Low Island, S. Shetland Isl.

ASPA 168: Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
ASPA 153: Eastern Dallmann Bay

ASPA 169: Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elisabeth Land, East Antarctica
ASPA 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land

ASPA 170: Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula
ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island

ASPA 171: Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island
ASPA 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island

ASPA 173: Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea 
ASPA 157: Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds, Ross Island

ASPA 174: Stornes, Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land 
ASPA 158: Hut Point, Ross Island

ASPA 175: High Altitude Geothermal sites of the Ross Sea region
ASPA 159: Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast

ASMA 1: Admiralty Bay, King George Island
ASPA 160: Frazier Islands, Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land


ASPA 161: Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea 


Type 1: Management plans in Annex V format that were adopted before the SGMP-process was established, which undergo only small changes during 5-year review, and which are adopted directly by the CEP/ATCM.

Type 2: Management plans in Annex V format that should, but have not, undergone a 5-year review after the SGMP-process was established.

Type 3: Management plans in Annex V format that have undergone 5-year review, but have been determined by the proponent to not require revision.

Type 4: Management plans which have not yet been adopted in Annex V format.
ASPA 162: Mawson’s Hut, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica


ASPA 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier


ASPA 164: Scullin and Murray Monolites, MacRobertson Land, East Antarctica


ASPA 165: Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Ross Sea


ASPA 166: Port-Martin, Terre Adélie


ASPA 167: Hawker Island, Vestfold Hills, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elisabeth Land, East Antarctica


ASMA 4: Deception Island


ASMA 5: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole


ASMA 6: Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica







