





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson Land









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson Land
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 102 Rookery Islands. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan. 
Background
The Rookery Islands are a group of small islands and rocks in the western part of Holme Bay, lying to the north of the Masson and David Ranges in Mac.Robertson Land, East Antarctica (67°36'36" S, 62°32'01" E). The Rookery Islands were originally designated as Specially Protected Area No. 2 through Recommendation IV-II (1966), after a proposal by Australia. In accordance with Resolution XX-5 (1996), the site was redesignated and renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 102.  A management plan for the Area was adopted under Recommendation XVII-2 (1992) and revised under Measure 2 (2005). The Area is designated to protect breeding colonies of the five bird species known to breed in the region, including the southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) and the Cape petrel (Daption capensis) which are not known to occur elsewhere in the region. The Area is one of only four known southern giant petrel breeding colonies in East Antarctica. The Area also protects the likely breeding colonies of an additional species, the Wilson’s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), which is frequently seen in the Area, although no nests have been found to date. ASPA 102 is designated for an indefinite period. A revised management plan for ASPA 102 is attached.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 102
    • There are no changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.
    • Sections 1 and 6(i) have been modified to include updated population estimates for bird species in the Area.
    • Section 6(iii) has been modified to include the location of two automatic cameras that have been installed to monitor long term variations in the breeding parameters of Adélie penguins and Cape petrels. 
    • Section 7(vi) has been modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
    • Section 7(ix) has been modified to clarify requirements for the disposal of waste.
    • Section 7(xi) has been modified for consistency with suggested standard wording in the Guide.
    • Minor editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
    • There are no major changes to the maps.
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 102 Rookery Islands, Holmes Bay, Mac.Robertson Land. 

ASPA No. 102, Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-2 (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVII-2 (1992)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 2 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson Land
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Minor change to title of Map A. 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 and 6(ii) – updated bird species population data
Section 6(iii) – modified to include the location of two automatic bird survey cameras 
Section 7(iv) – enhanced biosecurity measures
Section 7(ix) – clarification on waste disposal
Section 7(xi) – standard wording used  replacing previous text
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2(c) – To protect breeding colonies of the five bird species known to breed in the region, including the southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) and the Cape petrel (Daption capensis) which are not known to occur elsewhere in the region
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
This ASPA is not assigned to a Biogeographic Region. 


