





Workshop on Education and Outreach - Report of the Informal Discussions on the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol









Report of the Informal Discussions on the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol

Summary 
The present document contains the report of the informal discussions on  the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol, held during the intersessional period 2014-2015 at the CEP web-based forum, under Argentina’s guidance. 
Introduction
During the XVII meeting of the Committee on Environmental Protection, Argentina and Chile introduced  WP 47 “Outreach Activities on Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Signing of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environment Protection”.

In this document, it was considered appropriate to pool efforts in order to increase public knowledge of the work carried out throughout these 25 years, with a view to improve the visibility of achievements attained and reaching out to members of the community without regular exposure to Antarctic issues. In this regard, the Committee was asked to encourage the Parties to begin exchanging ideas in order to explore potential courses of action, such as the possibility of preparing an online publication to divulge information on the work carried out, as well as on the current and future challenges, for public dissemination in 2016.  

As a result of the discussions, the Committee expressed its support for the initiative, and several Members highlighted the need for the CEP to think in advance about the anniversary and to work on innovative ways to increase the visibility of the Committee and its work. 

Finally, the Committee welcomed Argentina’s offer to lead informal discussions on these issues in the intersessional period, supported by the CEP web-based forum, with a view to reporting to CEP XVIII, Sofia, 2015. Two rounds of discussions were held and the following Parties and Observers have actively contributed with comments to these informal discussions: Australia, France, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, ASOC and IAATO. 
Summary of discussions
Issues discussed
During the first round, Argentina proposed to start discussing the subjects to be included in the publication. In order to do so, a draft index was prepared based on different sources of information, as a starting point for comments from Parties. 

Comments were received to the draft index and also, participants raised additional issues that have emerged from this exchange. In the second stage, a modified index, which incorporated the changes proposed in the first round, was introduced. Also, other aspects of the publication (eg. dissemination), sent by some participants during the first round, were circulated for the opinion of the Parties. Finally, a document was submitted for consideration containing proposed guidelines for the preparation of the publication, aimed at discussing the following topics:

    • Defining precisely the aims and the scope of the publication.
    • Setting a general structure and a list of contents adapted to the targeted audience. 
    • Shaping a wording and a style that allow for a simple and broad dissemination of the achievements of the CEP over this time, taking into account corresponding quality and rigor.
    • Setting a mechanism for proposing authors and reviewers, based on the background and areas of interest of the participants.
    • Designing a working flow and defining a work schedule.

The full document can be downloaded from the CEP Forum.

Outputs of discussions
Index / content for the publication: The index resulting from the two rounds of consultation can be found as an Annex. In summary, the main issues to be addressed are:

    • The emergence of the Madrid Protocol.
    • The Madrid Protocol itself (summary of objectives, scope, etc.)
    • The Committee for Environmental Protection.
    • Resources established (guidelines, handbooks, etc.)
    • Incorporation of issues to the agenda over 25 years.
    • Current environmental challenges. 

Participants also gave a more detailed description of what to include in every section that can be consulted at the CEP Forum. There was consensus among the participants that this index would remain provisional and that, as the publication is developed, could be modified.

Future scenarios of the Madrid Protocol: It was discussed whether the publication should only address issues included in the CEP 5 Years Workplan, or whether it might consider longer-term challenges. There was no consensus in this regard. While a Party and an observer noted that it would be a good opportunity to address challenges beyond five years, other Parties stated that it would be better not to extend beyond the CEP Work Plan in order to avoid lack of consensus on a possible text.

Audience: Most participants agreed that the publication should be oriented to the general public but how to achieve this is seen as a challenge. Some parties proposed that the publication could usefully provide a summary, accessible to a general audience, of the key provisions of the Protocol. Finally, some Parties indicated that the publication can also be useful to new Parties to the Protocol and the Treaty.

Layout / presentation / format: Beyond the idea of a “traditional” online publication, some Parties have provided other well received ideas that are worth taking into account in future deliberations. Thus, it was indicated that the online publication could be put together in a series of vignettes with photos or short videos on a website, with some high level facts about the Protocol, the CEP, the highlights in terms of protection, successes and challenges, etc. Also that with lots of visuals and content presented in larger text size, the message might get across more easily than with a longer text. It was also said that if the intention is to produce an online publication, it would be worth considering a more flexible and less “formal” format.

Length of the publication: There was agreement among participants that the publication should be shorter and concise. See also the discussions about the format.

Authorship: There were different proposals regarding authorship that need to be further discussed. 
It was put forward whether the different sections of the publication should have single authors, multiple authors, or whether it should be presented as a neutral piece for and on behalf of the CEP with, authorship kept fairly low-key. While most participants seem to support the latter, some concrete proposals for some particular sections of the publication were received, such as that the five consecutive CEP Chairs since the creation of the CEP, draft a common foreword and that testimonials from Mr. Rocard and Mr. Hawke, who were at the origin of the Protocol, be included. On the writing process, proposals were received so as to establish a small drafting group, or even a single author, where draft material could be sent out more widely for review and approval, as a much easier and quicker way to proceed. In relation to copyright, several participants understand that this document could be treated in the same way as other CEP products.

Possible updates to the document: In general, participants suggested keeping the focus on a one-off publication. Possible updates of the document could usefully be addressed in the future.

Dissemination: Most participants indicated that the publication should be available on the ATS website. Other participants also raised other options as to “advertise” the publication through press releases, press conference in Chile in 2016, etc. Also it was suggested to draft a short executive summary which could be translated and printed out. Another proposal was to include the publication in the “Environments portal” (http://www.environments.aq/) currently under development, although the Party responsible for the development of the Portal indicated that this material would not fit with the type of material to be incorporated into the Portal. The possibility of creating a special web page for this publication, with links and search functions was also raised by a Party. Finally, a Party stated that other opportunities for dissemination in a future round of discussion can be considered, noting that there will likely be other outreach initiatives for the 25th Anniversary that the publication could be linked to in some way as the Workshop on Education and Outreach to be held in Sofia prior to ATCM XXXVIII.

Possible ways to move forward: Since the process has so far been undertaken on an informal basis, a Party drew the attention to the fact that it may be appropriate for the CEP to formalise the process for the production of the document itself, including to promote/ensure CEP Members’ engagement. For example, CEP XVIII could seek to establish a small steering group with agreed terms of reference, to lead the work in consultation with Members.

Many Parties suggested that the XXXVIII ATCM Education and Outreach workshop would be a proper place to further develop ideas on how best to engage the general public with the idea of Antarctic environmental protection, the Protocol framework, the science that is needed to underpin management and the work of the CEP. 

Conclusions 
Progress was made on the possible ways to proceed on the development of a commemorative publication on the occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol. Many interesting and innovative ideas were raised, that merit further discussion.
Recommendations
It is recommended that CEP:
    • Recognize the progress made during the development of informal discussion.
    • Consider the various options provided by participants, in order to advance the development of the proposed publication.
    • Continue this debate within the Education and Outreach Workshop, Sofia, 2015.
    • Analyze the convenience of formalizing the process of elaboration of the publication for the next intersessional period.





. 












Annex

1) Draft index of subjects

Foreword 

Summary

Initial Stages:
1) The emergence of the Madrid Protocol:
a) Background and reasons that gave rise to it
b) The development and signing of the final document 


The Madrid Protocol itself: 
2) The Madrid Protocol: 
a) Objectives 
b) Scope 
c) Working mechanism (Committee for Environmental Protection) 
d) Summary of key provisions

3) The Committee for Environmental Protection
    a) Roles and functions 
    b) Membership 
    c) Working practices 

Further development by the Committee for Environmental Protection: 
4) New established resources: Guidelines, Handbooks and other means and tools related to: 
a) Annex I: EIA 
b) Annex II: Flora and Fauna 
c) Annex III: Waste Management 
d) Annex IV: Marine Pollution 
e) Annex V: Protected Areas 
f) Annex VI: Liability
g) Other tools not directly related to Annexes 
(THIS SECTION COULD BE AN APPENDIX TO PRESENT THE OUTCOMES OF THE CEP’S WORK)

5) Responding to new challenges and issues since the entry into force: 
a) Addition of new issues to the agenda and other issues debated by the CEP over the past 25 years.

6) Current environmental challenges: 
a) The present and near future: ongoing discussions and plans for the next five years.
b) Challenges linked to the implementation of the Protocol (entry into force of the Annex VI, exchange of information, inspections, etc. 


