





Report from ICG on Climate Change









Report from ICG on Climate Change

Working Paper submitted by Norway and the United Kingdom


Summary

An ICG was established to develop a Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) for the CEP.  During two years of consultation the CCRWP has been devised and describes the issues facing the CEP as a result of the changing Antarctic climate, the actions/tasks required to address these issues, their prioritisation, and suggestions as to how, when, and by whom, the actions are best delivered.  An objective statement to accompany the CCRWP has also been agreed.  The future governance of the CCRWP has been considered and recommendations are made to the CEP.

Background

A recommendation of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on climate change and implications for Antarctic management and governance (2010) was that the CEP considers developing a climate change response work programme.  

In response to this, the Committee established an ICG on climate change at CEP XVI with the following Terms of Reference:

    1.  Review progress made against ATME recommendations 18 to 29 drawing on SP008 (CEP XV) and discussions at recent CEP meetings (cf: CEP report 2010 paras 351 - 386);
    2. Consider these ATME recommendations in light of recent papers and in particular SCAR's 2013 major update report in order to identify additional actions that may need to be addressed by the CEP;
    3. Consider how the recommendations might be addressed by developing a prioritised climate change response work programme; and
    4. Provide an initial report to CEP XVII.
The Committee agreed that the United Kingdom (Rachel Clarke) and Norway (Birgit Njåstad) would coordinate the ICG. 

ICG process 

The ICG has worked over a two year period in accordance with the following work plan:

    1. the status of ATME recommendations 18-29 (ToR 1)
    2. other climate-related issues subsequently discussed by CEP and/or arising from SCAR’s ACCE major update report (ToR 2)
    3.  decisions/steps already taken by the CEP with regard to these issues [i.e. the ATME recommendations and any other issues identified under bullet point 2] (ToR 2)
    4.  remaining needs and required actions by the CEP (ToR 3)
    5. how, who and when to move these action points forward (ToR 3)
    6. compiling identified actions into a draft prioritised CCRWP for the CEP (ToR 3).

The first intersessional period covered the first three points on this list, and initiated work on the fourth. Please see CEP XVII WP 008 for further details. 

This intersessional period has covered the remaining points, resulting in this proposed CCRWP submitted to the Committee. The ICG coordinators facilitated the discussion over through posting an initial notice and two consecutive discussion papers on the CEP Discussion Forum. These documents and the responses received are on the website. During the discussions 9 members (Australia, Argentina, Belgium, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa and US), the two countries of the coordinators, and 1 observer (ASOC) contributed to the discussion. 

CCRWP 

Overarching objective statement
Through discussions in the ICG an agreement was reached on the utility and wording of an overarching objective statement for the CCRWP, to set the context. The following statement has achieved agreement and is listed at the top of the CCRWP: 

Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations from the ATME on Climate Change in 2010, the CCRWP provides a mechanism for identifying and revising goals and specific actions by the CEP to support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica.

Priority issues
The CCRWP is focused around a definite number of priority issues (as reflected in column 1 of CCRWP). There are many ways to group and structure such issues and a choice must also be made on the level of detail. The ICG has agreed that it is more important to focus on the tasks and actions to be implemented rather than the structuring of the issues. It is believed that the current proposal reflects the overarching issues facing the CEP in its climate change response work. It is important to note that the list of identified priorities is targeted to the climate change related issues relevant to the CEP's functions and agreed priorities  (and does not seek to include the issues or actions/tasks that are required for other purposes). 

Actions and tasks
The key content of the CCRWP are the identified response actions for the various climate change related issues of interest to the CEP, i.e. tasks/actions that will move us forward with regard to management of Antarctica in the context of a changing climate. The identified actions/tasks (column 4) have been developed on the basis of input from all ICG participants. Actions are identified as either management or research oriented (column 3).  The actions/tasks included in the CCRWP reflect our current needs and are a firm starting point for ongoing discussions.  It is envisaged that additional actions/tasks will be included as the CCRWP matures. 

Prioritisation
The inclusion of actions in the CCRWP suggests that each action is required at some point, and therefore is in itself a priority. The ICG has, however, assigned a priority to each action in a suggested priority order (column 5) in order to identify which actions require the most urgent attention by CEP (or those responsible for delivering). All ICG participants were asked to contribute to the priority ranking in a simple and straight forward manner relying on the professional judgment of each ICG participant, and on a risk basis. An average ranking for each of the tasks were calculated on the basis of the input. Each task has been assigned a ranking between 1 and 5, with 1 being a top priority, which we envisage being initiated in the next CEP and priority 5 being a longer term requirement, which perhaps realistically might be complete beyond the CCRWP timetable as it is currently formatted.  We note that many of the actions were ranked as high priority during this exercise, so we have presented the prioritisation score with a decimal point to give maximum clarity.  Nevertheless further prioritisation (for example cross referencing the CEP 5 year plan) may be of benefit given the practicalities of delivering so many high priority tasks in a short time frame.  

Implementation 
We sought views of how the actions and tasks identified within the CCRWP would best be delivered and by whom.  Respondents were asked to suggest those responsible for delivering the actions in the CCRWP (such as interested Parties, Observers or Experts, COMNAP, National Programmes and the Committee). This information is recorded in Column 6.  The mechanism for delivering the actions (such as to provide or receive a report, hold a workshop, update the CEP etc) is also noted.  
The prioritisation exercise and specific feedback from ICG participants was used to suggest when the action should be undertaken and an action placed in the appropriate year (Column 8 onwards).  It is noted that not all top priority actions have been allocated to future CEP meetings; so on-going population of the CCRWP will be required. 

Outstanding issues
Consensus was not reached over the inclusion of several issues in the CCRWP.  Some ICG respondents suggested an issue or action/task for inclusion in the CCRWP, whereas others suggested the same issue or action/task be deleted.  These issues include the following and potentially merit further consideration by the Committee:

    • Encouraging COMNAP to develop a best practice guide on renewable energy use in Antarctica
    • Encouraging COMNAP and NAPs to use consistent methods to quantify and publish savings made by energy efficiencies
    • Understanding the impact of black carbon, ozone and other short lived climate forcers
    • There was some discussion over the use of IUCN criteria for assessing species at risk as it was noted that this criteria does not identify effects solely due to climate change.  A footnote has been added in the CCRWP to this effect.

Future governance of the CCRWP

We sought views on the governance of the CCRWP beyond this ICG, notably how to encourage greater participation and how to keep the CCRWP up to date.  

There was broad agreement that the CCRWP be retained as a separate document until it has matured and sufficient progress made, before considering its incorporation into the CEP 5-year plan.  It was also agreed that it should be updated annually.

Suggestions for driving CCRWP progress and keeping it up to date included:

    • reorganising the CEP meetings to devote more time (a day or ½ day) to this topic,  
    • convening a workshop immediately before a CEP meeting, 
    • establishing a subsidiary body (under Rule 10 of the CEP’s rules of procedure) that might operate in a similar way to the SGMP,  or 
    • continue the ICG.  

The advantages and disadvantages of each were clearly expressed although there was no clear consensus on the way forward.  There was considerable support for a future workshop and for the continuation of a multi-year ICG who’s ToR be updated according to the climate-relevant activity under discussion and the progress made. 

The benefit of a Resolution (or similar measure) to encourage action was discussed, and it was noted that a Resolution might be useful for general requests (e.g. to SCAR or COMNAP) or where encouragement to a collective group (e.g. National Programmes, Parties or science funding agencies) is required. 

Other ways of engaging support suggested include:

    • recording agreements made at CEP in the report language, 
    • correspondence between the CEP Chair and relevant Agencies,  and 
    • ensuring that research needs identified by the CEP are communicated to the ATCM for consideration in discussions and  scheduled in the ATCM multi-year strategic work plan as appropriate.
Whilst there was no immediate or specific action of this nature identified, this advice is listed in this WP for future reference. 

Recommendations

We recommend that the CEP:

    • Acknowledges the results of the work done by the ICG on Climate Change.  
    • Acknowledges that maximum engagement and participation in this topic is essential.
    • Adopts the CCRWP as a work plan, retains it as a separate document and update it annually.  Updating should involve populating the CCRWP with specific actions to address the priority issues, reflect changing priorities and documenting the progress made.
    • Further considers options for ensuring greater engagement and participation by Members in implementing the CCRWP, such as through allocating dedicated time during the CEP meeting, holding a workshop, establishing a standing group or multi-year ICG.


