





A suggested ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process 









A suggested ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process 
Submitted by Norway



Summary
Discussions at CEP XVII and the informal intersessional discussions that have taken place since that show that there is a general interest amongst Members to develop preliminary assessment procedures for ASPA and ASMA proposals. Norway suggests that the way forward would be to institutionalize such procedures into a set of non-mandatory guidelines.  

Background
At the 17th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVII), held in Brasilia in April/May 2014, Norway submitted WP 33 on “Need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation”. 

 In WP 33 Norway noted that as ASPAs and ASMAs are formal area management tools, with legal frameworks specified by Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, there are a number of formal requirements that places a heavy burden not only on the proponents and any Party involved in the management of such an Area, but also on the CEP (and ATCM) in eg. assessing, reviewing and revising management plans. Norway therefore suggested that it could be an idea to ensure that the CEP as a collective consider and discuss the merit of an area as an ASPA/ASMA before a management plan for an area not yet designated as a protected/managed area is prepared and submitted by the proponent(s). After a substantial and fruitful discussion at CEP XVII the Committee welcomed Norway’s offer to continue informal intersessional discussions relating to this topic on the CEP Discussion forum  

Time allowed for only a short round of discussions to assess the issue further and consider whether there were grounds for a concrete suggestion to be submitted to CEP XVIII. 

Although the timeframe for the informal discussions were limited, seven Members and one Observer provided useful and insightful comments to the background paper provided by Norway and to the suggested way forward provided therein. On basis of these comments Norway has modified the suggested approach even further, as summarized and put forward in the below. 

Considerations that have been put forward relating to the need for a pre-assessment procedure
It can be surmised, both from the discussions at CEP XVII and the informal intersessional discussions that have taken place since that there is a general interest amongst Members to develop preliminary assessment procedures for ASPA and ASMA proposals. 	

From the discussions in particular the following points are worth noting1: 
    • Many Members have noted that there is a need for a coherent approach toward implementing the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol. 
    • Many Members have supported the idea of developing procedures for ASPA/ASMA designations, although with a number of relevant caveats to consider further. 
    • It has been noted that preliminary procedures might help move management plans forward through providing advice to the proponent(s). 



A number of challenges have also pointed out by the Members:
    • There has been expressed concern that the development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designations would place a further burden on the work of the ATCM and the CEP. 
    • It has been noted that a formalized procedure could discourage Members from putting forward management plans. 
    • Lastly, it has been pointed to that it was important to avoid delay and discouragement in submission of protected area proposals. 

Discussion
Norway appreciated the comments and suggestions that were put forward in the discussions at CEP XVII and during the informal intersessional period, and is pleased to see that so many Members are positively inclined towards creating a process that will allow Members and the CEP to discuss the merits of planned ASPAs/ASMAs before a management plan is submitted.  There are some challenges that have been pointed out, such as the potential burden it could place on the ATCM and the CEP, as well as the possibility that it may discourage Members from putting forward management plans. 

We have considered all these comments to be important for designing a process that minimizes the potential negative impacts of a preliminary assessment process. We hope that these challenges may be overcome through the development of clear preliminary procedures that take care to refrain from placing a further burden on the proponent or the ATCM and CEP. We would like to see a process that engages all Parties in the process of designating new sites, recognizing that that all protected and managed areas are international sites once designated and have equal status in the laws of all Treaty Parties irrespective of the proponent countries. We furthermore hope that a preliminary procedure may aid Members in preparing management plans through allowing for feedback and comments from Members earlier on in the process. This could over time help achieve greater coherence in the choosing of areas to designate as ASPA/ASMAs. By raising discussion points and issues earlier on in the planning process it is hoped that a higher number of management plans could be approved upon submission. 

The findings of some recent publications discussing the Antarctic Protected Areas system also provide some basis for due consideration of protected and managed areas designation.  For example, Shaw et al (2014) point to concerns over the adequacy of the existing protected areas network and Hughes et al (2013) point out inter alia that the great majority of ASPAs are found close to research stations or areas of substantial national operator activity and that the system largely does not protect values in other more remote areas of the continent.  Prior assessment process would allow the proponent(s) / CEP to consider how the proposal fits into a more systematic network of sites. Whilst noting this challenge, we also recognize that areas located close to research stations or areas where substantial operator activity takes place are often in need of protection due to high activity levels. 

Is it also worth noting that we now have spatial planning tools available (e.g. the ACBRs – cf. Resolution 6 (2012) which encourages the use of ACBR as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographic framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol)). A prior assessment process would allow Members/Parties to collectively work towards a network of sites that sit within the ACBR context, although at the same time carefully analyze the benefits and limitations of such spatial tools where relevant.  

An added benefit of the proposed prior assessment tool is that it allows the Committee as a whole to improve its oversight of a more holistic protected areas system.



The way forward/proposal
The comments provided in the discussion on this topic have generally been positive towards the development of preliminary assessment procedures for ASPA and ASMA. 

We recognize that a mandatory change is not required. We suggest that the way forward would be to institutionalize procedures into a set of guidelines.  Although these guidelines would not be mandatory in nature, we nevertheless believe that there should be a high level of encouragement for CEP members (and other proponents of ASPAs and ASMAs) to lean on such guidelines in the process of preparing new ASPA or ASMA proposals.  

In consideration of the comments received we have outlined a proposal for a set of guidelines. 

Guidelines:  A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPA and ASMAs
    1. The proponent should submit information about planned ASMA and ASPA’s at the first possible CEP meeting after they have identified an area as a potential new ASPA or ASMA irrespective of whether a decision to start working on a management plan has been taken or not. It would be useful if the proponent submitted this information at the latest one year before intending to submit a management plan to the CEP for consideration. 
    2. The information submitted to the CEP should include:
        ◦ The proposed location of the ASMA/ASPA.
        ◦ The initial rationale behind the plans for proposing the designation2, including specifying the legal basis for the designation found in Annex V; how it improves the representativeness of the protected areas network, and how it fits within the ACBR planning tool.
        ◦ Other relevant information relating to the development of a management plan that the proponent country has available at the time of submission to the CEP meeting.  
    2. The proponent country is encouraged to facilitate further discussions and questions on the preliminary plans through e.g. informal discussions/exchanges on the CEP forum or directly with Member countries.

Recommendation
Norway suggests that the CEP:
    1. Emphasizes the merit of the CEP having the opportunity to do a prior assessment of any new ASPA and ASMA designations ;
    2. Encourage proponents of a new ASPA and ASMA brings the plans of such a designation to the attention of the CEP at an early as possible time to allow a prior assessment of the area by the Committee; 
    3. Agree to the guidelines outlined above as a desired, but not mandatory, procedure to be used to enable prior assessment of new designations.

References
Hughes KA, Pertierra LR, Walton DWH (2013) Area protection in Antarctica: How can conservation and scientific research goals be managed compatibly?  Environmental Science & Policy 31: doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2013.03.012
Shaw JD, Terauds A, Riddle MJ, Possingham HP, Chown SL (2014) Antarctica’s Protected Areas Are Inadequate, Unrepresentative, and at Risk. PLoS Biol 12(6): e1001888. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001888


