Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 106 
Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Working Paper submitted by the United States 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the United States has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan.
Background
Cape Hallett was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 6 through Recommendation IV-7 (1966) after a proposal by the United States of America. The boundaries of the Area were enlarged in Recommendation XIII (1985) to include extensive stands of vegetation to the south and north of the Area. The Area was re-named and re-numbered as ASPA No.106 by Decision 1 (2002). The Management Plan was revised and the Area was extended to include Seabee Hook, the breeding area of a substantial colony of Adélie penguins, by Measure 1 (2002). Measure 5 (2010) deleted the Managed Zone and revised the boundary to exclude two areas on Seabee Hook, which are now managed by Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors.
The primary reason for designation of the Area is that it provides an outstanding example of biological diversity, in particular a rich and diverse terrestrial ecosystem. The terrestrial ecosystem and rich avifauna present are also of high scientific value. In addition the site is of important historical and educational value and the location is aesthetically outstanding. These grounds for designation of the Area remain valid.
A revised management plan for ASPA No. 106 is attached.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA No. 106
Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
Introduction: Updated to include classifications under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA) and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR).
Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
Section 3 Management Activities: Consistent with Article 9.2 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, a new management activity was added noting that National Programs shall ensure the boundaries of the Area and the restrictions that apply within are marked on relevant maps and charts for which they are responsible. The purpose of the activity is to ensure that, to the maximum extent practicable, information on the presence of the protected area is available to all those operating vessels and aircraft in the vicinity.
Section 5 Maps: Map layout was improved. In other respects the maps remain unchanged.
Section 6(i) Description of the Area: Updated to include recent scientific literature, in particular new observations published on Adélie penguins, lichens, and nematodes present within the Area. In addition, information was added on soils present within the Area. Five new publications providing new observations on the Area were identified.
Section 6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area: Updated to include protected areas agreed since the last management plan review.
Section 7 Permit conditions: Revisions were made to the text and sub-sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011).
Section 8 Supporting documentation: The reference list has been updated.
Recommendation 
The United States recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea.

ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation IV-7 (1966, SPA No. 7)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation IV-7
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation XIII-13 (1985), Measure 1 (2002), Measure 5 (2010)
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2010)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Other relevant measures:
Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for Seabee Hook, Cape Hallett
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, minor changes to layout.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Updates to description of soils and biology of the Area from recent scientific publications. Revision based on guidance in Resolution 2 (2011).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems; 
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds;
(d) the type locality of two species;
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic value; 
(h) sites of recognised historic value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Yes. Environment U – North Victoria Land Geologic’.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main ACBR should be noted here). 
Yes. ACBR8 – North Victoria Land.



