The SCAR Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Action Group
The SCAR Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Action Group
Summary
SCAR’s Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Action Group (AG),
established in 2021, now has over 150 members. The group is
active in a number of areas such as developing a SCAR Code of
Conduct on EDI issues, reviewing existing external diversity and
inclusion resources, and working with other organisations to share
experience and best practices. The EDI AG is collaborating with the
SCAR Executive Committee, Secretariat, and Capacity Building,
Education and Training (CBET) Committee to advance SCAR's goal
of becoming a truly inclusive organisation, in line with the desire
expressed in the Final Report from ATCM XLIV, Berlin 2022, “to
ensure that everyone working on Antarctic matters [is] safe,
welcomed, respected and free from discrimination”.
Introduction
The establishment of the SCAR EDI AG was addressed in ATCM XLV
IP77 ATCM XLV IP77 The SCAR Equality Diversity and Inclusion
Action Group. As noted, the AG's leadership was chosen from over
150 community volunteers, consisting of a Senior Leadership team
made up of a Chief-Officer (Dr Adriana María Gulisano), a Deputy
Chief-Officer (Dr Jilda Alicia Caccavo), a Secretary (Pilvi
Mischitiello) and a wider leadership steering group (LSG) all
supported by Dr Inga Beck in a coordination role. The LSG has 15
members who are responsible for different working areas. They
represent the Antarctic research community from all career stages,
disciplines and geographical regions.
More details are available at https://www.scar.org/capacity-
building/edi/home/
This Paper is submitted by SCAR in recognition of priority 12 of the
ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan calling for Parties to:
Address equality, diversity and inclusion issues, by promoting full
participation of underrepresented groups in Antarctic science and
operations activities across all Antarctic issues, including science,
operations, policy and law.
For ATCM XLVI (2024) this called for “Parties, Observers and
Experts to share information on their plans and policies on these
issues”.
These statements have been taken into account in setting the
priorities and future plans of the SCAR EDI AG and are in line with
the statement on diversity and inclusion from the Final Report of
ATCM XLIV:
The ATCM highlighted the importance of ensuring that everyone
working in Antarctica is safe, welcome, respected and free from
discrimination. Participants affirmed their commitment to
enhancing diversity and promoting an inclusive culture for
everyone contributing to the work of the Antarctic Treaty system.
External Representation
The SCAR EDI AG includes representatives from the Association of
Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS), the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS) as well as the Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). In addition, members of
the SCAR EDI AG are active in other EDI initiatives such as the
International Science Council (ISC) Standing
Committee for Gender Equality in Science (SCGES), the SOOS
Working Group on EDI and the Women in Polar Science (WiPS)
initiative.
Recent Activities
One of the major goals for the EDI AG was the development of an
EDI Statement relevant and appropriate to SCAR and in August
2023, following approval by the SCAR Executive Committee, the
following statement was published.
EDI STATEMENT
The Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR) is
committed to promoting a culture of equity, diversity, and
inclusion. With open minds, we aim to listen, engage in dialogue,
and create meaningful change that will enrich our community with
a wide range of voices, backgrounds, languages, experiences, and
perspectives. The Equality, Diversity, and Inclusion Action Group
(EDI AG) is tasked with broadly looking at how EDI issues can be
effectively dealt with within SCAR, and what practical actions are
relevant for the organisation. SCAR expects all parts of the
organisation and community to actively engage with these issues
and, where necessary, consult the action group for guidance.
We acknowledge that we must be both reactive and proactive in our
efforts to promote EDI, and we will work together to create an
environment where all individuals feel valued, supported, and
empowered to contribute to scientific research and leadership. We
recognize that historic and systemic inequalities have excluded
many individuals and communities from participating in scientific
research, and as a result in leadership roles within SCAR, and we
commit to understand where these inequalities continue to exist
and to tackle them, whilst fostering a culture of inclusivity and
respect, where every voice is heard and every contribution is
celebrated.
SCAR will continue to work to build a more inclusive and
representative community that reflects the diversity of the world we
explore. We recognize that we must engage with the SCAR
community and our spheres of influence to affect meaningful
change. By working together, we can create a more equitable and
inclusive future for Antarctic science and beyond.
Another priority for the AG was the development of a Code of
Conduct (CoC) document that will serve as a guide for appropriate
behaviour within SCAR. The CoC document was developed in
parallel with a reporting system that allows the anonymous
reporting of violations against the CoCs. Both were reported on to
the SCAR Executive Committee meetings in September 2023 and
are being redrafted following feedback from external consultants. It
is intended to have final versions available for approval at the SCAR
Delegates Meeting in August 2024.
In July 2023 the EDI AG organized a webinar for the International
Science Council Standing Committee on Gender Equality in Science
(SCGES) titled: “Gender equality and beyond in the polar sciences”
and worked with the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
(APECS) on another webinar in February 2024 on “Incorporating
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) into Art”.
The AG created, analysed, and is in the process of preparing a
report on the results of a demographic survey of the SCAR
community that was implemented as part of the Open Science
Conference (OSC) 2022.
The upcoming 2024 SCAR Open Science Conference (OSC) will
include a plenary lecture, parallel sessions and workshops dedicated
to EDI issues. In preparation for the OSC, the EDI AG have prepared
a Code of Conduct specific to the meeting and an updated
demographic survey, both of which are intended to be included in
the registration process for the OSC.
The AG is preparing a paper titled “SCAR EDI AG report on SCAR
OSC’s survey results”. This paper summarizes the results of the
demographic surveys relating to the 2022 online SCAR
Open Science Conference (OSC). This OSC provided a first
opportunity for such data collection via two surveys: the first was
required as part of the OSC registration process, and the second was
optional and in the context of post-OSC feedback.
The paper presents the implementation process of these surveys,
their outcomes, as well as reflections on the implications of the
results. It also provides conclusions with recommendations on how
to improve future demographic surveys, and identify best practices
to monitor diversity within the SCAR community as a means of
assessing the impact of SCAR EDI initiatives.
Another paper is in preparation titled “Addressing Equality,
Diversity and Inclusion from within the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research”. In this paper, the authors present the
organisation, goals, completed and planned activities, as well as
outlooks for the EDI AG.
In conclusion the AG looks forward to the opportunity at ATCM
XLVI for the contributions and perspectives of Parties, Observers
and Experts on EDI issues to be shared, and notes the following
areas of its work in the coming year:
Finalising the SCAR Code of Conduct as well as the reporting
process
A workshop, plenary talk and parallel session at the 2024 SCAR
Open Science Conference
Publishing reports and papers based on the work of the AG and
analysis of the relevant data available
Participating in webinars and online events to disseminate the work
of the AG
Working with partner organisations to share best practice and
identify potential areas to address
