Update 2024: International Science & Infrastructure for
Synchronous Observation (Antarctica InSync)
Update 2024: International Science & Infrastructure for
Synchronous Observation (Antarctica InSync)
Information Paper submitted by Germany, Australia, Brazil, France,
India, Italy, Norway, New Zealand, South Korea, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States on behalf of the
Antarctica InSync partnership
Summary
This information paper brings the progress with “Antarctica
InSync”, first introduced to ATCM-XLV in 2023, to the attention of
ATCM-46 and CEP-26. In November 2023, UNESCO See end of the
paper for a list of acronyms and abbreviations in alphabetical order.
endorsed Antarctica InSync as a regional Ocean Decade program
aimed at better understanding, protecting and sustainably managing
the Southern Ocean and Antarctica in a year-round and circumpolar
observational effort. The preparatory phase in the period 2024 to
2026 seeks to organize synchronous scientific observation to take
place between 2027 and 2030, as a stepping stone to SCAR and
IASC joint plans for an international polar year 2032/2033.
Antarctica InSync will organize a circumpolar assessment of the
connections between ice, ocean, atmosphere, climate, environment
and life, including human pressures, and their solutions such as
marine protection. It contributes to SCAR’s UN Decade
Collaborative Centre for the Southern Ocean (DCC-SOR). ATCM and
CEP are key hubs to consult both policy- and research-driven needs
for such an international effort. This IP provides an update to the
planning steps and the opportunities to join the effort. In addition, a
side-event offering dialogue about the planned effort will be offered
at ATCM-46 in Kochi [date and time tbd].
Background
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are among the least studied
places on Earth, despite their importance for global climate and
weather patterns, sea level, biodiversity including a large number of
endemic species, and thus for humanity. Feedback mechanisms and
tipping points associated with climate change, dynamics in
biodiversity and potentially increasing pollution require
synchronous, concerted science efforts to assess the intricate links
between atmosphere, ocean, ice and life, and to protect and
sustainably manage this region. Providing the best knowledge for
risk assessments of and solutions to these challenges is beyond the
skills and infrastructure of any single science program or nation.
Antarctica InSync thus proposes a targeted, collaborative and
globally coordinated scientific program to be prepared in the period
2024 to 2026 and to be carried out between 2027 and 2030, to
deliver systemic scientific knowledge according to the goals and
strategic plans / priorities identified by SCAR and other
international organizations and bodies. It is urgent to respond to the
onset of Antarctica’s warming, sea-ice and land-ice decline, to
achieve a much-needed pan-Antarctic ecological baseline
knowledge. The joint ambition is thus to deliver a coordinated
regional action in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica designed to
contribute to the key challenges denominated by the UN Ocean
Decade. ATCM/CEP and CCAMLR as well as COMNAP have been
contacted to play central roles in supporting this effort, as they
bring together the Consultative Parties to exchange information on
scientific and policy knowledge and all matters of common interest
pertaining to Antarctica.
This information paper takes account of the goals of the United
Nations General Assembly Resolution of 25 September 2015,
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”, which are at a risk of not being achieved in a timely
manner. It is primarily intended to contribute to the achievement of
SDG 13 “Climate Action - Take urgent action to
combat climate change and its impacts” and SDG 14 "Life below
water - Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development."
What we want to achieve
Antarctica InSync builds directly on a vast science community effort
(SCAR, SOOS, WMO, ESA, etc.) in defining challenges and
objectives for Antarctic research and infrastructure. It aims to unite
national and international Antarctic programs to achieve
collaborative and synergetic actions, dedicated to synchronous
observation in the years 2027 to 2030, which conclude the first
decade of consecutive sea-ice minima and accelerated melt rates
since the onset of satellite observation. Simultaneous research
carried out in an integrated manner by all disciplines together
around Antarctica, with similar approaches, common methods and
shared goals has not been carried out at the level proposed here,
including ocean, land, ice and atmosphere as well as their global
teleconnections. Key knowledge gaps will be addressed according to
the SCAR Horizon Scan and the resulting science strategies.
Particular focus topics include synchronous circumpolar
assessments of fluxes and dynamics, heat and freshwater transport,
ice behavior, primary production, carbon budgets, the distribution
of key species in Antarctica and the surrounding waters and human
signatures, such as pollution and fishing. Observations will be used
to improve modeling capacities, and resulting data will be shared
via connected data centers by FAIR principles. A next-generation
capacity for integrated and sustainable research will be developed
involving Early Career scientists (e.g., via APECS and ECOP).
Antarctica InSync will go beyond sciences of the environment and
also provide opportunities for participation to social sciences and
humanities, as well as culture and art, and policy makers.
The proposed Antarctica InSync research program thus aims to
enhance collaboration, knowledge, data sharing (between science
and other societal agents) and science dialogue to raise awareness
of the role of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean for our lives and
humanity’s future. Its goal is to provide a framework for
international collaboration to implement a number of overarching
challenges for sustainable ocean science as addressed by the UN
Ocean Decade, and to provide a milestone towards the International
Polar Year 2032/2033 (SCAR/IASC). With this ambition, the
program sets out to contribute to a number of science and policy
processes and partnerships in the frameworks of the Antarctic
Treaty system (e.g., ATCM/CEP, CCAMLR, COMNAP, IAATO)
beyond the 2030 framework of the UN decade, the SCAR strategy
and the Sustainable Development Goals.
How to build a strong science plan
The science plan builds around several core objectives of pan-
Antarctic research in the overarching areas of
Southern Ocean and Antarctica heat, freshwater, carbon and other
element budgets and their response to climate change
Rapid sea ice decline and its causes and consequences
Melting ice shelves and ice sheets and their connections to coastal
ocean and continental margin zones
Improving knowledge and protection of the unique Antarctic life
from land and ice into the deep-sea
Detecting and abating anthropogenic footprints in atmosphere, ice,
ocean and land
These overarching research areas have been identified as key
priorities by the scientific community in the SCAR strategic plan
and as part of numerous scientific workshops held throughout the
year 2023. Additional workshops will follow in 2024, and the
scientific community will be invited via the Antarctica InSync
website (in preparation) to contribute to and shape these research
areas further.
The scientific rationale for Antarctica InSync arises from the current
and developing strategies of the Southern Ocean Action Plan of
SCAR, and further strategic planning of SOOS, ICED, WMO, WCRP,
ESA, EPB, IPY and other partners, as well as the policy needs (e.g.,
of ATCM, CCAMLR, IWC etc.) to define integrated science actions
for the field and synthesis period 2027 to2030. Each science action
will be registered via the Antarctica InSync international
coordination and additionally proposed as a UN decade activity
https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/DecadeActivity or action
https://forum.oceandecade.org/page/call-for-decade-actions-no6 of
the regional program, and the SCAR DCC. These science actions will
be an integral component of the Antarctica InSync overarching
research areas identified thus far. Many working groups are already
in place to coordinate and design field work and autonomous or
remote observation schemes., Examples of such working groups are
the SCAR expert groups on krill (SKEG), on Birds and Marine
Mammals (EG-BAMM) and on Antarctic Biodiversity Informatics
(EG-ABI), the SCAR expert group Forum for Research into Ice Shelf
Processes (FRISP), SOOS, the CLIVAR/CliC/SCAR Southern Ocean
Regional Panel (SORP), the SCAR Antarctic Sea Ice Processes and
Climate (ASPeCt) group, the Biogeochemical Exchanges Processes at
Sea Ice Interfaces (BEPSII) network, the ICED program, SOARC, the
GOOS Animal Borne Ocean Sensors network (AniBOS), the Joint
IACS-IAPSO Commission on Ice-Ocean Interactions (JCIOI), the
SCAR RINGS group, or the Nippon Foundation-
GEBCO Seabed 2030 project. Some actions will form from gap
analyses (e.g., in the area of a pan-Antarctic microbiome study),
from a pan-Antarctic biologging action, or from the Southern Ocean
paleoclimate archive group. The international science teams will
nominate coordinators and provide a registry and information for
transparent and inclusive communication on opportunities to
contribute to the specific planning and implementation. Ideally, any
science team will include experts of the GCOS/GOOS community to
inform on the essential variable concept, experts for observation
and data infrastructures, and modelers to help designing optimal
sampling and data acquisition strategies.
Basically, the science plan will integrate both bottom-up and top-
down strategies of all international partners with the view on
integrative and synthetic observation and information, to provide
the best-available knowledge for the forthcoming decade, and will
deliver blueprints for further coordinated sustainable science, e.g.,
towards the International Polar Year.
The science plan will be enabled by the cooperation between
national infrastructure programs of ships, stations and planes as
represented in COMNAP, coordination and integration of
distributed long-term observatories, and will seek to include
autonomous and remote global observatory programs such as Argo,
ESA, and NASA. We hope to attract industry (e.g., via IAATO, ARK
and COLTO) as well as private platforms (e.g., sailing vessels) for
the much-needed presence to observe, assess and document the
dynamic change occurring in Antarctica. We also hope to engage
Early Career Scientists (e.g., via APECS and ECOP) and
communities outside polar research (e.g., engineers, experts in
remote sensing, experts in microbiome studies, experts in new
pollutants) to achieve the ambitious program of a pan-Antarctic
baseline at the time of change.
A pan-Antarctic effort bringing together national programs and
other partners – Everyone can come on board
Many leaders of Antarctic scientific research institutions and
infrastructures, currently including AAD, AWI, BAS, CPC, IPEV, ISP,
KOPRI, NCPOR, NPI, NSF, PFS, SAEON, SPI, UAI/PNA and others
support the idea of such a pan-Antarctic Science Programme and
more have expressed their interest. Similar positive and
encouraging feedback was received from the Antarctic and Southern
Ocean science community, represented by SCAR, SCOR, SOOS,
WMO and other international science frameworks. National
Antarctic infrastructure programmes represented by COMNAP will
be engaged from the beginning in the development of the
Antarctica InSync Research Programme to ensure that the necessary
infrastructure and logistical support can be made available.
Input and contributions would also be welcome from other
Antarctic and Southern Ocean stakeholders, including CCAMLR,
WCRP and EPB, but also from various NGOs, foundations and
partners from industry, such as ASOC, IAATO, ARK or COLTO.
The preliminary time lines
2024-2026 - Preparatory Phase
The main tasks in the preparatory phase are establishing a
coordination team as well as alliances, working groups with
stakeholders, logistic teams and a framework of collaboration. The
governance structure will be based on previously successful
international efforts such as the Census of Antarctic Marine Life,
MOSAiC, RAATD etc., by establishing an international steering
committee, international science teams with specific contributions
to the overall science plan, and national committees to organize
national infrastructure and funding proposals. An Antarctica InSync
science plan will be established by bottom-up procedures via the
key Southern Ocean and Antarctic international communities, to
ensure that identified key challenges, questions and needs for
research are appropriately addressed, to decipher the drivers,
impacts and feedback mechanisms of this key region, together with
their global interactions on the oceans, climate, biodiversity, and
humanity. Joint data collection and coordinated, synchronous
experiments and composite observations will be developed by the
international science teams. National programmes and institutions
operating polar infrastructure will be asked to coordinate the
logistical means to implement the science plan. Some teams may be
ready before the international implementation phase to realize
testing of standards and essential variables for synchronous
observation.
2027-2029 - Implementation Phase
Beginning of 2027 will see an intense planning phase of the joint
field campaigns and synchronous data assemblies to be carried out
from 2027 to 2029, with efforts taking place both in the Austral
summer and winter seasons (e.g., by RV POLARSTERN).
2029-2030 - Completion and Reporting Phase
Analyses of the results of the joint field campaigns and synchronous
data assemblies should start directly during their completion with
international state of the art- data infrastructures according to FAIR
principles. In 2029, workshops could be held to discuss and compile
the knowledge gained from the Antarctica InSync program with a
view to prepare synthesis report(s) ready for submission as
contribution(s) to the international Ocean Decade in 2030. These
reports and the experience gained under the Antarctica InSync
research program will then also provide input to the planning of the
5th International Polar Year (IPY) 2032-33.
The funding
The Antarctica InSync research program, especially the planned
joint field campaigns and the use of polar infrastructure and
synchronous data assemblies, will be supported primarily by
voluntary contributions from national or multi-national science
programs, in their sole discretion. Where appropriate, they may be
enhanced by other stakeholders / foundations and further pro
Antarctica InSync partners. Foundations and philanthropy can
substantially enhance international coordinated programs, as
previously shown e.g., in the framework of the Census of Marine
Life. The objective is to make best use of available resources.
The goal is to encourage all Antarctic Treaty Parties to enhance
their Antarctic and Southern Ocean activities with the special aim
to improve sustainable year-round observation. Beyond the funding
of national programs, we hope that the parties can engage to
support international young scientists globally to build the next
generation of inclusive Antarctic and Southern Ocean
expertise. The aim is also to facilitate access to research
infrastructure by scientists from resource-limited countries through
coordinated calls, to achieve a new level of synergy in knowledge
sharing.
Side-event at ATCM-46
To inform about progress with this initiative and to invite further
partnerships to enable this mission, a seminar will take place at
ATCM-46 in Kochi on [date and time tbd].
Acronyms and abbreviations
AAD
Australian Antarctic Division
APECS
Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
ARK
Association of Responsible Krill harvesting companies
ASOC
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
AWI
Alfred Wegener Institute
BAS
British Antarctic Survey
CCAMLR
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources
COLTO
Coalition of Legal Toothfish Operators
COMNAP
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
CPC
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) and Brazilian
National Institute for Cryospheric Sciences
DCC-SOR
Decade Collaborative Centre for the Southern Ocean Region
ECOP
Early Career Ocean Professionals
EG-ABI
SCAR Expert group on Antarctic Biodiversity Informatics
EG-BAMM
SCAR expert group on Birds and Marine Mammals
EPB
European Polar Board
ESA
European Space Agency
FAIR
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Re-usable
FRISP
SCAR expert group Forum for Research into Ice Shelf Processes
GCOS
Global Climate Observing System
GEBCO 
General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans
GOOS
Global Ocean Observing System
IAATO
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
IACS
International Association of Classification Societie
IAPSO
International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Oceans
IASC
International Arctic Science Committee
ICED
Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean
IPEV
Institut polaire français Paul-Émile Victor
IPY
International Polar Year
ISP
Institute of Polar Sciences (Italy)
IWC
International Whaling Commission
KOPRI
Korea Polar Research Institute
MOSAiC
Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic
Climate
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (USA)
NCPOR
National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research (India)
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NPI
Norwegian Polar Institute
NSF
National Science Foundation (USA)
PFS
Swedish Polar Research Secretariat
RAATD
SCAR project on Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data
SAEON
South African Environmental Observation Network
SCAR
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SKEG
SCAR expert groups on krill
SOARC
Southern Ocean Argo Regional Centre
SOOS
Southern Ocean Observing System
SPI
Swiss Polar Institute
UN
United Nations
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNI/PNA
Uruguayan Antarctic Institute / Uruguayan National Adaptation
Plan
WCRP
World Climate Research Programme
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
