Turkish Polar Science Strategy 2023-2035
Turkish Polar Science Strategy 2023-2035
Information Paper submitted by Türkiye
Summary
This paper briefly summarizes the new polar research strategy
document of Türkiye covering the time frame between 2023-2035.
It includes information on mission & vision, priority scientific
themes, core values, and strategic aims that have been defined
within the strategy.
Introduction
In 2017, Türkiye’s first strategy document regarding polar research,
“National Polar Science Programme” was announced, which
covered the period between 2018-2022. Within this time frame,
Türkiye executed its polar activities according to the targets and
priority research themes specified in this document. For future
national polar research activities, the Turkish Polar Science Strategy
was prepared covering a wider period (2023-2035). Until the
preparation of this strategy, Turkish polar research activities mostly
focused on earth and life sciences. With the strategy, as the second
roadmap of Turkish polar research, scientific research of Turkish
scientists will diversify with different topics.
The 2023-2035 Turkish Polar Science Strategy is based on the data
gathered from national and international research initiatives. In this
context, the studies of other polar programs were examined in order
to understand the current situation and future trends in polar
research. In the scope of this study, more than 20 institutions/
organizations were examined within the framework of polar
research plans and programs. A total of 61 one-on-one interviews
were conducted with relevant stakeholders. Two different
workshops were organized with participation from different
disciplines and a focus group study was conducted.
2023-2035 Strategy
From 2023 onwards, the Turkish Polar Science Strategy (Figure 1)
has the aim of guiding the activities of relevant stakeholders,
particularly the Scientific and Technological Research Council of
Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar
Research Institute (TÜBİTAK MAM PRI), drawing attention to the
main priorities for issues awaiting resolutions and challenges in
national and international polar research studies, as well as
informing all national and international stakeholders. The
preparation of the strategy document was carried out by the
Turkish Management Sciences Institute (TÜSSİDE) of TÜBİTAK. The
strategy was introduced by the Minister of Industry and Technology
of Türkiye, Mehmet Fatih Kacır, during the opening ceremony of
the 7th Turkish Polar Science Symposium.
The mission of the 2023-2035 strategy has been determined as “to
consistently develop scientific research and science diplomacy
activities with a governance-based approach in order to strengthen
a sustainable world, which is the common vision of humanity,
through polar research”, while the vision was defined as “to be
among the leading countries in polar research with its unique
scientific studies that draw its strength from its well-equipped
infrastructure, expert human resources, and cooperation network” .
Figure 1- Cover of the Turkish Polar Science Strategy.
The core values that will differentiate Turkish polar research have
been identified as “responsive”, “original”, and “collaborative”. The
priority scientific themes that will shape the direction of the
research were specified as:
Global Climate Change
Ecosystems Under Threat
Anthropogenic Impacts and Social Systems
Understanding the Past, Predicting the Future
A Look into Space
Three strategic aims have been defined in the period up to 2035;
To achieve scientific excellence in this field by increasing the
quantity and quality of national polar science outputs, thereby
strengthening Türkiye’s position in scientific international
organizations and networks.
To increase awareness, understanding, and knowledge on polar
regions and global climate change by increasing the interaction of
polar research and society.
To ensure the sustainability of national polar research.
In addition, some performance indicators have been identified to
annually track the effectiveness of polar research activities during
the period of the strategy. The document is available in English on
the TÜBİTAK MAM PRI’s website (kare.mam.tubitak.gov.tr/en).
Conclusion
The 2023-2035 Turkish Polar Science Strategy provides a roadmap
for all national stakeholders to develop concrete steps. All areas that
Türkiye aims to further strengthen in polar research, such as human
resources, international cooperation, education & outreach
activities, were assessed holistically. As a result, Türkiye aims to
strengthen the existing ties between
researchers and decision-makers and to gain differentiating
competitive power in the scientific field.
