120 years of Argentine scientific research in Antarctica
120 years of Argentine science in Antarctica
Summary
In 2024, 120 years of continuous Argentine presence in Antarctica
will be completed. Throughout these years, numerous scientific
works have been carried out in different areas of knowledge. Since
the creation of the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) in 1951,
Argentine science in Antarctica has grown with technology. This
document provides a brief review of some of the main milestones
that occurred along this 120-year path.
Introduction
On 22 February 2024, Argentina celebrated the 120th anniversary
of its continuous presence in Antarctica. This historic event began
on 22 February 1904 when William Bruce, leader of the Scottish
National Antarctic Expedition, formalised the handover to the
Argentine government of the Meteorological and Magnetic
Observatory located on Laurie Island (South Orkney), today
Orcadas Antarctic Base. Argentina's scientific activity in Antarctica
began previously, at the beginning of the 20th century, with the
participation of Ensign José María Sobral in the Swedish Antarctic
Expedition of Dr Otto Nordenskjöld at the end of 1901, thus
becoming the first Argentine to arrive in Antarctica in an official
capacity, staying for two consecutive years, a period in which he
carried out his scientific technical tasks through observations in
meteorology, geodesy and geomagnetism. However, it is since 1904
that Argentina's scientific activity in Antarctica has been developed
on an ongoing basis.
Brief review of some milestones of Argentine scientific activity in
Antarctica
During the period between 1904 and 1950, scientific activities were
based mainly on the knowledge and study of the terrain and on
obtaining data that could give rise to more in-depth scientific
investigations in the future.
Between 1947 and 1951, a technical and scientific work plan was
developed that culminated in the creation of the first Scientific
Institute in the world dedicated exclusively to the study of the
Antarctic continent, the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA).
From that date on, Argentine science in Antarctica was planned,
coordinated and developed by the IAA, with its scientists and in
cooperation with groups of researchers from national and
international institutions and universities. In this way, the period
1951-1970 can be described as a stage of logistical deployment of
international cooperation and great development of knowledge.
Between 1 July 1957 and 31 December 1958, the IAA participated
in the International Geophysical Year (IGA), developing research in
different areas of the biological and geological sciences. It is worth
highlighting, in particular, those carried out in the disciplines of
Glaciology and Upper Atmosphere, since they gave rise to the
development of these areas of knowledge within the institution.
These glaciological activities, which continue to this day, made it
possible to predict, in 2002, the rupture of the Larsen B barrier,
while in the Upper Atmosphere, studies on the ozone hole and
space climate are of great relevance.
After the AGI, the IAA had an active presence in the meetings of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), an area in
which, for example, it participated in the proposal to study the
ozone layer, which would have its greatest boom in the 1980s.
In November 1968, the IAA made a breakthrough in the issue of
gender equality, with the participation of the first Argentine women
who, in different fields of the biological sciences, carried out field
work at the Melchior Base, Antarctica. The group was made up of
four biologists from Argentina's Bernardino Rivadavia Museum of
Natural Sciences.
Since 1970, through the work of the IAA, Argentina has emerged as
a prominent player in international cooperation in the Antarctic
region. This recognition is due to its commitment to
multidisciplinary scientific research and to integrating international
cooperation projects with objectives focused on critical issues such
as climate change, biodiversity, the sustainability of Antarctic
resources, as well as the care of the environment and the
possibilities of bioremediation of damage caused by human
presence. Argentine scientific bases have become research centres,
contributing to the advancement of knowledge in very diverse
areas. Since 1991, with the entry into force of the Protocol to the
Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol),
scientific advances have intensified the protection of the
environment and associated ecosystems
For Argentine Antarctic science, it is worth highlighting the
agreement signed in 1994 with the Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI)
of Germany, which allowed the construction of a Binational
Laboratory for Biological and Geological Research.  It was the first
research laboratory in Antarctica operated by more than one nation.
There, researchers from Argentina and Germany worked together
during summer Antarctic campaigns for 30 years, jointly generating
a large amount of valuable information for science. This milestone
has been a unique example of Antarctic scientific cooperation,
where a laboratory was shared by two countries with common
scientific interests.
One of the notable disciplines of the IAA in the last 50 years is
Palaeontology.The palaeontological research carried out between
the IAA and the Vertebrate Palaeontology Division of the La Plata
Museum has generated the most complete collection of fossil
vertebrates in Antarctica. This collection comprises approximately
32,000 specimens, including fish, tail-less amphibians, marine
reptiles (plesiosaurs and mosasaurs), avian and non-avian
dinosaurs, turtles, marine and terrestrial mammals. It stands out for
its number of fauna specimens from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic,
extremely useful for understanding evolutionary dynamics,
continental movements (tectonics) and climatic changes of the last
80 million years. The collection contains 21 holotypes, including
Antarctopelta, the first dinosaur found in Antarctica, and Conflicto
antarcticus, a fossil record of a non-marine bird with very different
characteristics from other known birds that will contribute to new
theories about the evolution of modern birds.
The IAA also carried out the studies that culminated in the first
sequencing of a complete genome in Argentina. This achievement
arose from the signing of a cooperation agreement with the
biotechnology company BioSidus on the “White Genome" project,
whose objective was the search for a new bacterial species, with the
complete sequencing of its genome. The project was developed
successfully with the participation of the IAA for several years and
culminated with the description of the bacterial species Bizionia
argentinensis and the sequencing of its genome. This was the first
sequencing of a complete genome in Argentina.
Finally, it is worth highlighting that in recent years, three new
laboratories were built on three of the permanent bases in
Argentina: Orcadas Base, Esperanza Base and San Martín Base. Two
shelters were added to this (on Vega Island and Cerro Nevado).
These new scientific facilities represent a great advance, since they
will facilitate and make the work of many research groups easier
and safer and will promote studies in places where they could not
previously be carried out, due to the lack of adequate facilities.
In this way, Argentine Antarctic science has completed its first 120
years of activity on the white continent and its objective is, through
the IAA and all the national and international researchers with
whom it cooperates, to continue contributing to the knowledge of
Antarctica, especially at this time when marked climate change
places its biodiversity and its natural and genetic resources—still
scarcely known—at risk.
