Hybrid generation pilot project at the Chilean Antarctic Naval Base
“Arturo Prat"
Hybrid generation pilot project at the Chilean Antarctic Naval Base
“Arturo Prat"
1. Summary
The purpose of this document is to publicise the effort made by
Chile to meet the goal of having the first Chilean Net Zero Antarctic
base by 2030. This purpose is part of the national and global effort
aimed at reducing the sources of pollution that cause environmental
damage due to the emission of greenhouse gases and the
consequent increase in global temperature.
2. Origin of the project
The Arturo Prat Antarctic Naval Base, opened on 6 February 1947,
has electrical generation provided by a group of generators that
consume approximately 110 tonnes of diesel oil each year. The
Chilean Navy, an institution committed to reducing the emission of
Greenhouse Gases in accordance with its “Plan of Measures to
confront Climate Change”, and in accordance with the policy of the
State of Chile of carbon neutrality by 2050, applied in a public-
private alliance to implement a pilot project that allows the Arturo
Prat Naval Base to achieve the goals set.
Having defined the need to cooperate with the institutional
Measures to confront Climate Change, an analysis was made of the
convenience and feasibility of the first national Antarctic Base being
the pioneer in achieving the gas reduction target. To achieve it,
meetings were held and managed with various national companies
capable of presenting an appropriate project eligible for competitive
funds from the Production Promotion Corporation (CORFO). The
winning companies were ANDESVOLT in alliance with the company
SAESA S.A., to implement the project called “Remote Hybrid
Generation System for operation in extreme areas of the country
and the world.”
3. The Pilot Project
The Pilot project consists of implementing a “Remote Hybrid
Generation System at the Arturo Prat Antarctic Naval Base”, more
specifically in the building called “Refugio González Pacheco”,
consisting of a wooden construction with a useful area of 144 m2
and an electrical requirement of 15 kW currently supplied by an oil-
fired generator. The system comprises the following equipment:
A modular container containing the “B.E.S.S.” (Battery Energy
Storage System) for the storage and management of available
energies, including the electricity provided by the current generator
and non-conventional renewable energies indicated below. It
includes the equipment controllers and inverters, as well as devices
for remote monitoring and administration of the system. The
systems are manufactured and supplied by the company Andesvolt
– Chile.
A vertical axis wind turbine with a power of 5 kW supplied and
installed by the company Andesvolt – Chile. It is the first wind
turbine of its type installed on a Chilean Antarctic Base, and has the
advantage of delivering energy with a wide range of speeds and
with low decibels of noise, along with preventing incidents with
birds by generating a centrifugal force with its operation.
A set of 5 kW solar panels supplied by the company SAESA – Chile
and installed on the roof of the shelter, taking advantage of the
optimal slope and solar orientation.
Currently, the energy matrix of the Arturo Prat Antarctic Base
depends exclusively on the use of fossil fuels (oil), like the rest of
the national Antarctic bases supported by the Armed Forces and by
INACH. According to calculations by the institutional work team,
the Arturo Prat Antarctic Base has an annual requirement of 91,736
litres of oil for electrical generation (82.02%) and 20,120 litres of
oil for thermal generation (17.98%). The above would imply a
carbon footprint due to oil consumption of 298 tonnes of CO2/year,
with 244.40 tonnes contributed for electricity generation.
This situation, which is repeated in all national Antarctic bases,
even those of recent construction, is far from the 2050 carbon
neutrality goals assumed by the State of Chile in the Paris
Agreement, and which, if not met at a global level, could mean an
increase in temperature above 1.5ºC in the current century,
bringing with it an increase in sea level, which directly affects the
Arturo Prat Antarctic Base, since it is only located at 2.5 metres
above sea level, climate change being a threat to its subsistence.
Conclusions
The successful implementation of the pilot project will make it
possible to reduce the CO2 contribution gap, verifying the wind and
sun conditions for the operation of the equipment, opening the
current energy matrix and implementing an intelligent energy
management system from batteries permanently recharged with
NCRE sources and ultimately with oil, with an initial fuel savings
target of 50%.
S notes that this implementation began in the 2023-2024 Antarctic
campaign, hoping to measure the results of the system during the
year 2024, to subsequently continue developing the project for the
Base in its entirety.
Figure 1: image of a 5 kW vertical axis wind turbine.
Figure 2: image of a 5 kW solar panel set.
Image 3: B.E.S.S container image and wind turbine.
Image 4: “Gonzalez Pacheco" shelter with solar panels, B.E.S.S.
container and work team.
