The Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules, 2023: A step
towards enforcement of Indian Antarctic Act 2022
The Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules, 2023: A step
towards enforcement of Indian Antarctic Act 2022
Summary
The notification of Rules to the Indian Antarctic Act (2022) in
August 2023 completed the process of enforcement of this Act to
ensure that the pristine Antarctic environment and its dependent
and associated ecosystem is protected.
The present IP is a follow-up of IP 141 of XLV ATCM and
summarizes the measures taken through the promulgation of Rules
to provide teeth to the Indian Antarctic Act.
Background
India submitted Information Paper 141 titled “National Measures on
Antarctic legislation” at XLV ATCM (2023) held at Helsinki to
apprise the Meeting about steps taken to establish a regulatory
framework for the management of various Indian activities in
Antarctica in consonance with its obligations under various
instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System as also in line with
Article 13 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctica Treaty.
The previous I. P. (141), referred to above, gave details about the
said Act that was promulgated after both the houses of the
Parliament of India passed it and were assented to by the Hon’ble
President of India. The rules pertaining to this Act, called “The
Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules, 2023’ (here
onwards referred to as Rules), were framed by the Government of
India in the exercise of the powers conferred by section 55 of the
Indian Antarctic Act, 2022 and came into force with effect from 7th
August 2023 when these were published in the Gazette of India
through a notification by the Ministry of Earth Sciences of the
Government of India.
Content
The rules are described in nine chapters, which contain a total of 51
rules and several sub-rules mentioned under the respective rules.
They also contain 04 Schedules and 13 Forms (including Permit and
Post Visit Report Forms) annexed to these rules.
Description
In accordance with sections 4 to 13 of the Act, chapter II frames the
rules to deal with prohibitions of certain actions and makes it
incumbent on the persons and/or vessels to get a permit for any
activity in Antarctica. The rules clearly bring out that unless a
‘permit’ has been obtained, it is unlawful to enter into Antarctica or
Indian Antarctic Stations; take away native mammals, birds or
plants from Antarctica; engage in harmful interference; enter into
ASPAs, HSM: possess /sell/export and import mammals, birds and
plants; carry out any activity (including tourism) and mineral
resource activity in Antarctica and or in Convention area; violate
permit conditions; discharge garbage, plastic, oil or oily mixtures,
effluent, bilge water or any food waste, introduce non-native
species, animals, plants, non-sterile soil and microscopic organisms
or engage in any such matter referred to in the Act.
The procedure for applying for the Permit and disposal of the same
by the designated authority (named Committee on Antarctic
Governance and Environmental Protection - CAGEP) is explained in
this chapter. Rule 4 and Rule 5, with details given in sub-rules 4(1)
to 4(8), along with the applicability of different forms (Form 1,
Form 1A, 1B or 1C and Form 2) depending upon the type of activity
envisaged,
Chapter III deals with Environmental Evaluation to be submitted by
the applicant to the Authority (CAGEP) as established under sub-
section (1) of Section 23 of the Act. These Environmental Impact
Assessments have to be in sync with the “Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica” issued by the CEP
(Committee for Environmental Protection). The rules pertaining to
the ‘Grant and Revocation of Permit,’ including the obligations of
the receiver of the Permit, are described in Chapter IV, emphasizing
the requirements relating to waste management and emergency
plans.
Chapter V lays down the rules pertaining to Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (ASPA), Marine Protected Area (MPA), Historic
Sites and Monuments (HSM), and Protected Species (described in
Schedule 2). It also covers permits for non-native species, the
manner of tackling native species, and the removal and disposal of
the species.
Considerable importance has been given to waste management,
including the removal and disposal of solid and liquid waste
generated in Antarctica and environmental emergencies in Chapter
VI. The rules make it obligatory for the permit holder to remove the
waste generated by his/her activities from Antarctica (including
waste generated in the field camps) to the country from which the
activities generating waste were organised or to any other country
in which arrangements have been made for the disposal of waste in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the relevant
international agreements.
Rules 27 (read with sub-rules 27(1) to 27(4) make it mandatory on
the Permit holder to prepare a waste management and emergency
plan as required under sub-section (6) of the section 27 of the Act.
Under Rules 28 to 30, there are provisions for the classification of
waste, removal of the waste, and annual review of the waste to
update the waste management Plan. Schedule 3, annexed to the
rules, describes the emission standards of machinery, equipment,
and vehicles manufactured in India, while for the imported
machinery, the standards of the country of their origin are to be
followed.
Chapters VII and VIII pertain to the administrative matters related
to the Committee on Antarctic Governance and Environmental
Protection, while the rules governing the inspections of
international facilities in Antarctica are laid out in Chapter IX.
Schedules
The details of the different schedules annexed to the rules are as
follows:
Schedule 1: Amount for Permit Application and Security Deposits
Schedule 2: ASPA, MPA, HSM, and Antarctic Specially Protected
Species.
Schedule 3: Emission Standards,
Schedule 4: Inspection Checklists.
Forms
Forms for Permit applications: Relevant forms need to be filled as
per the activity envisaged by the Permit seeker. These are as
follows:
Form 1, Form 1A, Form 1B, Form 1C (see rule 4),
Form 2: Applicable for vessels/aircraft entering the Antarctic/
convention area.
Form 3: Annual statement of Accounts, Balance Sheet, etc., to be
maintained by the Committee on Antarctic Governance and
Environmental Protection as per sub-rule (!) of rule 48.
Form R1: Post Visit, Report to be submitted for entry, activities, and
stay in Antarctica.
Form R2: Post Visit, Report to be submitted for entering ASPA/
MPA/HSM.
Form R3: To be submitted for permit issued for Fishing/ tourism/
Recreational activity in Antarctica (ship/vessel-based activity),
Different Permits, as follows, will be issued depending upon the
activity envisaged.
P1: For entry, carrying out activities, and staying in Antarctica.
P2: For entry into ASPA, MPA and HSM
P3: For introducing non-native animals and plants or microscopic
organisms in Antarctica.
P4: For vessels and aircraft entering into Antarctica.
Note: The Act and the Rules are available at < https://
ncpor.res.in>
The Indian Antarctic Act, 2022
The Indian Antarctic Environmental Protection Rules, 2023
