Report of the 2024 Pre-CEP meeting review of ASPA and ASMA
Management plans
Report of the 2024 Pre-CEP meeting review of ASPA and ASMA
Management plans
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
The 2024 Pre-meeting review of ASPA and ASMA management
plans was conducted via the CEP Discussion Forum and was
convened by the United States. Nineteen new or revised ASPA
management plans were available for comment through the Forum.
There were no new or revised ASMA management plans submitted
this year. Recommendations for endorsement or for further
discussion are presented to aid discussion under CEP agenda item
9a.
Background
This subforum continues the approach for a pre-review of
Management Plans to be discussed under CEP agenda item 9a. A
spreadsheet accompanied the Opening Announcement of the
subforum; this listed each of the management plans under review,
along with the placement of each management plan within
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions and within the
Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent. If an
Important Bird Area was located within an ASPA or ASMA, that was
identified (See Attachment A).The pre-review provides an
opportunity for colleagues to provide early feedback on
management plans. Proponents have the opportunity to respond to
comments in the subforum and may elect to submit a revision of the
management plan. This process should reduce the time spent
discussing individual plans during the CEP, thus freeing precious
time for other pressing agenda items. As previously agreed, any CEP
member may engage in discussion of any of these management
plans during the CEP.
Many CEP members are experts in the topic of Management Plan
review and might comment on many of the plans. However, other
CEP members might want to focus their attention on management
plans with which they are familiar and could provide area-specific
advice.
Results of the Forum Discussion
Seven CEP members (Australia, China, France, Germany, Italy, the
United Kingdom, and the United States) provided comments and/or
responses for eight of the new or revised management plans. No
comments were received for eleven management plans. There were
many ‘views’ of the management plans; eight plans were viewed by
seven to thirty-two participants; and the rest were viewed by one to
four participants.
Three of the management plans were reviewed by the Subsidiary
Group on Management Plans and then revised based on comments
received in the SGMP. One of these management plans was
submitted to CCAMLR for approval, which was received at the 2023
meeting of the Commission.
There were fifteen revised management plans for which the
proponents considered as having ‘minor’ revisions. No revised
management plans were considered as having ‘major’ revisions by
the proponents. One new management plan was submitted. No
management plan due for the five-year review was submitted with a
proponent recommending endorsement with no revision. Minor
revisions of two management plans were submitted based on
comments received in the pre-review forum (ASPAs 128 and 175).
Recommendations
Given the comments and responses for the 19 management plans,
recommendations follow:
Revised management plans for thirteen ASPAs (Numbers 116, 128,
135, 136, 141, 142, 151, 154, 160, 161, 171, 173 and 175) be
endorsed by the CEP without further discussion.
Management plans for the three ASPAs ‘XXX” (See WPs 43a and 43
b which are part of the SGMP report and WP 55) which have been
reviewed and revised through the SGMP review process (including
the one management plan, see WP 55, which was approved by
CCAMLR in 2023) be endorsed by the CEP without further
discussion.
The new draft management plan for the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge
(WP 8) be forwarded to the SGMP for intersessional review.
The revised management plans for ASPAs 137 and 139 be discussed
during the CEP.
It is noted that any of the above revised management plans may be
discussed during the CEP if a member wishes to do so.
