SCAR response to risk of High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in
Antarctica
SCAR response to risk of High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in
Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Since 2021, High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI H5N1) (‘bird
flu’) has caused high levels of mortality in wild bird and mammal
populations across the world. The first suspected cases of HPAI
H5N1 in the Antarctic Treaty Area were reported on 22 December
2023, as detailed in WP 47 Update on High Pathogenicity Avian
Influenza in Antarctica.
This paper summarizes the work undertaken by SCAR to:
prepare a biological risk assessment for the Antarctic region and for
its bird and marine mammal biodiversity; and
establish an HPAI database to monitor and record information
submitted to the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Network (AWHN)
on the spread of HPAI outbreaks in the sub-Antarctic and Antarctica
throughout the 2023/24 Austral Summer.
SCAR encourages CEP Members and Treaty Parties to:
Continue to monitor wildlife populations for signs of unusual
behaviour and mortality;
Facilitate the reporting of suspected and confirmed cases of HPAI to
the SCAR AWHN (see information on reporting suspected and
confirmed cases at: https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu); and
If possible, conduct surveillance studies to further scientific
understanding of the virus and its spread.
Background
Since 2021, a high pathogenicity strain of avian influenza known as
HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b (referred to here as HPAI) has caused
significant outbreaks across the world decimating wild birds in the
UK, Europe, South Africa and the Americas, and pinnipeds in South
America. Since this outbreak began, millions of seabirds and tens of
thousands of pinnipeds have died globally due to the disease. The
first cases of suspected HPAI in the Antarctic Treaty Area were
reported on 22 December 2023 in Antarctic skuas near Argentina’s
Orcadas station. At the time of writing, confirmed cases have been
recorded at six sites, and suspected cases recorded at seven sites in
the Antarctic Treaty Area (see also WP 47 Update on High
Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica). Given the impact
HPAI has had on wildlife colonies in the South Atlantic and sub-
Antarctic regions, and the dense breeding colonies of wildlife in the
Antarctic Peninsula region, HPAI is expected to have significant
impacts on wildlife if it remains present at colonies in these regions
during peak breeding periods in the 2024/25 austral summer, and
could lead to breeding failure and large-scale mortality events.
The SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Network (AWHN), a working
group of SCAR’s Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals, and
SCAR’s Joint Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine, have
provided the community with detailed guidance documents and
informational bulletins aimed at ensuring a coherent approach to
mitigating risks associated with human activities in the region. The
AWHN has also established a HPAI Monitoring Project and database
with the aim of monitoring the movement of HPAI throughout the
sub-Antarctic and Antarctic regions, and to increase understanding
of its impacts on wildlife populations.
Biological Risk Assessment
Given the potential threat posed by HPAI H5N1 to the Southern
Ocean in the 2023/24 Austral spring and summer, the SCAR AWHN
released a biological risk assessment for the region and for its bird
and marine mammal biodiversity in September 2023 (Dewar et al.,
2023a). This risk assessment considered the most likely potential
pathways for HPAI H5N1 into the region, the risk posed to distinct
geographical areas, and identified the species most susceptible to
mass mortalities. In addition, the AWHN provided guidelines and
recommendations for surveillance, monitoring, and responding to
HPAI, research priorities and enhanced biosecurity measures for all
operators in the Southern Ocean. The AWHN will update the risk
assessment based on lessons learnt during 2023/24 austral spring
and summer to assist with preparations for the 2024/25 season.
In December 2023 the AWHN published a practical guide for
operators and scientists interacting with wildlife (Dewar et al.,
2023b), which outlined likely risks from HPAI H5N1 and suggested
how to reduce additional risks associated with human activity in
the region.
In June 2023, the SCAR Joint Expert Group on Human Biology and
Medicine (JEGHBM) summarized the AWHN guidance and added
additional supporting information and guidance regarding the
impact of HPAI in humans.
Regular bulletins are prepared by the SCAR AWHN and the
JEGHBM, and issued via the SCAR website to provide advice on
current cases and recommendations (https://scar.org/scar-news/
life-sciences/awhn-news/scar-hpai-update-bulletin).
HPAI database
Ongoing surveillance and monitoring of the situation are essential
to monitor the spread of HPAI in the region and to understand its
impacts. The AWHN, has established a central repository to record
and monitor all suspected and confirmed HPAI outbreaks in the
region (https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu). Since its launch,
the HPAI database has been the most frequently visited page on the
SCAR website, accumulating a total of 5,957 views from close to
3,000 unique users.
National Antarctic Programs, National Competent Authorities,
IAATO and CCAMLR fishing vessels via the CCAMLR Secretariat)
have been encouraged to report suspected or confirmed cases of
HPAI to the SCAR AWHN, including information on locations,
species, numbers of individuals affected, signs observed, and
progression of the outbreak. To date there have been XXX
submissions to the database. All reports received by the AWHN are
viewed by one of the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Networks
Avian Influenza experts before being included in the database.
Information submitted to the database is being used to:
Monitor the movement and spread of HPAI in the sub-Antarctic and
Antarctic region.
Update the AWHN risk assessment for wildlife species and
geographical regions.
Update recommendations and guidelines for surveillance,
monitoring and response to HPAI
Update the polar community on current suspected and confirmed
outbreaks of HPAI
Further understand the biology and movement of the HPAI virus
Analyse the impacts of HPAI on wildlife colonies based on reported
data.
The following information is shared publicly via a summary table
and interactive map on the SCAR website:
Date reported
Region (sub-Antarctic/Antarctic)
Site details (Site Name, Latitude/Longitude)
Species affected
Status (suspected/confirmed)
Type of test used for confirmation.
Challenges and further research and monitoring needs
The reports are likely to be an under-representation of actual cases
since the database relies on reports from those operating in the
Antarctic, and these operators do not access all areas with wildlife.
For example, a recent HPAI expedition by members of the AWHN to
the Weddell Sea discovered the largest mass mortality event in
skuas recorded in Antarctica to date (>48 birds) at Beak Island.
This is a previously undocumented breeding ground for skuas in the
region, and it is likely that birds travel to forage at surrounding
islands.
There is a time lag between reports of cases in a given area and
these cases appearing on the SCAR website because of the need for
authorities to give permission to SCAR to display the data.
A lack of sampling equipment and trained personnel in the
Antarctic region has meant many suspected cases have gone
untested and therefore the ability of the AWHN to calculate the true
incursion of HPAI into the region and the number of sites affected is
limited.
Future plans and priorities
SCAR will update its risk assessment and recommendations based
on lessons learnt from 2023/24 austral summer season. The SCAR
AWHN will continue to document the movement of HPAI into the
Antarctic region via the SCAR HPAI database, and will further scope
a long-term study into HPAI in Antarctica. AWHN members will
also undertake surveillance expeditions to specific regions of
Antarctica to identify the presence of HPAI, and to identify
important wildlife locations that could seed HPAI outbreaks at
another location.
SCAR encourages CEP Members and Treaty Parties to:
Continue to monitor wildlife populations for signs of unusual
behaviour and mortality (noting ‘unusual’ mortality does not
necessarily mean high numbers of mortalities, but can also refer to
the appearance of carcasses; e.g., skuas with HPAI often die with
wings splayed out or in unusual positions)
Facilitate the reporting of suspected and confirmed cases of HPAI to
the SCAR AWHN (see information on reporting suspected and
confirmed cases at: https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu)
If possible, conduct surveillance studies to further scientific
understanding of the virus and its spread, including:
Collection of oral/cloacal samples from species 
Air sampling from colonies 
Antibody testing to identify populations where virus has arrived.
References
Dewar, M., Vanstreels, R.E., Boulinier, T. Cary, C. et al. (2023a)
Biological Risk Assessment of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in
the Southern Ocean. https://scar.org/library-data/science/life-
sciences/eg-bamm/biological-risk-assessment-of-highly-pathogenic-
avian-influenza-in-the-southern-ocean
Dewar M, Wille M, Gamble A, et al. (2023b) The risk of highly
pathogenic avian influenza in the Southern Ocean: a practical guide
for operators and scientists interacting with wildlife. Antarctic
Science. 35(6):407-414. doi:10.1017/S0954102023000342
