Measures taken to guarantee the safety of activities carried out
during the Spanish Antarctic campaign in the face of the threat of
highly pathogenic avian influenza
English version provided by the author
Measures taken to guarantee the safety of activities carried out
during the Spanish Antarctic campaign in the face of the threat of
highly pathogenic avian influenza
Summary
This document lists the measures taken by Spain during the
2023-2024 Antarctic campaign to minimize risks and guarantee the
safety of those scientific activities which, due to their nature,
require working near fauna in Antarctica which could be infected
with the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus, and to
avoid transmission of the disease between different animal colonies.
Background
HPAI virus H5N1 initially evolved outside Antarctica, first causing
very significant mortality in the northern hemisphere in colonies of
different bird species. Towards the end of 2022, the virus reached
South America. In 2023, it spread throughout the continent, also
affecting sea mammals. This seemed to indicate that the virus could
reach Antarctica during the 2023-2024 austral summer, which
could have a very considerable impact on the population of
Antarctic animals.
Moreover, the spread from birds to mammals witnessed in South
America, with high mortality rates for sea mammals such as
elephant seals, created further uncertainty as to the possibility of
infection in humans. Although historically the number of human
cases of HPAI infection is very low, mortality linked to the disease
is very high (over 45% of those infected).
Because of this, during the 45th Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting (ATCM), some Parties submitted documents on this issue,
such as WP003 "Surveillance and coordination for the prevention
and detection of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Antarctica",
submitted by the United States, and IP039, IP122 or IP023 rev.1. As
a result, the Meeting encouraged Parties "to develop and implement
procedures for preventing the introduction or spread of HPAI by
their national Antarctic programmes". It also encouraged Parties "to
share information on HPAI detections in Antarctica" (Final Report,
paragraph 313).
Measures taken
Following ATCM recommendations, and seeking to contribute to the
work initiated by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR), the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP) and the International Association of Antarctica Tour
Operators (IAATO), Spain organized a national expert committee in
order to revise international recommendations for identifying
suspected HPAI cases and eliminating the risk associated with the
transmission of the virus by human activity, as well as national laws
and regulations regarding this matter. This led to the drafting of a
"Protocol to reduce the risks deriving from highly pathogenic avian
influenza in the Antarctic campaign", attached hereto as Appendix I.
This Protocol is a living document evolving as more scientific
information becomes available. It establishes different procedures to
reduce to the greatest extent possible the risk of transmission of the
HPAI virus from animals to people, between people, and between
animal colonies. Moreover, it set forth a set of mandatory rules for
all staff taking part in the 2023-2024 Spanish Antarctic campaign.
These included a ban on visits to animal colonies except when
essential for scientific reasons and a requirement that said visits be
carried out by specialized staff using full Personal Protective
Equipment.
Subsequently, a "Procedure for landing in areas where animals are
present and where infection with avian influenza is possible"
(attached as Appendix II), aimed at scientific and technical staff on
board ships, was drafted to supplement the aforementioned
Protocol.
To enhance the safety of scientific activities requiring interaction
with fauna potentially infected with the HPAI virus, a biosecure
molecular diagnostic laboratory was set up at the Spanish Antarctic
base Gabriel de Castilla on Deception Island to handle samples from
animal colonies. The laboratory has automated systems for
extracting nucleic acids from the samples and amplifying them
through nested PCRs for specific detection of the HPAI strain. The
laboratory can also perform immediate in situ nucleic acid
sequencing to provide unequivocal confirmation of PCR-positive
samples. These facilities and the laboratory's analysis capabilities
were offered to all countries operating in the South Shetland Islands
and the Antarctic Peninsula through COMNAP.
Spain has actively participated in communication processes
established by SCAR and COMNAP to share information on the
detection of HPAI in Antarctica. Spain also supported the creation
of a technical working group with participants from Argentina,
Chile, Korea, Uruguay and Spain to debate the best technical
approaches to the issue and to share experiences.
Other initiatives using unofficial channels, such as information
exchange groups on social media, were also very fast and effective
at imparting information supplied by experts from the different
Parties.
Outcomes achieved
Laboratory molecular diagnosis analyses showed that the samples
collected at different locations on Deception Island were free from
the HPAI virus. However, samples collected by Argentina at
Primavera base and analysed at the molecular diagnosis laboratory
at Gabriel de Castilla base showed that at least one skua found dead
carried the HPAI virus. This was the first case of HPAI on Antarctica
confirmed by molecular analysis and in situ sequencing.
In February and March 2024, more cases of dead animals and of
animals with symptoms compatible with HPAI (such as
uncharacteristic behaviour) were reported on the islands
surrounding Antarctica, as well as in the continent's coastal areas.
The complexity of transporting samples from the collection
locations to laboratories with analysis capabilities made it more
difficult for infection to be confirmed in all cases.
In March 2024, a scientific expedition on board sailing vessel
Australis, partially funded by IAATO and in which one of the
Spanish researchers responsible for operating the Gabriel de Castilla
base laboratory took part, demonstrated the spread of the virus to
different Antarctic areas. The expedition confirmed HPAI cases in
areas of the Weddell Sea, such as Beak Island, Hope Bay, Heroína
Island and Paulet Island.
Conclusions and future prospects
In view of the confirmed presence of the HPAI virus in Antarctica
and its impact on animal populations, it seems advisable that:
the Parties continue developing and implementing procedures to
prevent the spread of the virus in Antarctica due to human activity;
the Parties remain alert to the possible impact of HPAI on birds and
mammals in Antarctica;
the Parties share information on the detection of HPAI in Antarctica
and any subsequent scientific results in order to prepare the
response and develop action strategies to ensure maximum safety
for humans and animal colonies during the 2024-2025 summer
campaign; and
SCAR and COMNAP continue to issue practical advice on this topic.
