Incorporation of Antarctica into the Global Monitoring Plan for
Persistent Organic Pollutants through co-development of
harmonized monitoring frameworks between National Antarctic
Programmes and relevant national environmental agencies
Incorporation of Antarctica into the Global Monitoring Plan for
Persistent Organic Pollutants through co-development of
harmonized monitoring frameworks between National Antarctic
Programmes and relevant national environmental agencies
Summary
The Antarctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AnMAP) is a
joint initiative between SCAR, the Arctic Monitoring and
Assessment Programme (AMAP), the United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and Griffith
University. Its aim is to facilitate sufficient and reliable chemical
observation data from the Antarctic region, in order to advise
international chemical policy. This paper outlines the Global
Monitoring Plan (GMP) for Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs),
and highlights the importance of incorporating Antarctica into the
GMP through the co-development of harmonized monitoring
frameworks between National Antarctic Programs and relevant
national environmental agencies.
Background
In June 2023 the Antarctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
(AnMAP) was established as a new co-sponsored group under SCAR.
AnMAP has been established in recognition of the planetary
chemical pollution crisis, and the unique value of the Earth’s Polar
Regions as barometers of Planetary Health. AnMAP has been co-
developed with the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
(AMAP), it is hosted by Griffith University, and is a UN Ocean
Decade Project, coordinated by the Decade Collaborative Centre for
the Southern Ocean Region (DCC-SOR) (see also ATCM XLV IPXX
Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development).
The principal function of AnMAP is to facilitate sufficient and
reliable chemical observation data from the Antarctic region, in
order to advise international chemical policy. It will do so via four
foundation research pathways identified through a horizon scan by
the SCAR ImPACT group (Bengston Nash et al., 2023), namely:
Input pathways of chemicals to Antarctica;
Biogeochemical cycling of chemicals in a changing climate,
Toxicological impact to Antarctic biota, and;
Surveillance
The establishment of AnMAP was a founding objective of the SCAR
ImPACT Action Group, and the two SCAR bodies will work closely
to facilitate standardised, quality-assured, continuous chemical
observation data is generated and synthesised for policy. The co-
creation of a POP online interactive database https://pops.apps.aq
together with other SCAR groups represents a significant output and
progress towards greater contribution of Antarctic chemical
observations to the GMP, with delivery of the tool resulting in
recognized partnership with the Stockholm Convention.
The work of AnMAP and the delivery of an interactive POP
mapping tool further supports the CEP Five-Year Work Plan (2023),
which identified systematic sampling and data collection of
chemical contamination in the Antarctic as a priority under
Monitoring and State of the Environment Reporting.
Global Monitoring Plan for Persistent Organic Pollutants
The 2021 UN categorisation of Chemical Pollution as part of a
“Triple Planetary Crisis”, alongside climate change and biodiversity
loss (UNEP, 2021) signalled an immediate need to radically reform
the global chemical industry, including the policies governing
chemical production, regulation, and trade. In the short time since,
unprecedented groundswell for reform has emerged. The EU
Chemical Sustainability Strategy, with a target of “Zero Pollution” is
in its first years of operation. In 2022 the United Nations
Environment Assembly (UN-EA) announced a new
Intergovernmental Panel on Chemicals and Waste at its 2022 5th
meeting. Finally, the International Conference on Chemicals
Management (ICCM5) met in September 2023, to introduce a new
Global Framework on Chemicals (GFC) that supersedes the former
Strategic Approach to International Management of Chemicals
(SAICM), with 28 concrete targets relating to e.g. the creation of
new legal mechanisms and safe alternatives.
A principal vehicle for the protection of environmental and human
health from harmful chemicals, has for the past 20 years since its
ratification, been the Stockholm Convention (SC). The SC seeks to
reduce and eliminate emissions of identified Persistent Organic
Pollutants (POPs) to the environment (Lallas, 2001). The Global
Monitoring Plan (GMP) forms a part of the effectiveness evaluation
of the SC and encourages signatory nations to undertake monitoring
of POPs in core media, namely: air, surface water, human
breastmilk, and human blood. The major product of monitoring
efforts are quality assured data for the collation of timeline trends
that provide evidence against the effectiveness of regional policy
implementation.
Whilst signatory nations are legally obligated to adhere to the
chemical production and trade restrictions outlined by the SC, and
are expected to generate quality assured monitoring data within
available means, few nations have extended their national
monitoring frameworks to their Antarctic-based activities. With
global chemical production increasing exponentially year after year,
the value of harmonized chemical monitoring in Antarctica in
support of strengthened policy has been recognized. Norway built a
permanent atmospheric observatory that includes continuous
atmospheric measurements of POPs in 2008, becoming the first
Party to act on the identified need. This infrastructure and ongoing
monitoring is funded by the Norwegian Ministry of the
Environment and contracted to the Norwegian Institute for Air
Research, via the Norwegian Polar Institute, providing a model for
realisation of secured data pipelines.
The 2023 The Lancet Planetary Health horizon scan of chemical
pollution needs in Antarctica (ATCM XLIII, Information Paper 137,
Bengston Nash et al., 2023) identified chemical surveillance as a
key priority for the region, specifically of core media via continuous
high volume air sampling, and routine surface seawater collection.
Whilst service level agreements for maintenance of monitoring
activities represent minimal time and labour and may feasibly be
absorbed by National Antarctic Programs, realising implementation
of permanent (air) sampling infrastructure, or negotiating reliable,
ship-based sampling platforms, as well as transport, archiving, and
quality assured chemical analysis of samples, is non-trivial. It is
therefore recommended that, where possible, co-development of
harmonized monitoring frameworks for the Antarctic region be
pursued by CEP Members by working towards development of
partnerships between National Antarctic Programs and relevant
national environmental agencies responsible for GMP monitoring.
Integration of Antarctica in Global Monitoring Plan frameworks
Given the unique role of polar regions in alerting regulators to
chemicals of emerging concern (ATCM XLIII, Information Paper
137; Bengston Nash et al., 2023; Ebinghaus et al., 2023), we
recommend that CEP Members work towards the streamlined
inclusion of Antarctic chemical monitoring into their national
chemical monitoring priorities and Global Monitoring Plan
frameworks. We suggest with minimal start-up costs and effort, the
sampling platforms and protocols can be developed for long-term
monitoring deliverables. Outcome oriented discussions between
National Antarctic Programs, relevant national environmental
agencies and National Environmental Specimen Banks, in
consultation with AnMAP, would bring together the
necessary expertise for budgeting and design of co-created,
coordinated, circumpolar monitoring frameworks for GMP advice.
Investment of national agencies into the development of
observation platforms and establishment of secured pipelines for the
delivery of continuous, quality assured data that subscribes to FAIR
principles aligns with the CEP Five-Year Workplan, Challenges 7
and 8 of the UN Ocean Decade, and best practice under the GMP.
The availability of standardised chemical observations from the
remote Antarctic region supports proactive management of the
global chemical pollution threat through the contribution of
essential risk assessment data.
References
ATCMXLIII 2021. Information Paper 137. Persistent Organic
Chemicals in Antarctica: A horizon scan of priority challenges.
Submitted by SCAR.
Bengtson Nash, S., et al. (2023). Monitoring persistent organic
chemicals in Antarctica in support of global chemical policy: a
horizon scan of priority actions and challenges. The Lancet
Planetary Health 7(5): e435-e440.
Ebinghaus, R., et al. 2023. Berlin statement on legacy and emerging
contaminants in polar regions. Chemosphere, 327: p. 138530.
Lallas, P.L., 2021 The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants. The American Journal of International Law, 95(3): p.
692-708.
UNEP, 2001. Making Peace with Nature: A scientific blueprint to
tackle the climate, biodiversity and pollution emergencies, United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
