Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the CEP
Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the CEP
Summary
We report on the activities undertaken by CCAMLR in the
2023/2024 period relevant to the work of the CEP, including
science capacity building, strategic planning, climate change,
biodiversity, Antarctic species requiring special protection, spatial
management, ecosystem monitoring and marine debris.
SC-CAMLR-42 meeting
The 42nd meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-
CAMLR) was held in person 16 to 20 October 2023 in Hobart,
Australia. Video and audio of the meeting was also streamed live to
increase participation. The full report of the meeting, including the
SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-
CAMLR-42, is available from the CCAMLR website: https://
meetings.ccamlr.org/meetings/sc-camlr.
The Chair of the Scientific Committee for SC-CAMLR-42, Dr D.
Welsford (Australia), completed his fourth and final meeting. The
Scientific Committee elected Dr César Cárdenas (Chile) to the role
for the next two meetings.
Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are
available in CCAMLR fishery reports with management details on
the current year available in Conservation Measures and Fishery
Notices.
SC-CAMLR capacity building
At its October 2023 meeting the Scientific Committee further
developed its science capacity by awarding two new science
scholarships (Dr X. Mu (China) and Ms K. Hoszek (Poland)), both
working on population ecology of krill and their predators. The
CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship has been announced and promoted
in collaboration with fellowships established by SCAR, COMNAP,
and IAATO.
The Scientific Committee also agreed to continue supporting
research on CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)
indicator species and monitoring sites, and to fund a study on
feeding behaviour of crabeater seals by Dr S. Labrousse (France).
The Secretariat implemented an international internship program to
build CCAMLR capacity through funding provided by China by
hosting two international interns, one from China (Kai Huang,
Shanghai Ocean University) and one from the USA (Natalia Perez,
Tufts University). Two new international internships were
advertised and will be arranged for 2024.
Strategic workplan
The Scientific Committee developed a four-year strategic workplan
in 2022 and parsed the tasks to the various working groups. In
2023, these topics were progressed, reviewed and updated based on
working group discussions and is available on the CCAMLR
Website.
SC-CAMLR has reported on five issues of common interest to the
CEP and SC-CAMLR since 2010, following the endorsement by both
the CEP and SC-CAMLR of the recommendations of the Joint SC-
CAMLR/CEP Workshop held in Baltimore in 2009. In 2022, CEP
and SC-CAMLR agreed to include a summary of CCAMLR’s marine
debris monitoring programme into the report (ATCM44_rp12
paragraph 227, SC-CAMLR-41 paragraph 5.48), creating a sixth
category.
Progress in 2023/2024
Noting the progress both CEP and SC-CAMLR has made since the
last joint workshop, it would be useful to establish a process to
review issues of common interest between the two bodies in the
near future to streamline reciprocal reporting to the two
organisations.
a. Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
The Scientific Committee held a climate change workshop in
September of 2023 (WS-CC-2023) in an online hybrid format. The
report is publicly available on the meeting website. With the
revision of the terms of reference for CCAMLR scientific working
groups, all CCAMLR working groups now include providing advice
on the effects of climate change on their advice, where relevant, as
part of their workplans.
The workshop developed a number of recommendations which
were then tasked to the scientific working groups (SC-CAMLR-42
paragraphs 5.1 – 5.14). The Scientific Committee further
recommended that the WS-CC-2023 report be utilised by the joint
CEP – SC-CAMLR climate change workshop currently being planned
(SC-CAMLR-42 paragraphs 5.11).
The Scientific Committee endorsed the proposal for the joint CEP –
SC-CAMLR climate change workshop terms of reference in SC-
CAMLR-42 Annex 9, and appointed Dr R. Cavanagh (UK) to co-
convene the workshop (SC-CAMLR-42 Paragraph 5.29).
b. Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine
environment
The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to
biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected
areas agenda item. The Scientific Committee noted a paper on
phylodiversity in the process of publication and requested the
published paper be submitted to WG-EMM-2024 for further
discussion (SC-CAMLR-42 paragraph 4.6). The CEP remains the lead
body on the issue of non-native species.
c. Antarctic species requiring special protection
The Scientific Committee and the Commission did not discuss
Antarctic species requiring special protection at CCAMLR-42.
d. Spatial marine management and protected areas
An extraordinary meeting of the Commission was agreed to develop
a roadmap to progress discussions on MPA design, designation,
implementation, and the establishment of research and monitoring
plans consistent with the Convention and based on the best
scientific evidence available (CCAMLR-SM-III). The meeting was
held in Santiago, Chile from 19 to 23 June 2023. The meeting did
not achieve the desired outcome of creating a roadmap to the
establishment of a representative system of MPAs (CCAMLR-42
paragraphs 5.1 –5.4).
The Scientific Committee discussed developing SMART criteria for
MPA Research and Monitoring Plans, but their use and mechanism
of implementation were not agreed, and the Scientific Committee
encouraged continued discussion intersessionally (SC-CAMLR-42
4.7 – 4.16).
The Scientific Committee discussed proposals for four MPAs:
Domain 1 Antarctic Peninsula (D1MPA), East Antarctic MPA,
Weddell Sea Phase 1 MPA, and a newly proposed Conservation
Measure for an Eastern Weddell Sea Phase 2 MPA. Scientific aspects
of the Eastern Weddell Sea Phase 2 MPA proposal were discussed,
and improvements recommended (SC-CAMLR-42 paragraphs 4.20 –
4.29). Norway proposed to hold a research and monitoring plan
workshop in April of 2024 (SC-CAMLR-42 paragraphs 4.30 – 4.31).
Significant discussion occurred during both the Scientific
Committee and Commission meetings regarding spatial
management of the Antarctic Peninsula region through the
harmonisation of fishery management and spatial protection. This
initiative began during CCAMLR-41, continued intersessionally, and
at WG-EMM-2023, resulted in an agreement to hold a
Harmonisation Symposium in July 2024 to discuss scenarios for
how spatial management in the area could accommodate further
development of the krill fishery, ecosystem monitoring, climate
change monitoring, and spatial protection (SC-CAMLR-42,
paragraphs 2.85 – 2.90, 2.97, 2.100, 4.17, 4.18, and CCAMLR-42
paragraphs 4.35 – 4.37). The Symposium will be held in Korea 16
to 20 July 2024, following WG-EMM-2024.
The Scientific Committee discussed, and the Commission endorsed
the proposal to merge the management plans for Antarctic Specially
Protected 31 Area (ASPA) No. 152 Western Bransfield Strait and
ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay (SC-CAMLR-42 paragraph
4.38 and CCAMLR-42 paragraph 5.60).
e. Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
The Scientific Committee recognised that while ecosystem
monitoring data is an integral part of providing scientific advice to
the Commission across a number of topics, it is also a specific topic
of its own, which should provide advice regarding the status of
Southern Ocean ecosystems and the impacts of climate change. The
Scientific Committee therefore agreed to add a new agenda item for
ecosystem monitoring and management discussions (SC-CAMLR-42
Paragraphs 2.77 and 9.31).
In 2022 the Scientific Committee agreed to revise the CCAMLR
Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) to better align it with
information required to periodically update the spatial
overlap analysis of the krill fishery with krill predator distributions
as part of the revised krill management approach. The Scientific
Committee endorsed the recommendations of WG-EMM-2024 to
establish four temporary teams to progress this revision
intersessionally, with teams to analyse existing CEMP data, design a
monitoring framework for sentinel species, design a framework for
fishery-dependent data collection, and design a framework for
environmental data collection (SC-CAMLR-42 Paragraphs 2.72 –
2.76). Further discussion and development of these data streams
will be discussed at WG-EMM-2024.
The Scientific Committee noted the unprecedented threat that
Antarctic wildlife faces from high pathogenicity avian influenza
(HPAI) and the need to take appropriate management action (SC-
CAMLR-41 Paragraphs 2.4, 5.17 and 8.13). CCAMLR has consulted
with avian health experts and coordinated its response with other
Antarctic organisations in developing advice for observers and
vessel crew which is available on the CCAMLR website (https://
www.ccamlr.org/en/science/high-pathogenicity-avian-influenza-
hpai-resources). CCAMLR is coordinating with SCAR, COMNAP and
IAATO to maintain consistent and best practice advice to Members
and to the public.
f. Marine debris
The Marine Debris Monitoring Program uses three sources of data
on marine debris from several sources, including:
Data reported by Member national research programs as well as
through Antarctic tour operators such as the International
Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO);
Debris reported by observers onboard longline and trawl vessels
within the Convention Area; and,
Lost fishing gear reported by vessels from longline fishing activities
in the Convention Area.
The data reported as part of the Marine Debris Program should be
independent of data reported via other mechanisms associated with
national programmes or via SCAR, however CCAMLR would
welcome efforts to coordinate, verify, standardise and integrate data
collected across programs to ensure a comprehensive view of
marine debris in the Convention Area can be developed.
Monitoring by national programs
Across the five sites reported in 2023, a total of 4 033 debris items
were collected across these five sites, with 70% of these categorised
as plastic, 18% rubber and the remaining 12% a combination of
metal, wood, cloth, fishing gear and paper. Throughout the time
series, most debris collected have been “Non-fishing items” (Figure
1). The proportion of fishing gear items reported is fairly stable
among areas. The most common type of debris reported is the
‘Other plastic’ category, and packaging items identified individually
as Styrofoam and polyurethane foam. Twenty-seven instances of
fishing gear were reported in 2023, including items from various
sections of longline (e.g., monofilament fishing line, buoys, etc).
Surveys reported ten open and one closed packaging bands in the
2023 season.
Miscellaneous debris reported by CCAMLR scientific observers
In the current year, observers onboard longline vessels
predominantly reported line and hooks lost, while those on trawl
vessels generally reported loss of floats, ropes, plastic buoys, and
small pieces of nets, and in some cases packaging materials.
CCAMLR is developing new data forms to better record
observations of marine debris from various sources in addition to
fishing vessels through an intersessional correspondence group.
Figure 1. Number of records from beach surveys in the Convention
Area since 1989. Site name is given on the y-axis, and fishing
season is given on the x-axis. The size of the pies indicates the
number of records while the fill colour indicates the proportion of
type of debris reported (i.e., fishing gear (red) vs non-fishing items
(blue)). Season (year) is displayed on the x-axis, while site name is
displayed on the y-axis.
A total of 247 772 hooks were reported by vessels as “lost attached
to sections of line” in 2023, equating to 413 km of line, the lowest
in the time series to date (Figure 2). The spatial distribution of total
length of line lost per spatial cell varied with fishing effort (which is
influenced by the catch limits in those areas), and the different
habitats (Figure 3).
Figure 2. Total line lost (km) and proportion of bottom longline
gear deployed that was subsequently lost (%) between 2008 and
2023.
While the reasons for higher levels of gear loss are not always clear,
it can be a consequence of fishing floats being trapped and dragged
away by moving sea ice, or a result of strong currents over steep
and rocky habitats. Therefore, both spatial and temporal patterns
may reflect variation in seasonal ice conditions in some locations.
Continued monitoring and mitigation of gear loss resulting from
CCAMLR fishery operations is an important part of ecosystem-based
fishery management, particularly in relation to quantifying levels
and sources of marine debris and impacts on the ecosystem.
Figure 3. The spatial distribution of lost gear reported by longline
fishing vessels in the Convention Area summarised as the total
kilometres of line lost per 5 000 km2 cell, 2008 – 2023.
