Do we need management groups for ASPAs and handling
cumulative impacts?
English version provided by the author
Do we need management groups for ASPAs and handling
cumulative impacts?
Several WPs and IPs point out the need for ATCM 46 to make
significant progress in the implementation of mechanisms to
manage cumulative impacts (WP010) and the impact of tourism
(WP003, WP024), and to improve environmental monitoring
(WP045) and ASPAs management (WP043). This requires a
qualitative improvement in information-sharing among Parties, for
proper and timely assessment of the impacts that result from
multiple activities, undertaken by multiple stakeholders and
assessed by different Parties.
Experience in ASMAs highlight the value of management groups as
a tool to assists in the planning and co-ordination of activities in
areas where several Parties operate, to avoid possible conflicts,
improve cooperation, and facilitate effective communication
between Parties. It seems reasonable to pose the question of
whether it is time to expand this experience to other initiatives and
challenges in areas where activities of several Parties overlap. This
is an issue further explored by Soutullo et al., 2022 (attachment).
IP022 provides an overview of the ongoing process of updating the
Management Plan of ASPA 150, Ardley Island, located in one of the
areas with highest human footprint in Antarctica, where many
Parties operate and where many of the challenges already
mentioned, accumulate. This offers a unique opportunity to explore
some of the potential advantages of management groups to
coordinate activities among Parties in a context other than ASMAs.
In the case of ASPAs, a management group might facilitate
coordinated responses to contingencies and emergencies, providing
a flexible framework for the timely exchange of information among
Parties operating in the ASPA or its vicinity, as well as a means for
considering potential cumulative impacts of activities undertaken
by different Parties in the ASPA, and implement joint research and
monitoring programs.
Recommendation
Establish an informal contact group to support the process of
updating the management plan of ASPA 150 and explore the
possibility of including the figure of a management group for the
ASPA in the updated Management Plan, as a means to increase
coordination of activities among Parties operating in the area.
