Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2023-24
Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2023-24
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
Introduction
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
is pleased to report its activities to ATCM 46.
IAATO focuses activities in support of its mission to advocate and
promote the practice of safe and environmentally responsible
private sector travel to Antarctica. Further information on IAATO,
its mission, primary activities and recent developments can be
found at: www.iaato.org.
Overview
Over the last three decades, IAATO has been committed to the
promotion of safe and environmentally responsible private sector
travel. This commitment has been unwavering through periods of
major growth, the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic and most
recently, the emergence of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI) in Antarctica.
IAATO’s strength has been and continues to be its membership’s
ability to draw upon their own experience and the advice from
other stakeholders to address emerging challenges and evolve its
procedures and management when necessary. IAATO’s current
membership totals 115 Members, comprised of 55 Operators and
Provisional Operators and 60 Associates.
The total number of visitors in the 2023-24 season was 122,072
which was higher than the preliminary estimates provided at ATCM
XLV. This was mainly the result of increased occupancy on the
cruise only vessels travelling to Antarctica which accounted for 35%
of the visitors.
The anticipated arrival of HPAI in Antarctica, particularly in the
Antarctic Peninsula region was of high concern in advance of and
during the 2023-24 season. The collaboration between IAATO,
SCAR and COMNAP continued from the 2022-23 season and was
further enhanced with additional communications and protocols.
Internal communication between IAATO and its Operators
continued to be strong during the season, which included increased
reporting relating to HPAI (63 reports received on potential
suspected cases) and the Site Stewardship Program (114 reports
covering 27 sites), ATCM 46, IP 108 IAATO Site Management
Methods.
Lessons learned and considerations for the upcoming season were
discussed at IAATO’s Annual Meeting in Annapolis, Maryland, USA
(22-25 April 2024). Additionally, new guidelines were approved to
further support visitor site management. Progress on IAATO’s five-
year strategic plan, Embracing our Role as Stewards of Antarctica
(see attachment), was reviewed and short term goals for the
upcoming season were approved to further support the plan. All of
these steps are important to fulfill IAATO’s mission, and to ensure
Operators’ activities have no more than a minor or transitory
impact on the environment.
Further information on IAATO Operators’ activities can be found in
ATCM 46 IP102 IAATO Vessel Overview of Antarctic Tourism:
2023-24 Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2024-25 Season.
Further information on IAATO tourism statistics, including activities
and nationalities, can be found in ATCM 46 IP104 A Five-Year
Overview and 2023–24 Season Report on IAATO
Operator Use of Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and ATCM
Visitor Site Guidelines and IP103 Deep Field and Air Overview of
Antarctic Tourism: 2023-24 Season and Preliminary Estimates for
2024-25 Season. The Membership Directory can be found at
www.iaato.org.
IAATO Annual Meeting
IAATO’s 2024 Annual Meeting was held in Annapolis, Maryland,
United States of America, 22-25 April 2024. IAATO was pleased to
have attend the open sessions in Annapolis Treaty Party member
representatives from Australia, Türikye, United Kingdom and the
United States of America as well as other valued stakeholders,
including COMNAP and ASOC. Certain portions of this meeting
were also live streamed for members and invited guests, which
included representatives from the Netherlands, Peru and Uruguay.
Actions at the Annual Meeting included:
Review of IAATO’s five-year strategy, Embracing Our Role as
Stewards of Antarctica and the status of the 2023-24 Short Term
Actions and the approval of seven Short Term Actions for 2024-25,
which include:
Developing a new Polar Guide application (ATCM 46 IP106 Field
Operations Manual)
Incorporating the updated Antarctic Ambassador Program (ATCM
46 IP110 Antarctic Ambassador Expedition Program)
Evolving the Observer Program (ATCM 46 IP109 IAATO Observer
and Compliance Program)
Review of the 2023-24 season results of IAATO initiatives including:
Mandatory/Provisional Operator Observer Program (ATCM 46
IP109)
Voluntary Cetacean and Pinniped Sighting Program (ATCM 46
IP108)
Site Stewardship Program (ATCM 46 IP108)
Adoption of several new guidelines and infrastructure changes
including
17 new IAATO Visitor Site Guidelines, which cover both terrestrial
and marine locations (ATCM 46 IP108).
New Vessel Helicopter Activity Restricted Zones (ATCM 46 IP102)
Updated Compliance & Dispute Committee Rules of Procedure
(ATCM 46 IP109)
Creation of the Cruise Only Working Group. (IAATO now has 12
committees and 10 working groups.)
Discussion at a Town Hall session and presentation in the open
meeting regarding the impact of HPAI during the past season and
considerations for the 2024-25 season
Treaty Party Representatives are cordially invited to join any of the
open sessions during IAATO’s future Annual Meetings. IAATO’s
2025 Annual Meeting will be held in Cascais, Portugal, during the
week of April 14, 2025.
IAATO Support of Research & Conservation
IAATO encourages collaborative opportunities with scientific
organizations particularly where these enhance the Antarctic
community’s understanding of human activities in the region.
Projects include(d):
HPAI Response – Prior to the start of the 2023-24 season, IAATO’s
collaboration with COMNAP and SCAR continued regarding the
enhancement of protocols related to HPAI, which included
considerations when working with scientists as well as a reporting
process for suspected cases to SCAR. These were communicated to
IAATO Operators in August
and October of 2023 through virtual Town Hall sessions and
webinars and materials were developed to assist with the education
of field staff and guests related to these protocols. See also ATCM
46 WP47 Update on High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in
Antarctica and ATCM 46 IP105 IAATO Operator High Pathogenicity
Avian Influenza Response.
HPAI Australis Expedition 2024 – In March of 2024, an
international multidisciplinary team of wildlife biologists,
veterinarians and virologists, led by Dr. Meagan Dewar, SCAR, went
to Antarctica, specifically the Danger Islands and into the Weddell
Sea. Leveraging suspected reports submitted by IAATO Operators
during the season, Dr. Dewar collaborated with IAATO to determine
appropriate sites to visit and conducted research regarding HPAI.
IAATO was the primary funder of this expedition. (ATCM 46 IP105)
IAATO/COMNAP Fellowships – IAATO, in collaboration with
COMNAP, will continue to invest in the development of early-career
researchers by awarding its sixth US$15,000 Fellowship in 2024.
Suitable candidates are encouraged to apply. IAATO recognized two
fellows in 2023: Leena Riekkola from the University of Auckland,
New Zealand and, Miguel Ángel Bascur from the University of
Barcelona, Spain.
Support in Antarctica – IAATO Operator expeditions during the
2023-24 season were able to provide support for various scientific
projects, such as the Antarctic Site Inventory - Oceanites and
Penguin Watch. Many IAATO Operators also provided logistical
field support by air, overland traverse or vessel to National
Antarctic Programs.
Other Work and Activities
IAATO also continues to prioritize activities that strengthen its
institutional structure and help position it as a reputable, valued
partner in the wider polar community. In addition to the work
described above, over the past year, IAATO has:
Hosted 10 webinars, covering 20 topics, for field staff at the
beginning and end of the 2023-24 season to discuss best practices
and lessons learned. These webinars were recorded and made
available for field staff who weren’t able to attend the live session
or wanted a refresher during the season. These webinars will
become part of an education library available for field staff and
Operators. This practice will continue for the 2024-25 season, as
will a joint Polar Field Staff Conference with the Association of
Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators (AECO), in September of 2024.
Facilitated over 5,000 online assessments for field staff, crew
(including captains and bridge officers) and office personnel which
were successfully completed for the 2023-24 season.
In addition, IAATO Secretariat staff and Operator representatives
participated in internal and external meetings, liaising with Treaty
Party representatives, National Antarctic Program personnel, and
governmental, scientific, environmental, and industry organizations,
including but not limited to:
COMNAP Annual Meeting, June 2023, and participation in
COMNAP Expert Groups
COMNAP SAR Workshop, June 2023, with participation on the
steering committee
AECO Conference & Annual Meeting, October 2023
Workshop “Workshop on Tourism Monitoring in Antarctica”, 10-12
October 2023 (Online, Hosted by Germany)
AECO Joint Arctic SAR, March 2024
Tourism Incidents 2023-24
IAATO’s policy is to disclose major incidents to ensure risks are
understood and appropriate lessons are learned for all Antarctic
Operators. There were no major environmental or safety incidents
during the 2023-24 season.
IAATO is committed to reviewing all incidents, and taking
appropriate actions for updating operational procedures as needed.
With Thanks
IAATO appreciates the opportunity to work cooperatively with
Antarctic Treaty Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, CCAMLR, IHO/HCA,
WMO, ASOC and others toward the long-term protection of
Antarctica.
