The Use of Wheeled Vehicles for
Science Support on the East Antarctica Plateau
The Use of Wheeled Vehicles for
Science Support on the East Antarctica Plateau
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
Covering 98% of the continent and with an average thickness of
over 2 km, the Antarctic Ice Sheet holds around 90 percent of all
the freshwater on the planet. If it melted, it would raise global sea
level by about 58 meters (Fretwell et al, 2013). Antarctica is
currently losing ice mass through melting at an average rate of
about 150 billion tons per year, contributing significantly to sea
level rise. The West Antarctic ice sheet mass loss is increasing and
accelerating. How much and how fast we will lose major portions of
the West Antarctic ice is an uncertainty in climate science. Some
areas of the East Antarctic ice sheet are presently stable, but in
other areas ice mass loss is accelerating at a similar rate to those in
West Antarctica. Understanding ice sheet dynamics, bedrock to ice
coupling and the relatively unknown geothermal flux beneath
Antarctica, using on-the-ground geophysical methods and ice sheet
drilling is foundational to understanding past and current changes
and informing models of future ice mass loss, sea level rise, and
climate change.
Figure 1 – Location of the study region and its scientific
significance. (a-b) The area of Southern Transantarctic Mountains
(STAM) and the South Pole (SP) station are located between the
East Antarctic (EANT) and the West Antarctic Rift System (WARS),
encompassing the Mountain Early (ME) and Titan Dome (TD), as
well as multiple large glaciers (Reedy Glacier (RG), Leverett Gl.
(LG), and Scott Gl. (SG)). (c) Blow-up map for the nodes (blue dots)
and broadband (red diamonds) deployment. Dashed circles
highlight the 120 and 240 km distance from the SP. 8 Broadband
(BB) stations and 190 short period seismic nodes were planned (red
diamonds) in the region within 240 km of the SP. The array cuts
through a variety of topographic and tectonic features, including
the uppermost mantle low-velocity zone (UMLZ) marked by red
solid and dashed lines in (b-c) and speculated high melting zone
(green contour).
Background
It is logistically difficult to do ground-based studies of Antarctic ice
sheets. Moving people and equipment into the deep field requires
ski-equipped aircraft and major traverse efforts using tracked
vehicles, or both. The US Antarctic Program (USAP) recently funded
a project to do a comprehensive seismic study of the crust and
uppermost mantle beneath the South Pole, East Antarctica. This
relatively unstudied area bridges the Transantarctic Mountains and
East Antarctic craton and is critical for studying geological history
and modern tectonism of the continent, modeling Antarctic
continental dynamics, and developing more accurate ice sheet
dynamic models to predict their response to the global climate
change. The project required at least 8 long traverses from South
Pole to deploy 190 high-frequency 3-component portable seismic
nodes in a cross pattern and eight broadband seismic sensors along
the traverses (Figure 1). Rather than use USAP traditional resources
such as aircraft and tracked vehicles, the program contracted with
Arctic Trucks, a company founded in 1990 in Iceland which re-
engineers OEM light duty wheeled vehicles (including pickup trucks
and 4X4s) to provide recreational and logistic support in the
cryosphere (Figure 2). Arctic Trucks vehicles were first introduced
to Antarctica in 1996 to support a science traverse; the majority of
the >370,000 km travelled on the high plateau of Antarctica since
then have been as a permitted non-governmental operator
supporting private sector activities.
Figure 2 – Upper left: The field team performing seismic station
installation with Arctic Truck support. Upper right: the wheeled
vehicle provides conditioned space for programming and testing the
seismic system in cold environment; Lower panel: Deep field camp
set up by Arctic Trucks supporting team during one of the over-
night traverses.
Key Outcomes
Over the past Antarctic field season (2023-2024), Arctic Trucks
provided two Hilux AT44 trucks to support the USAP science team
to perform 40 days of fieldwork near the South Pole station,
Antarctica (Fig. 2 and Table 1). The team installed nine broadband
seismic stations and installed and retrieved 191 seismic nodes,
covering two 350-400 km transects and extending from the nearby
South Pole subglacial basins to the plateau area towards the
southern Transantarctic Mountains. The teams were able to travel at
maximum speeds of ~60 km/h and average speeds of ~30 km/h on
the Plateau (Table 1). The Arctic Trucks wheeled vehicles
allowed the science team to adjust the working plan as needed,
while enabling high seismic data acquisition rate, making this one
of the first successful seismic node projects performed on the East
Antarctica plateau. This project also demonstrates that using a
private-public partnership model for logistics using wheeled, light
duty traverse support allowed the rapid execution of science at a
lower carbon footprint where traditional platforms (fixed wing,
snowmobile, or PistenBully) were not an option.
Table 1 – Notable statistics of the South Pole seismic project
(2023-24 field season).
Literature Cited
Fretwell, P., Pritchard, H. D., Vaughan, D. G., Bamber, J. L.,
Barrand, N. E., Bell, R., Bianchi,
C., Bingham, R. G., Blankenship, D. D., Casassa, G., & Catania, G.
(2013). Bedmap2: Improved ice bed, surface and thickness datasets
for Antarctica. The Cryosphere, 7(1), 375-393. https://
doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-375-2013
