Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach activities 2023-2024
Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach activities
2023-2024
Summary
This paper presents the Romanian Antarctic Education and
Outreach activities carried out between May 2023 and April 2024
within international /national programs such as “Antarctica Day”,
“Polar Week”, “Another kind of school”, “Green Week”, "Do Know
and Protect Antarctica!" including the National Arts Competition on
Polar Themes for pupils and students, as well as within
collaborations with SCAR, APECS and Parties like Argentina.
Romania, as a co-submitting party of ATCM XLVI WP 029 - Seventh
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach, supports the ATCM E&O ICG recommendations for the
continuation of the activity of this group and the organization of a
second Workshop on Education and Outreach.
Background
Romania, through the E&O group of the National Commission for
Antarctic Research (NCAR) and its collaborators from educational
and scientific research institutions and museums, annually develops
E&O activities on scientific and environmental issues specific to the
Antarctic Treaty System. Observing the ATCM recommendations,
this group made the Antarctic information available to the
Romanian scientific community and decision-makers, through
numerous Notes accompanied by relevant documentary materials.
Sinse 2018, Romania developed through the E&O group an E&O
Program in cooperation with Argentina on Antarctic science,
history, and arts. The results have been disseminated in papers,
conferences, interviews, and exhibitions.
Romania participated in the First Workshop on E&O, ATCM
XXXVIII, Bulgaria, 2015, and since 2016, in some ATCM E&O ICGs
by the ATCM Discussion Forum, reporting on national/international
events, and on Antarctic information published or disseminated by
media. Participation of Romania in those ICGs has been recorded by
the ATCM E&O ICG Core Group in ATCM Working Papers (Agenda
item 11, Education isues) as follows: ATCM XL WP024 (2017);
ATCM XLII WP033 (2019); ATCM XLV WP 025 (2023) and ATCM
XLVI WP 029 (2024).
The Romanian relevant E&O activities have been reported to ATCM
Meetings, Agenda item Education Issues, by the ATCM papers:
ATCM XL IP 171 (2017), ATCM XLII IP 162 (2019) and ATCM XLIV
BP 32 (2022) and ATCM XLV BP 55 (2023). Two reports have been
communicated to XXXIV SCAR OSC 2016, Session 36 - Antarctic
education, outreach, and training. (SCAR OSC Book of Abstracts,
Volume 2, Posters, pages 788-789 and 799-800).
Romanian Antarctic Education and Outreach activities 2023-2024
This paper is a report of Romanian activities carried out during
2023-2024, which were briefly presented on the ATCM Discussion
Forum within the E&O ICG, on three topics of the four proposed by
the ICG, i.e.: (1) “Education and Outreach activities carried out by
Parties, Observers and Experts”; (2) “Exchange request of
information on examples on education on equity, diversity and
inclusion from Antarctic Programs”, and (4) “Feedback request on
the work carried out by the ICG and discuss its future
development”.
National and international education and outreach activities
Romania, under the coordination of the E&O Group of the National
Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the Romanian
Academy, conducted in 2023-2024 a complex program of
educational and outreach activities on Antarctic issues, in
accordance with the ATCM E&O ICG terms of reference.
The Romanian E&O activities in the 2023 first semester have been
reported by Romania by ATCM XLV BP 055 (2023), Agenda Item
ATCM 11- Education issues. During June 2023 – April 2024, the
NCAR E&O Group organized other events for the dissemination of
Antarctic issues, as addressed within ATCM-CEP and SCAR, but also
APECS. Domestic events also informed on national contributions to
Antarctic exploration and science. The audience included pupils and
students, teachers, professors and school inspectors, researchers,
and a few members of Romanian Academy. More than 1000 people
participated in these activities in 2023, and 1700 in 2024.
Antarctic scientific and outreach conferences
Scientific conferences in international workshops
- Three conferences, by researchers of the Institute of Biology of
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, on applications of (Antarctic)
microbial strains and extremozymes (Grahamstown, South Africa,
07-11.02. 2023, and Bucharest, Romania, 25-28.2023, and
12.09.2023).
- International Workshop “Focus on science” for students,
Bucharest, 12.09.2023.
Outreach of Antarctic issues to Romanian education system
institutions, 2023-2024
- Six scientific conferences (on biome adaptation to climate change
– Antarctica case study) presented by researchers of the Institute of
Biology of Romanian Academy, and the National R&D Institute for
Biological Sciences, Bucharest, at: Polytechnical University,
Bucharest; three colleges and two gymnasiums, Bucharest, within
the national Program “Another Kind of School”.
- Twelve scientific and outreach conferences have been held
between April 2023 and April 2024 by the members and
collaborators of the E&O Group of NCAR, involving educational
system institutions and the “Stefan S. Nicolau” Institute of Virology
of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, within the Polar Education
Program "Do Know and Protect Antarctica!" of NCAR in connection
with the National Programs "Another Kind of School" and "Green
Week”, as well as with the NCAR Polar Week Programs, September
2023 and March 2024. Co-organizers have been gymnasiums and
high schools / national colleges, School Inspectorates, and CORINT
Publishing House Group. The conference themes included, among
others: “25 Years of continuous activity of Romania in the Antarctic
Treaty System”; “Emil Racoviță and Belgica Expedition - Antarctic
winter effects on the physical and mental health of the expedition
team”.
https://acad.ro/institutia/acte/comisii/comisia_100/2023_Nota
%2010%20rev.pdf
Scientific papers
Astudillo-Barraza, David, Romulo Oses, et al., 2023. "Apoptotic
Induction in Human Cancer Cell Lines by Antimicrobial Compounds
from Antarctic Streptomyces fildesensis (INACH3013)"
Fermentation 9, no 2: 129. (Dr. Cristina Purcarea, Romanian co-
author).
https://doi.org/10.3390/fermentation9020129
Antarctica Day Program 2023
This program (posted on the ATCM Discussion Forum), included 12
activities, in collaboration with the Ecological University,
Bucharest, and the Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences,
“Ovidius” University, Constanta, with the participation of Academia
de la Antartida of Argentina, Bucharest University, and “Edmond
Nicolau” Technical College in Bucharest.
https://acad.ro/institutia/acte/comisii/
comisia_100/2023_Nota_9_ProgramAntarcticaDay.pdf
Polar Weeks Programs September 2023 and March 2024
These events included conferences, webinars for students, book
exhibitions and presentations, polar readings, promotion of
Antarctic art, celebrations of remarkable Romanian polar figures
such as Emil Racovita and Teodor Gheorghe Negoita.
https://acad.ro/institutia/acte/comisii/
comisia_100/2024_Nota1_rev25martie.pdf
National Arts Competition on Polar Themes for pupils and students,
Stages I and II, 2023
The contest, organized by the E&O Group of NCAR on seven
thematic sessions, included 33 educational institutions in Romania,
with 221 works (essay, drawing, painting, poetry, model,
poster, video), created by 215 participants. This contest, as a part of
"Do Know and Protect Antarctica!" program, proved to be a useful
dissemination tool, resulting in remarkable artistic productions on
Polar themes, created by pupils and students at all education levels.
https://acad.ro/institutia/acte/comisii/comisia_100/2023_Nota
%2010%20rev.pdf
Educational / creative programs of “Grigore Antipa” Museum of
Natural Sciences
The museum provides indiscriminatory access to scientific
information and cultural patrimony, polar information included, by
developing programs for all categories of public, online included.
a) The interactive exhibition "Antipa and Racoviță - story
explorers", 01.06.2023 – 29.04.2024
https://antipa.ro/product/antipa-si-racovita-exploratori-de-poveste/
b) Art Antipa Workshops, Module IV, Festive season, Theme 1,
Penguins’ Joy (6-12 years old), 09.12.2023. https://antipa.ro/
product/ateliere-art-antipa-septembrie-noiembrie-2023/
The Cooperation Program with Argentina
The E&O cooperation activities with Argentina, through Academia
de la Antartida of Argentina, continued. Two online conferences via
Zoom, referred to “125 Years since the First Wintering in
Antarctica: Belgica Expedition”, and “Emil Racoviță and the Belgica
Expedition - Tribute Session”; a third conference was delivered in
the online Scientific Seminary dedicated to Antarctica Day,
organized at the Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences,
"Ovidius" University, Constanta. https://www.univ-ovidius.ro/
stiri/3634-comunicat-de-presa-universitatea-ovidius-din-constanta-
celebreaza-ziua-internationala-a-antarcticii-2
SCAR related E&O activities
- Scientific conference "15 Years since the Admission of Romania as
an Associate Member in SCAR. Romanian contributions to SCAR
activities.", organized by the Institute of Virology of Romanian
Academy [https://virology.ro/programul-de-activitate-stiintifica-al-
ivn-iulie-2023/]
- Three E&O paper abstracts submitted by NCAR E&O Group to
SCAR OSC 2024, Chile, in sessions 34 (Antarctica and the Arts) and
43 (Literacy and science education on Antarctica, Earth systems and
global change).
- The visit in Romania of the SCAR President, Dr. Yeadong Kim
This event has been organized by NCAR and the Department of
Arctic and Antarctic Research of the National R&D Institute for
Biological Sciences. The agenda included a conference held on
September 12, 2023, at the Romanian Academy, dedicated to the
scientific research activity in Antarctica, Romanian - Korean
cooperation included. Dr. Yeadong Kim delivered two lectures, the
first detailing the mission and role of the SCAR Committee that he
leads, and the second presenting the activity of the South Korean
Polar Research Institute - KOPRI.
https://acad.ro/evenimente/evenimente/2023/53_eveniment.html
E&O Activities within APECS
Romania participated with several presentations within the
webinars dedicated to Polar Weeks (Autumn 2023 and Spring 2024)
and to Antarctica Day. (Dr. Marilena Dracea-Chelsoi).
Antarctic scientific research education and outreach in mass media
National “Radio Romania Actualități” (30.06.2023), and “Radio
Guerilla” (June-December 2023), Dr. Corina Itcus, Institute of
Biology, Romanian Academy, Bucharest.
Examples on equity, diversity and inclusion within Romanian
Antarctic E&O Programs
Romanian Antarctic E&O activities addressed to institutions
distributed over wider geographical areas in Romania. A larger
number of pre-university educational institutions, kindergarten
included, have been involved, as well as universities, R&D
institutes, and the Romanian Academy. Other institutions with large
audiences, such as museums, libraries, and publishing houses, also
disseminated polar information, providing the necessary conditions
for people with disabilities. Women in the Romanian Antarctic
research field are well represented, both in number and
achievements. The number of woman polar educators involved
exceeds the number of men.
Examples of indiscriminatory and inclusion activities
National Arts Competition on Polar Themes for pupils and students
– edition 2023
The contest observed the policy of the Antarctic Treaty to promote
knowledge on Antarctica and its environmental protection at all
levels of education system, and the EDI (education, diversity,
inclusion) principle promoted within the Antarctic Treaty System.
1) Educators, pupils, and students of all levels participated in the
contest. 2) The contest involved participants from 33 educational
institutions in 5 (of the 9) geographical regions of Romania. 3) A
few pupils with special needs (speech impediments, heart disease,
Down syndrome) also submitted artistic productions in the
competition. In Romania, pupils with disabilities have the right to
study in any school (as per Law no 198/2023 of 4 July 2023 –
“Preuniversity Education Law”, entered into force on 6 January
2024. This law also stipulates the provisions on the equity,
diversity, and inclusion aspects of the Romanian national education
system).
E&O programs of “Grigore Antipa” National Museum of Natural
Sciences
“Grigore Antipa” Museum, Bucharest, provides indiscriminatory
access to scientific information and cultural patrimony by dedicated
events in partnership with “Superheroes among us” association, for
visitors with sensory and neurocognitive disabilities. These events
are provided monthly as “Quiet Hours at Antipa Museum” (23
editions in 2023) on Mondays (access platforms installed).
The program “Do Discover Nature!” for primary school pupils, and
online interactive / creative (free) workshops became models of
good practice for other museums. (In 2023, 41 workshops for 447
children and youth with special educational needs, and 200
accompanying participants).
Romania within the ATCM E&O ICGs
The Romanian Antarctic E&O programs have been extended
following the participation since 2016 of Romania in some ATCM
E&O ICGs. Romania became a co-author of ATCM WP 025 (2023)
and ATCM WP 029 (2024). Analysis of the reports and suggestions
from the Parties, Observers and Experts, posted on the ATCM
Discussion Forum and summarized in the ATCM E&O ICGs Reports
(WPs submitted by the ICG Core Group) generated useful
conclusions and recommendations.
Romania supports the continuation of the ATCM Intersessional
Contact Group on Education and Outreach during 2024-2025 and
recognizes the usefulness of the Forum to further work. Romania
supports the engagement of other stakeholders such as SCAR,
APECS and PEI, and endorses the recommendation to organize
another Workshop on Education and Outreach.
General Remarks: The diversification of Romanian Antarctic E&O
activities and the increased number of institutions and participants
involved is noteworthy. Women in the Romanian Antarctic research
field are well represented both in number and achievements, and
the number of woman polar educators exceeds the number of men.
E&O activities addressed to institutions distributed over wider
geographical areas in Romania, and peoples with some disabilities
have been involved.
Conclusions
The Romanian E&O Antarctic programs have developed in the ten
years of activity under NCAR of Romanian Academy and the
coordination from the NCAR E&O Group, especially following the
participation of Romania in some ATCM E&O ICGs. Romania is
willing to further participate in some international Antarctic E&O
programs that should also consider artistic means, as per the ATCM
recommendations, also endorsed by SCAR.
Romania, duas a result of its participation in the E&O ICGs on
ATCM Discussion Forum, has become part of the group of authors
which submitted the Sixth Report (ATCM XLV WP 025, Agenda
item 11: Education Issues) and the Seventh Report of the
Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach (ATCM
XLVI WP 029, Agenda item 11: Education Issues).
Romania recognizes the usefulness of the Discussion Forum on E&O
to further work within ICG during 2024-2025. Romania supports
the ATCM E&O ICG 2023-2024 recommendation to discuss the
possibility to organize a second Workshop on Education and
Outreach.
Acknowledgements
Romania acknowledges the support from the ATCM E&O ICG Core
Group and collaborators in its E&O activities and programs.
Contact: Romanian Contact Point for ATCM E&O ICG - Senior
researcher Mihaela Cotta,
mihaelacotta@gmail.com
