Maitri-II: Redevelopment of the Indian Research Station Maitri in
Antarctica
Maitri-II: Redevelopment of the Indian Research Station Maitri in
Antarctica
Summary:
The redevelopment of Maitri research station is necessitated due to
aging of old station and need to address the existing challenges to
enhance its capabilities for scientific research and environmental
sustainability. The National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research,
an autonomous institute under the Ministry of Earth Sciences,
Government of India is working on preparing a detailed
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) as per the Revised
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(2016)
Introduction:
This information paper aims to inform the Antarctic community
about India’s initiative to revitalize the aging Maitri Station,
commissioned in 1988. The purpose of this redevelopment and
expansion is to optimize existing facilities at the Indian Research
Station Maitri while minimizing disruption to the natural
topography and biota of Schirmacher Hills. This endeavour aims to
foster cutting-edge technology, bolster environmental sustainability,
and enhance living conditions for expedition members.
The proposed redevelopment plans seek to replace aging
infrastructure of existing Maitri Station with modern facilities and
incorporate new structures to advance waste management, water
treatment, and emissions reduction capabilities as per the modern
environmental standards. Strategic placement of buildings, across
the undulating terrain, is envisioned to accommodate a sustained
population of approximately 45 individuals throughout the year,
with a peak capacity of up to 150 during the summer months.
Through conscientious planning and implementation, India would
strive to harmonize these developments with the natural
environment, preserving the pristine beauty and ecological integrity
of Schirmacher Hills for future generations.
Background:
India commissioned its first Antarctic research base Dakshin
Gangotri on ice shelf in the Princess Astrid Coast, east Antarctica in
Antarctica in 1983. The station was lost to snow cover and gradual
sinking because of which it had to be abandoned in 1989-90 in
favour of a station on ice free rocky oasis of Schirmacher Hills.
"Maitri," India's second Research Station in Antarctica, embodying
its unwavering commitment to the scientific advancement and
exploration was commissioned in 1988. Maitri is strategically
positioned amidst the Schirmacher Hills, gracing the southern
shores of the Priyadarshani (Zub) Lake. Nestled upon an ice-free
rocky terrain, Maitri stands at an altitude of approximately 117
meters above sea level, positioned at coordinates 70°46’00’’S;
11°43’51’’E in the central Dronning Maud Land region of East
Antarctica.
Despite its significant contributions to scientific research, Maitri has
surpassed its conceived operational period of 25 years, exhibiting
signs of wear and tear in response to the harsh Antarctic
environment. Situated approximately 100 kilometres from the sea,
with an intervening ice shelf, the station faces unique challenges
common to all inland stations of Antarctica. These challenges
underscore the importance of revitalizing and expanding Maitri to
keep pace with growing advancement in S&T fields so as to ensure
its continued effectiveness as a hub for scientific exploration and
collaboration in the Antarctic region.
Current Situation:
The Maitri research base, established with the primary building
accommodating up to 25 persons during winters, faces logistical
challenges impacting the comfort and environmental standards of
its operations. The main source of water supply, the Priyadarshni
(Zub) Lake, supports the facility. Scientific laboratories and summer
living quarters, housed in containerized and wooden hutments,
extend the capacity to accommodate up to 70 persons. However,
these facilities are distributed across the moraine platform between
the Priyadarshani (Zub) Lake and the main building, resulting in
dispersed resources and increased logistical complexity.
Under the existing waste management practice, the waste is
segregated, compressed, and packed in empty cartons or drums and
back loaded with the ship. Furthermore, the kitchen and water from
showers are treated through a containerized bio-mechanical plant,
and the treated water is accumulated in a polyline pit and drained
during the summers. The toilets are of incinerator type, and all the
incinerated material is back loaded into empty fuel drums.
Additionally, six power generators, housed in containerized units on
the southern side of the main building, provide essential electricity.
The vehicles workshop, located in an old hangar, poses challenges
during winter operations, affecting maintenance efficiency. The
main building, constructed between 1987 and 1988, has seen the
surrounding infrastructure expand over the years, as per evolving
requirements.
Cargo discharge occurs at the Indian Barrier, approximately 100 km
from Maitri, with an intervening ice shelf. Transportation of cargo
and fuel to Maitri involves a fleet of Pisten Bully vehicles traversing
a circuitous route, primarily over the ice shelf in the north, then
climbing the polar ice cap, and finally navigating a snow-covered
morainal patch to approach the station from the south. This
challenging journey takes a toll on the vehicles, necessitating
continuous repair and maintenance. A temporary fuel farm,
comprising approximately 16 double-hulled tank containers with a
capacity of 24 KL each, is maintained west of the main building.
Despite Maitri's significant contributions to scientific research, the
prevailing logistical challenges pose hurdles to maintaining
stringent environmental standards, emphasizing the need for
improvements.
Issues/Challenges:
One of the foremost challenges facing the Maitri station is the aging
infrastructure, which demands replacement with environmentally
friendly, energy-efficient, and weatherproof structures. However,
the most pressing concern lies in the disposal of treated waste
water. Currently, the main building of the station is situated at a
higher slope on the southern side of Priyadarshni (Zub) Lake, the
primary freshwater source. This positioning leads to treated waste
water seeping back into the same lake due to natural slope, posing a
significant environmental risk.
Moreover, the power requirements of the station, including
containerized generators, water treatment plant, and heating boilers
for the main building, are substantial, exacerbating energy
consumption concerns. Additionally, the alignment of roads,
pipelines, and cableways not only create navigation challenges but
also presents maintenance difficulties that require attention.
The constrained space both for living and laboratories due to
increasing research interest underscores the need for comprehensive
improvements and redevelopment of the Maitri to enhance its
operational efficiency.
Proposed Actions/Solutions:
To address the recommendations and suggestions of the three
International Inspections teams1,2,3 and mitigate environmental
risks associated with waste water disposal, it is planned to relocate
the main building of Maitri-II, north of Priyadarshni (Zub) lake.
This strategic relocation would
enable the utilization of freshwater from the existing source while
facilitating the discharge of treated water onto the shelf ice in the
north.
Implementing a comprehensive infrastructure upgrade is essential
to replace aging structures with environmentally friendly, energy-
efficient, and weather proof alternatives. This initiative, taking
advantage of the experience gained while making of the Bharati
Station, will include replacing containerized generators, water
treatment plant components, and heating boilers with modern,
energy-efficient equivalents. Additionally, planned electrical
distribution systems will enhance operational efficiency and reduce
energy consumption.
Optimizing the space utilization, planned infrastructure growth
such as alignment of roads, pipelines and cableways and other
essential infrastructure elements, the operational efficiency will be
significantly improved, reducing labour-intensive efforts and
minimizing disruptions to scientific activities thereby enhancing the
overall effectiveness of the Maitri research station. The
implementation of energy-efficient and environmentally conscious
building designs will enhance sustainability while providing
flexibility to adapt to seasonal variations in population and energy
demand. The option to shut down portions of the station during
winter months will not only conserve fuel for electricity
consumption but also reduce operational costs and environmental
footprint.
Overall, the redevelopment of Maitri research station will meet the
evolving needs of scientific research in Antarctica while upholding
environmental principles contributing to our understanding of the
Antarctic region and its significance for global environmental
conservation efforts.
Conclusions
India is working on developing a detailed Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) document in line with ‘Revised
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(2016)’ and will intimate the progress on this account at the 47th
ATCM.
References
1.V K Dhargalkar (1996) The twelfth Indian Scientific Expedition to
Antarctica: Events and Achievements. In: Twelfth Indian Expedition
to Antarctica Technical publication No.10, pp.1-22 [Visit of
Swedish Inspection team to Maitri on 21.01.1994]
2.Report of Russia-US Joint Antarctic Inspection (Nov.29-
Dec.06,2012)
3.Report of German-South African Joint Inspection (Jan.08-29,
2013)
