IAATO Site Management Methods
IAATO Site Management Methods
Information Paper Submitted by the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
Introduction
Various ATCMs have adopted a number of instruments to guide the
assessment and management of tourism activities, often developed
with advice from IAATO. These have proved very helpful to those
organizing and conducting activities in Antarctica. A list of
examples is given below, all of which were codified from
established IAATO guidelines: Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994),
which includes Guidance for those Organizing and Conducting
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic.
Resolution 4 (2004), which includes Guidelines on contingency
planning, insurance and other matters for tourist and other non-
governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Measure 4 (2004) Insurance and contingency planning for tourism
and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Resolution 9 (2012), The assessment of land-based expeditionary
activities.
Resolution 4 (2021), General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic.
IAATO has developed guiding principles, set in the Association’s
bylaws, which bind its membership. The guiding principles were
developed to ensure that IAATO Members’ activities were consistent
with the Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Protocol, and ATCM
Measures, Resolutions and Recommendations. For example:
To advocate and promote the practice of safe and environmentally
responsible travel to the Antarctic. (IAATO Bylaws Article II,
Section B.)
To operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty System.
(IAATO Bylaws Article II, Section D.).
That planned activities will have no more than a minor or transitory
impact on the Antarctic environment. (IAATO Bylaws Article II,
Section E.)
IAATO maintains an extensive database in order to understand
long-term trends to facilitate decision-making about the responsible
management of its Operators’ activities. Data is collected through
Post Visit Report (PVR) forms, adopted by the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties, which are submitted to the IAATO Secretariat
and collated into an annual statistics overview.
Data from PVRs or other reporting methods (e.g., see information
below about IAATO’s Voluntary Cetacean and Pinniped Sightings
(V-CaPS) and Site Stewardship), assists IAATO in understanding
where further guidance or management of sites may be needed.
When additional management needs are identified, IAATO utilizes
its Committee and Working Group structure to create the necessary
tools and support documents.
Below is further information about the tools IAATO uses for site
management.
Site Guidelines
Since its inception in 1991, IAATO Operators, have actively self-
managed their activities within the framework of the Antarctic
Treaty System (ATS). Prior to adoption of a Resolution Site
Guidelines for Visitors in 2005 at ATCM XXVIII (Resolution 5),
IAATO had established site specific guidelines to manage their
Operators activities. These early IAATO site specific guidelines
included identifying
sensitive areas to be avoided and categorized sites as suitable for
visits from vessels carrying less than 200 passengers and those sites
suitable for visits from vessels carrying up to 500 passengers and
ultimately formed the starting point for the for the development of
subsequent ATCM Site Guidelines.
The present 44 ATCM Site Guidelines for Visitors provide site-
specific advice for some locations, which are essential tool for those
managing safe and environmentally responsible visitation to the
Antarctic.
Continuing to proactively manage Operator activities, IAATO
created a suite of additional Site Guidelines that they use in the
field. IAATO bases the decision to create a site guideline upon the
analysis of PVR site visitation data as well as feedback from guides
in the field. While creating the new IAATO site guidelines, IAATO
uses Annex 2 of Resolution 4 (2021), to remain consistent with the
ATCM suite of guidelines. Several new guidelines are noted below.
These, together with the ATCM Site Guidelines, cover a broad suite
of site guidance to many of the most highly visited sites that IAATO
Operators visit.
IAATO has created 18 new IAATO site guidelines in the last two
years. These new IAATO guidelines, adopted at the recently held
Annual Meeting (Annapolis, MD, USA, 23-25 April 2024), include
both marine and terrestrial sites, and contain practical guidance for
Operators and guides on how they should conduct visits in those
sites, taking into account environmental values and sensitivities.
IAATO would welcome working with Consultative Parties to review
and confirm these site guidelines, should there be value seen in
including them for adoption at future ATCMs.
The new IAATO Guidelines are as follows (See attachments 1-18 for
full documentation):
Bongrain Point, Pouquoi Pas Island
Cape Lookout, Elephant Island
Chiriguano Bay, Brabant Island (Marine only)
Cierva Cove, Hughes Bay (Marine only)
Fort Point, Greenwich Island
Hidden Bay (Marine only)
Hovgaard Island
Hydruga Rocks
Jenny Island
Kerr Point, Ronge Island
Kinnes Cove/Madder Cliffs, Joinville Island
Leith Cove, Paradise Harbour
Penguin Point, Seymour Island
President Head, Snow Island
Prospect Point, Holtedahl Bay
Red Rock Ridge
Robert Point, Robert Island
Spert Island (Marine only)
Between ATCM Site Guideline review periods, IAATO may add
supplemental information to existing guidelines when helpful –
information that assists with interpretation but does not affect the
substance of the guidelines. An example of this is a small addendum
to the ATCM Stonington Guideline, where an updated map was
circulated.
For further Site Guideline information see ATCM 46 (2024) IP104 A
Five-Year Overview and 2023-24 Season Report on IAATO Operator
Use of Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and ATCM Visitor Site
Guidelines.
IAATO Ship Scheduler and Live Ship Scheduler
Scheduling site-landings has always been a key role of IAATO from
its founding in 1991. The methods have evolved with technology.
The seasonal scheduling was originally done by manual means from
1991 through the 2000’s. The implementation of the pre-season
electronic ship scheduler in early 2010 was the first step with more
advanced technology to help coordinate changes to vessel and yacht
operations. However, in-season schedule changes were still
managed via email, and when multiple changes needed to be made
due to expedition needs, weather and ice, this presented a challenge
for management.
With further advancement in technology, the Live Ship Scheduler
was launched in 2019. The Live Ship Scheduler is a visual tool
which integrates all software platforms the IAATO fleet currently
uses, e.g., the hourly vessel tracking site and the IAATO database,
to allow vessels to re-schedule landings in real time during the
season. Booking changes are instantaneous and allow for faster and
more reliable IAATO Fleet coordination.
Each year IAATO continues to evolve this tool prior to the season,
creating improvements and new features, as Operators benefit from
increases in bandwidth and consistency of internet access in
Antarctica.
Stewardship Programs
IAATO leverages the extensive local expert knowledge of IAATO
Operator field personnel for example through the development of
site guidelines or monitoring for high mortality events. These Field
Staff often have tertiary degrees in education, environmental
sciences, and conservation management, and are passionate about
protecting Antarctica. They identify changes occurring in
Antarctica, from seasonal (current status of the wildlife
reproductive cycle) to non-seasonal (changes in ice). Historically
they have shared these observations with guests to enrich their
experience as well as with colleagues on other vessels to expand
their knowledge. Over the years a significant amount of anecdotal
information has been shared but not formally recorded.
IAATO started two programs in the past two Antarctic summer
seasons to help record this information in a more structured manner
and assist IAATO’s membership in making future management
decisions. Next steps for both of these programs includes the
development of technology and educational material to be shared
with visitors.
Site Stewardship Program
The Site Stewardship Program started during the 2023-24 Antarctic
season. Each vessel was initially allocated at least one site to report
on based upon pre-season Ship Scheduler sites planned for the
season. Reporting required responses to five questions and the
submission of three images (see attached Site Stewards Monitoring
Report example). Feedback from the reports was shared with the
IAATO Fleet to consider for subsequent site visits. In total 114
reports were received, covering 27 sites.
For the 2024-25 season, this program will be further expanded to
include more site assignments and additional questions on the
report.
Voluntary Cetacean and Pinniped Sightings (V-CaPS) Program
V-CaPS started during the 2022-23 Antarctic season. In this
program field staff provide information about opportunistic
sightings of whales and seals to IAATO on a weekly basis. This data
is then mapped and shared weekly with those who have contributed
the submissions.
Information gathered during the 2022-23 season resulted in a
proposal from the IAATO Marine Committee to create two new
geofenced whale slow down zones as well as the expansion of time
for a previously designated zone (see attachment – FOM document
of IAATO Geofenced Whale Areas).
Information gathered during the 2023-24 season further supported
the need to create the new geofenced areas.
IAATO remains committed to reporting to the CEP and ATCM
information on IAATO Operator activities. IAATO values
collaboration with all Antarctic Stakeholders, whether feedback
from the field or data from researchers, to improve existing, or
create new, tools to support the continued safe and environmentally
responsible private sector travel to Antarctica.
