An Update on British Antarctic Survey’s Antarctic Infrastructure
Modernisation Programme (AIMP)
Update on the Antarctic Infrastructure Modernisation Programme
(AIMP)
An information paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The Antarctic Infrastructure Modernisation Programme (AIMP) is a
long-term investment programme in United Kingdom’s polar
infrastructure that is intended to transform how the British
Antarctic Survey (BAS) enables and supports frontier science on an
ongoing basis. BAS are taking a phased approach to modernisation,
and to date, most activities have occurred at Rothera Research
Station.
This paper updates the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM) on progress to date of development and delivery of the
major initiatives within this programme.
AIMP Overview
The AIMP, commissioned by the Natural Environment Research
Council (NERC), which is a component of UK Research and
Innovation (UKRI), is a long-term programme that is intended to
enable a world-leading capability to ensure that Britain remains at
the forefront of climate, biodiversity and ocean research in the
Polar Regions.
Since its inception in 2017, the AIMP has taken the form of two
phases of work. Phase 1 of AIMP was primarily focused on delivery
of the Royal Research Ship Sir David Attenborough (RRS SDA) and
its associated projects at Rothera Research Station.
These included the construction of a new wharf to support the
effective operation of the vessel (an update on the wharf project
was provided in CEP XXIII IP097 - Update and CEE Compliance
Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation
Project) and the Rothera Modernisation Project.
The Rothera Modernisation project comprises the construction of
the Discovery Building, a new scientific support and operations
facility at Rothera Research Station, demolition of six older
buildings which have reached the end of their operational life, and
the improvement and upgrade of site wide services (pipework and
cables that distribute fuel, water and electricity). It has been
designed with a focus on sustainability and will enable scientific
support and operations functions to work together under one roof.
This new facility forms an essential part of the critical life support
systems to the station and includes:
A combined heat and power (CHP) energy centre that distributes
waste heat to buildings and provides power to the station.
Central store to consolidate equipment and cargo stores on station
for more effective stock control and efficient cargo management
with reduced manual handling.
Workshops and preparation areas for managing equipment and
cargo for support science and field expeditions.
New operations hub and offices to support the whole station.
Operations tower to manage communications with deployed
Antarctic field teams and aircraft.
New medical centre designed to modern healthcare standards.
Improved training facilities including a climbing wall for field
teams and an education centre.
Enhanced wellbeing areas including gym, breakout areas, music
centre and arts and crafts facility.
Backup systems for life support and operations.
Bespoke biosecurity facilities to further minimise the risk of non-
native species introductions associated with imported cargo.
The modular approach to the design of the building and the
provision of multi-functional zones provides an ability to adapt for
future operational requirements.
The Rothera Modernisation project was subject to an Initial
Environment Examination (IEE) in 2019. To complement the IEE
process, BAS has worked with the Building Research Establishment
(BRE) to tailor BREEAM for polar environments. BAS currently uses
a bespoke “Tailored Appendix” for the BREEAM International
scheme for new buildings which has adapted many of the standard
criteria to achieve the best possible outcome with the most
appropriate approach for the climate and latitude. Further detail on
that process is included in CEP XXIII WP027 Sustainable Antarctic
station design: Reducing contributions to climate change.
Work began on constructing the Discovery Building and Site Wide
Services in 2019 and completion is expected in 2025 to enable
commencement of its transition and handover into operational use.
Example photos of the Discovery building are included below.
Phase 2
The investment case for Phase 2 of AIMP was approved in 2022
with a 10-year delivery horizon.
Within the Phase 2 business case, the key focus areas are airbridge
capability, in terms of infrastructure and operating platform, and
striving towards net zero carbon.
From an air infrastructure perspective, the first project to be
developed and delivered within Phase 2 is the Runway Resurfacing
project. This was required as the runway had not received
significant interventions since commencing its operational period in
1991/92 and its condition had degraded.
The project required replacement to the runway lighting, provision
of a traffic control system at the runway crossings in addition to
replacement of the surface itself, which included reinstatement of
the camber for drainage and maintenance purposes along with the
provision of a turning circle at the southern end of the runway to
support ongoing air operations at Rothera.
The project was subject to an IEE in 2022 and was completed over
the course of two austral summer seasons in 2022/23 and 2023/24.
It required two closures of the runway during the 2023/24 season,
but BAS confirm the runway is again fully operational and open to
transiting aircraft.
The photo below shows the runway resurfacing project in progress:
From a net zero carbon perspective, the Phase 2 business case
allocated funding to the Rothera Renewable Energy project that is
responsible for developing a road map to net zero carbon for the
station, as well as undertaking feasibility studies on known
technologies and innovative solutions, and where possible,
undertaking enabling works and trials on station. It is also intended
that this activity would inform future bids for funding to deliver net
zero carbon in accordance with the organisational strategy and
targets.
A further update on future Phase 2 and later phases will be
provided to ATCM next year.
