Summary Report on an Informal Intersessional Process to Share
Information on Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Summary Report on an Informal Intersessional Process to Share
Information on Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Summary
An informal intersessional process was established by ATCM XLV
(2023) to share information on domestic implementation of Annex
VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty. All participants reaffirmed their support for the principles
underlying Annex VI and welcomed the opportunity to exchange
experience and information in support of progress towards Annex
VI becoming effective. Participants shared views and experiences in
developing and implementing domestic legislation, including
applying financial security and insurance provisions, and
administering requirements for operators. Further exchanges would
benefit parties’ progress towards implementation; Australia stands
ready to convene a further intersessional discussion following
ATCM XLVI to support this.
Background
At ATCM XXVIII (2005) Consultative Parties adopted Measure 1
(2005) Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty: Liability arising from environmental emergencies.
Annex VI is an important element in supporting the objective of the
Environmental Protocol to comprehensively protect the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
Annex VI becomes effective upon the date on which Measure 1
(2005) has been approved by all 28 Consultative Parties entitled to
attend ATCM XXVIII. As at ATCM XLV (2023), 19 Parties whose
approval is required for this liability annex to enter into effect had
approved Measure 1. A further Party not entitled to attend ATCM
XXVIII had approved Measure 1.
Over the past 18 years, the ATCM has adopted a series of Decisions
to evaluate the progress towards Annex VI becoming effective and
identify what action may be necessary and appropriate to
encourage Parties to approve Annex VI in a timely manner,
including Decisions 1 (2005), 4 (2010) and 5 (2015). Most recently,
Decision 2 (2022) called on Parties to continue to share with one
another information and experience in relation to approving
Measure 1 (2005), to support progress towards Annex VI becoming
effective. The ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (Decision 5
(2023)) includes a related priority issue and actions.
At ATCM XLV (2023) Australia with Finland, France, Germany, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden, the United
Kingdom and Uruguay brought forward Working Paper 30, which
proposed an informal intersessional process to share information
and experience to support progress towards the entry into force of
Annex VI.
In discussion of the proposal, Parties that had ratified Annex VI
noted their willingness to share, consult and collaborate with
Parties that were interested in this kind of exchange of experiences.
Some Parties expressed their hope that the initiative for increased
information exchange on the actions that Parties that had ratified
Annex VI had taken domestically, would lead to new ratifications
and eventual adoption of Annex VI.
ATCM XLV (2023) agreed to the proposed informal intersessional
process, which would be convened by Australia and conducted via
the ATCM Discussion Forum. The objective of the informal
intersessional process was to continue to ATCM’s work on
evaluating progress towards Annex VI becoming effective, and to
exchange information on the actions Parties could take to approve
Measure 1 (2005).
While the primary purpose would be to support Parties to take their
own domestic steps to implement Measure 1 (2005), this summary
report highlights key matters discussed for the information of the
ATCM, and suggests further discussion.
Summary of intersessional discussions
Australia, as convener, opened discussions in January 2024 and
proposed a schedule of work. Australia, Canada, France, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, and the United States contributed to the
forum discussion.
Participants, at all stages of implementation reaffirmed their
support for the principles underlying Annex VI. A number of
participants provided information on their completion of domestic
implementation, and others outlined their progress. Several
participants noted they currently apply Measure 1 (2005) through
domestic regulatory frameworks, pending its entry into force
internationally. While it was noted by some that domestic
implementation was somewhat complex and lengthy, no
insurmountable impediments were reported.
Participants outlined their progress regarding the implementation of
Annex VI, including where regulations or legislation had brought it
into force in domestic legislation. Several parties noted that
legislative change was required to provide a legal basis for several
of the terms, including ecological damage and facilitating the
transfer of funds to the fund established in Annex VI.
Parties shared some queries and suggestions regarding insurance
issues, including access to appropriate insurance products,
collective insurance cover, and the relationship between the
insurances held by vessel owners and those of tourism operators
chartering vessels.
In one case where Annex VI had been implemented in national
regulations, non-government activities encompassed by its
insurance requirement have so far included cruise operators, which
already hold sufficient insurances, and its national research station
which is self-insured by government.
Parties provided some details of how Annex VI requirements were
administered (or planned to be administered when the Annex enters
force), including requirements for operators to submit evidence of
insurance or other financial security. It was also noted that for some
Parties, domestic entry into force would not occur until Annex VI is
effective internationally, and that practical experience in applying
and administering Annex VI requirements would not be available
until that point.
For one Party where Annex VI requirements have been
implemented and have entered force in domestic law, challenges
had been experienced by smaller operators in obtaining appropriate
financial security (e.g., through insurance). The participant noted
that there is not yet a well-developed international insurance
market for small operators in Antarctica, and in that context
welcomed the opportunity to exchange experiences between parties.
In acknowledging these challenges, the participant further noted
that ensuring financial security remained the responsibility of the
operators, not the responsibility of the State to ensure mandatory
insurance is commercially available. Another participant noted their
expectation that the international market should provide for
insurance once Annex VI comes into effect generally. A further
Party indicated that consultations with operators prior to
implementing Annex VI had indicated that contemporary insurance
policies usually cover liability for costs arising from harm to
persons, infrastructure, third party property, and the environment;
and that non-government operators generally already held such
insurance.
Conclusion
This informal intersessional discussion demonstrated the value in
sharing information on experiences with implementing and
administering Measure 1 (2005) and Annex VI.
Australia encourages other Parties with experience in domestic
implementation of Measure 1 (2005) to consider sharing
information, including on the issues raised in the informal
discussions.
Given parties’ various stages of consideration and implementation
of Annex VI, further exchange of experience and information could
be valuable in assisting all parties in their efforts towards Annex VI
becoming effective.
Australia would be ready to convene further informal intersessional
discussion if that was regarded as helpful.
