On-board Observation of Tourist Vessels during the 2023 / 2024
Season
On-board Observation of Tourist Vessels during the 2023 / 2024
season
Summary
This paper reports on the observation of four tourist voyages carried
out under Resolution 9 (2021) Voluntary on-board observer
operational framework for vessel-based tourism in the Antarctic
Treaty Area during the 2023 / 2024 Antarctic season by France,
New Zealand and the United States. It notes the benefits of on-
board observation and encourages further use of observers in the
context of the ATCM’s priority work (multi-year strategic work
plan) to develop a strategic approach to the management of
Antarctic tourism to ensure it is conducted in a safe and
environmentally responsible way.
Background
In 2021, the ATCM adopted a voluntary on-board observer
framework for vessel-based tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area
(Resolution 9 (2021)). The Parties recommended the use of the
framework in developing and implementing schemes for vessel-
based monitoring, and that Governments cooperate, as appropriate,
in the implementation of schemes under this framework.
In 2023, France, New Zealand, and IAATO reported on joint
observations under the scheme (for more information, ATCM XLV
IP105, Feedback on the monitoring on board tourist vessels
conducted during the 2022 / 2023 season).
New Zealand has deployed observers on Antarctic tourism vessels
since 1996, following the entry into force of the Environmental
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. Observers provide a direct
mechanism for monitoring compliance with notification / permits
and associated Ministerial directions issued under New Zealand law,
and direct observation of actual and potential impacts (for more
information, ATCM XLII BP5 Experience of an Observer Scheme for
Antarctic Tourism in New Zealand).
New Zealand observers carry out monitoring under the visitor site
assessment scheme (VISTA), which aims to determine if direct or
cumulative effects are occurring at sites, and to provide information
on those sites in order to support the management and mitigation of
any impacts.
Vessels that visit New Zealand’s Subantarctic Islands require an
appropriate authorisation and an approved on-board observer from
New Zealand. Where those vessels also visit Antarctica, and the
Antarctic component of the voyage is authorised by a Competent
Authority other than New Zealand, New Zealand has offered that
those observers also have a role in the Antarctic on behalf of that
Competent Authority, under the voluntary on-board observer
framework (Resolution 9 (2021)).
Observers
Observers were selected and appointed by New Zealand and trained
by New Zealand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Department of Conservation, and Antarctica New Zealand. The
selection process for the observer programme is robust. All
observers are New Zealand government officials and are
appropriately trained, qualified and experienced. They meet the
expectations set out in the operational framework annexed to
Resolution 9 (2021).
New Zealand provided the observers with all relevant and required
information and documentation, such as relevant management
plans; relevant site-specific guidelines; health & safety guidance;
etc. Specific equipment including a satellite phone, and appropriate
clothing and gear were also provided by New Zealand.
The observers report to France, New Zealand and the United States
on compliance with the authorisations including the requirements
of the Antarctic Treaty, its Environmental Protocol and relevant
instruments. The observers considered issues set out in the
compliance section of the voluntary on-board observer framework,
particularly the operator’s impact on the Antarctic environment and
dependant and associated ecosystems.
Voyages
The French and New Zealand Authorities conducted joint
monitoring of two voyages by Ponant’s vessel, Le Soleal between
January 2024 – March 2024, authorised by France.
The United States and New Zealand Competent Authorities
conducted joint monitoring of two voyages of National Geographic
Endurance’s vessel Lindblad, authorised by the United States.
Across the four voyages a high standard of compliance with and
awareness of the rules and regulations for Antarctic tourism was
observed; no unauthorised activities were reported; and no more
than minor or transitory impacts were reported.
Biosecurity measures were reported to be robust, protected area
(ASPA, ASMA, HSM) provisions and Management Plans were
understood and respected, and waste management plans were
compliant. Safety was prioritised across the voyages, and there were
good passenger management arrangements including briefings, and
guide-to-passenger ratios. Observers were welcomed on board, and
felt safe and supported in their role.
Comments
The joint observations under Resolution 9 (2021) reported in this
paper:
Met the objectives and requirements of Resolution 9 (2021);
Supported priority work (in the Multi-year strategic work plan) to
develop a strategic approach to the management of Antarctic
tourism to ensure it is conducted in a safe and environmentally
responsible way;
Provided independent verification of compliance with relevant
ATCM regulations;
Facilitated cooperation between Competent Authorities, and with
operators; and
Supported direct observation of site sensitivity and actual and
potential impacts.
In the context of these benefits New Zealand, France and the United
States:
Encourage the use of the voluntary on-board observer operational
framework for vessel-based tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
Thank the operators for their support and participation, without
which such observations would not be possible;
Stand ready to discuss our experience further with other Authorities
considering carrying out observations; and
Note that observations are a relevant consideration as Parties
develop a Framework for Antarctic tourism and other non-
governmental activities (Decision 6 (2023)).
