Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory – contributing to sea-level change
research
Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory – contributing to sea-level change
research
Summary
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have recognized and encouraged
research that will contribute to the importance of reducing the
uncertainties around Antarctic contribution to global sea-level rise
in the future. This information paper provides updated information
on a key long-term observation series, and associated research, that
contributes to understanding the role of ice-shelves in the Dronning
Maud Land region.
Background
At ATCM XLIV SCAR introduced WP 30 rev. 1 Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Findings and
Policy Recommendations. ATCM XLIV welcomed SCAR’s decadal
update of the ACCE and agreed to hold a full-day joint session at
ATCM XLV to consider the implementation of the ACCE
recommendations. In continuing the discussions, ATCM XLV agreed
to encourage Parties to continue their efforts to implement the 2022
ACCE Decadal Synopsis.
Several of the ACCE recommendations relate to the issue of sea-
level rise, and Policy Recommendation #2 in particular notes the
need to reduce uncertainties in scenarios:
The Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) is changing rapidly, with the
anthropogenic signal starting to become apparent. The AIS is
projected to contribute substantially to global mean sea level rise,
but the risks of significantly larger rates and magnitudes of sea level
rise from rapid ice sheet mass loss in the coming decades to
centuries are not well known, particularly from vulnerable marine
basins in West Antarctica and parts of East Antarctica. Reducing
this uncertainty is a globally urgent research priority that will
require further support from NAPs. Novel observations along
sensitive marine-based sectors, and from paleoclimate archives, are
urgently needed over the time scale of a decade to improve
understanding of the physical processes driving the retreat,
document the current evolution in detail, and comprehensively, and
critically improve the skills of numerical projections.
In this Information Paper Norway and the United Kingdom provide
a summary of long-term observations of an ice-shelf in Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctica, and recent results and outcomes of
research related to these observations, which gives indications of
important changes also in eastern ice-shelves, which may in turn
have added implications for sea-level rise.
IPY initiated time series from the Fimbul Ice-shelf provides
important information about change
The Antarctic ice sheet and the floating ice shelves fringing the
Antarctic continent are losing mass at an accelerating rate, causing
the global mean sea level to rise. The Antarctic ice shelves thin
mainly because ocean currents bring 'warm' water into their cavities
causing them to melt from below. As the ice shelves thin, they offer
less support to the ice sheet upstream which then also thins and
accelerates. Ice shelf thinning is most prominent in Western
Antarctica but changes are also observed in East Antarctica. The
East Antarctic ice shelf cavities host cold water masses that limit
melting, and only a few short-term observational studies exist on
what drives warm water intrusions into these cavities.
The Fimbul Ice-Shelf (Fimbulisen) is the largest ice-shelf in
Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. In 2009 a field campaign took
place on Fimbulisen to study the mass balance of the ice-shelf, as
well as the melting and circulation in the ocean underneath the
floating ice as part of an IPY project (ICE Fimbulisen: top-to-
bottom). Moorings were deployed through hot-water-drilled holes
at three sites on the ice-shelf. This became the start of what is still
an ongoing time series of oceanic properties beneath Fimbulisen
(Hattermann et al. 2012). Today these instruments provide the
longest continuous record of ocean temperature and currents under
an Antarctic ice shelf.
A recent article providing insights into the data from these
moorings, show that there has been a sudden shift toward sustained
warm inflow under Fimbulisen since mid-2016. The changes, which
were concurrent with the anomalous Southern Hemisphere sea ice
decay (Schlosser et al. 2018), seem to be caused by large-scale
changes in Southern Ocean climate (Lauber et al. 2023). The
enhanced warm inflows had direct implications for basal melting at
Fimbulisen during 2016-2019 (Lindbäck et al, under review),
illustrating how remote processes impact the ice shelf mass balance.
The Fimbulisen time series also provides further evidence of a
potential ocean warming in the East Antarctic sector. Historically,
basal melt rates beneath ice shelves in Dronning Maud Land have
been found to be an order of magnitude smaller than melt rates in
areas where warm water directly accesses the ice shelf cavities.
However, recent southward shift of Circumpolar Deep Water along
East Antarctica (Herraiz-Borreguero et al. 2022), a warming on the
southwestern Weddell Sea continental slope after 2019 (Darelius et
al. 2019) and high basal melt rates for parts of East Antarctica
(Hirano et al. 2020), indicate the region’s vulnerability to future
change. An increase in the frequency and temperature of warm
inflow events, as have been observed at Fimbulisen, may
dramatically increase future basal mass loss, where enhanced basal
melting near the ice shelf grounding lines through increased warm
inflows at depth will directly affect ice sheet discharge. Monitoring
and understanding these dynamics, their link to large-scale climate
dynamics, and their interplay with potentially enhanced surface
accumulation in a warming atmosphere are crucial when assessing
future ice sheet stability and sea level rise.
The Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory continued through TONe
In ATCM XLV WP 31 (Network of Observation Systems) Norway
introduced Troll Observation Network (TONe). TONe is a
comprehensive research infrastructure which aims to contribute
significantly to observation and data gathering efforts, centered at
the Norwegian Antarctic research station Troll. By utilizing TONe
infrastructure and observations the research community will be able
to answer questions and generate knowledge related to climate and
sea-level change, atmosphere dynamics, solid Earth structure,
cryosphere dynamics, space weather effects, robustness of
communication networks, quality of weather and climate models,
and the effects of global changes on marine ecosystems.
Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory (FIO) is one of eight observatories
in TONe, operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute, in partnership
with the University of Bergen and British Antarctic Survey. FIO
aims to continue and extend the important long-term series initiated
in 2009, in order to provide measurements of processes
understanding and long-term monitoring of mass balance at and
ocean properties at this ice-shelf over the next decade.
For this purpose, an extensive and successful field campaign was
carried out during the 23/24 austral season to replace the current
outdated and outlived instruments with a combination of state-of-
the-art and cutting-edge under ice shelf ocean instrumentation
under the northern, 200 m thick, and central, 400 m thick, part of
Fimbulisen. FIO also includes the establishment of co-located
autonomous surface and basal mass balance and ice shelf motion
(snow accumulation, dynamics, tides, strain) measurements.
Taking an open and international collaborative approach to the
fieldwork was imperative for the successful implementation of the
FIO observatory. While Norway provided heavy deep field logistic
support to realize the 1500 km overland traverse to the drill sites,
and field safety- and domestics, UK-partners contributed hot-water-
drilling expertise that roots in decade-long
fruitful science collaborations. In addition, US-partners
complemented borehole instrumentation with under-ice robotics to
gather detailed observations of the under-ice shelf geometry and
hydrography in the ice-ocean boundary region. In combination, the
collectively obtained datasets will contribute significantly to
developing new formulations of basal melting for global-scale
climate models that will ultimately reduce uncertainty in future sea
level rise, in addition to the continuation of a unique time series of
the ocean climate at the East Antarctic coastal environment.
References:
Darelius, E., Dundas, V., Janout, M. & Tippenhauer, S. Sudden, local
temperature increase above the continental slope in the southern
Weddell Sea, Antarctica. Ocean Sci. 19, 671–683 (2023).
Hattermann, T., O. A. Nøst, J. M. Lilly, and L. H.
Smedsrud (2012), Two years of oceanic observations below the
Fimbul Ice Shelf, Antarctica, Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L12605
Herraiz-Borreguero, L. & Naveira Garabato, A. C. Poleward shift of
Circumpolar Deep Water threatens the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. Nat.
Clim. Change 12, 728–734 (2022).
Hirano, D. et al. Strong ice–ocean interaction beneath Shirase
Glacier Tongue in East Antarctica. Nat. Commun. 11, 4221 (2020).
Lauber, J., Hattermann, T., de Steur, L. et al. Warming beneath an
East Antarctic ice shelf due to increased subpolar westerlies and
reduced sea ice. Nat. Geosci. 16, 877–885 (2023).
Lindbäck, K., Darelius, E., Moholdt, G., et al. Basal melting and
oceanic observations beneath Fimbulisen, East Antarctica. ESS Open
Archive. December 27, 2023. DOI: 10.22541/
essoar.170365303.33631810/v1
Schlosser, E., Haumann, F. A., and Raphael, M. N.: Atmospheric
influences on the anomalous 2016 Antarctic sea ice decay, The
Cryosphere, 12, 1103–1119
