Avian Influenza: Situation in Argentine Antarctic Bases
English version provided by the author
Avian Influenza: Situation in Argentine Antarctic Bases
Summary
Faced with the spread of avian influenza, the Argentine Antarctic
Program became involved in the work and coordination promoted
by COMNAP, SCAR and IAATO in order to have tools to face the
expected arrival of influenza to the Antarctic continent during the
Austral summer 2023/2024. In this context, it also established a
specific protocol for the activities of the Argentine Antarctic
Program to take care of its personnel, and established a database for
the registration of suspected and confirmed cases that occurred in
the Argentine Antarctic Bases as of March 2024.
This document describes the development of the avian flu situation
at Argentine Antarctic Bases and the measures implemented in
cooperation with other Argentine institutions and other National
Antarctic Programs. Finally, it provides conclusions and
management perspectives for the coming years.
Introduction
Avian influenza is a highly contagious viral infection among birds
that affects both domestic poultry and wild birds. Recently,
infection has also been detected in mammals, presenting a high rate
of plasticity to mutate and use new hosts of different species for
transmission and replication.
Antarctica and subantarctic islands provide a unique environment
for the coexistence of a variety of aquatic and migratory birds. Due
to their geographical isolation, the introduction of pathogens to
these fauna populations can have detrimental effects, as they also
have limited protection against anthropogenic environmental
change. The 2.3.4.4b H5N1 strain that has been detected in the
Antarctic territory is among the highly pathogenic ones. The
potential transmission vectors of this strain are mainly found in
scavenging birds such as the kelp gull (Larus dominicanus), the
snowy sheathbill (Chionis albus) and skuas (Stercorarius
antarcticus, Catharacta maccormicki). Cases of infection have also
been observed in marine mammals, including the Antarctic fur seal
(Arctophoca gazella), the southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina)
and the leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx).
Actions taken
In the months prior to the 2023/2024 Summer Antarctic Campaign,
the National Directorate for the Antarctic of Argentina (DNA)
coordinated the development of a specific protocol for the
management of influenza, using the advice of different experts from
the Argentine Antarctic Program and other competent national
institutions. Thus, in December 2023, the "General Protocol for
prevention and risk management in relation to H5N1 Influenza" was
adopted. Its objective is to provide directions to plan and develop
Argentine Antarctic activities of the 2023/2024 Antarctic Campaign
in a safe manner for the health of personnel re the H5N1 influenza
outbreak. The COMNAP document “COMNAP Guidance Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) Preparedness in Response to
Heightened Risk” and the SCAR document “Biological Risk
Assessment of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in the Southern
Ocean” were particularly taken into account for the preparation of
this Protocol. During the 2023/2024 Summer Antarctic Campaign,
the scientific and technical staff of the Argentine Antarctic Program
carried out their activities within the framework of the protocol
against the backdrop of the transmission and dissemination of the
avian influenza virus. In particular, those who work with birds and
mammals
used specific biosafety protocols for each activity, articulated with
the specialist Dr. José Luis López from the National Institute of
Bacteriology and Molecular Virology (IBAVIM). The mandatory use
of Personal Protection Equipment (masks, gloves, overalls and
goggles) and the establishment of designated spaces to carry out
disinfection and disposal procedures for PPE, were implemented
following the regulations of the National Hazardous Waste Law No.
24,051. In this way, the scientific-technical staff monitored the
fauna, giving early warning to the authorities of the appearance of
individuals with suspicious symptoms or deaths.
Through national and international cooperation, scientists and
technicians from the Argentine Antarctic Program took samples to
monitor the virus in birds and mammals with symptoms as well as
dead specimens without symptoms of the infection. This was carried
out around three Argentine Antarctic bases: Primavera, Carlini and
Esperanza. In cooperation with the Spanish Antarctic Program,
samples were taken from three specimens found dead in Punta
Cierva, which tested positive for avian flu at the Spanish Gabriel de
Castilla base (Deception Island). In the Carlini Base environment,
41 samples of randomly selected mammals were taken. They were
taken in ASPA 132 Potter Peninsula, and will be analyzed in the
laboratories of the Argentine National Agri-Food Health and Quality
Service (SENASA). In collaboration with the Australian Antarctic
Program, samples were taken from individuals found dead, and one
of the cases tested positive for avian flu by PCR analysis. In
addition, feces were collected from individuals without symptoms,
and air and water samples were taken to evaluate the prevalence of
the virus in the environment at Esperanza Base. Apart from this, we
would like to thank the New Zealand Antarctic Program for offering
supplies for testing.
Each of the suspected cases was reported by Argentina to COMNAP
through the “Antarctic Wildlife Health Network - Southern Ocean
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Monitoring Form”.
Suspected cases and confirmed cases in Argentine Bases
The records that were carried out were identified and surveyed
using the SCAR avian influenza tracking form. To date the records
received by each Base are the following:
Orcadas Base: in December 2023, thirteen dead polar skuas
(Catharacta maccormicki) and two with characteristic symptoms of
influenza were recorded, being the first Argentine base in which
suspected cases of avian influenza were identified.
It has not been possible to test the suspected individuals since, to
minimize the risk of transmission, scientific work was suspended.
In March, National Park Rangers wintering at the base recorded
dead gulls (Larus dominicanus), a dead gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis
papua), and thirteen dead brown skuas (Stercorarius antarticus),
plus some sick ones.
Primavera Base: in January 2024, scientific personnel from the
Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) began their monitoring work
with penguins and marine mammals. At the base they have been
able to perform swabs with all personal protective equipment and
biosafety measures.
The samples were inactivated and transported by ships of the
Argentine Antarctic Program to be processed at the Gabriel de
Castilla base thanks to the help and cooperation of the Spanish
Antarctic Program. Spain informed the Argentine authorities of
confirmed cases at Primavera Base. Of the swabs and tests carried
out using the RNA shield kits, all the samples taken and processed
were positive. The samples are from the following species: a dead
polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki), a dead storm petrel
(Oceanites oceanicus), and a sick leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx).
In addition, individuals have been found that could not be swabbed,
including dead skuas, a sick gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua) and
a dead Antarctic cormorant (Leucocarbo bransfieldensis).
Esperanza Base: Thirteen dead brown skuas (Stercorarius
antarcticus) and three dead polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki)
have been recorded, as well as one dead snowy sheathbill (Chionis
albus) and four dead kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus).
In March, a team of scientists of different nationalities aboard the
sailboat “Australis”- among them Florencia Soto, representative of
the Argentine Antarctic Institute -, took samples at different sites in
the Weddell Sea. The team landed at Esperanza Base and performed
a necropsy on six dead individuals. Positive confirmation of highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in a brown skua was obtained.
Conclusions
The arrival of the Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza virus in
Antarctica constitutes a turning point in the way human beings stay
and work on the continent. In particular, in the Antarctic facilities,
the scientific-technical personnel are those who carry out the tasks
with the greatest exposure and are therefore the ones who are in
the front line of transmission of the infection. The Protocol of the
National Directorate for the Antarctic of Argentina (DNA)
determines the minimum necessary safety conditions to perform
activities on the ground and prevent the spread of the virus.
The arrival of this virus to South America and Antarctica has
promoted cooperation strategies with national and international
organizations with the aim of observing and monitoring the
advance of the virus in Antarctic fauna populations. The Argentine
Antarctic Program highlights and appreciates the collaboration of
IBAVIM, SENASA, and the Antarctic Programs of Spain, Australia
and New Zealand.
The Argentine Antarctic Program considers that the situation of
avian influenza in the Antarctic continent should continue to be
monitored throughout the year, establishing more rigorous controls
and biosafety measures for the next summer campaign, seeking to
strengthen the ties of cooperation between national programs for
the taking of samples and search for outcomes to have more
information regarding the improvement of prevention and care
measures for scientific-technical personnel and Antarctic fauna.
The high cooperation and communication maintained between the
National Antarctic Programs, SCAR, COMNAP and IAATO is
remarkable, allowing for more effective management of the
situation.
References
Dewar M, Vanstreels R, Boulinier T, Cary C, Clessin A, Gamble A,
Gray R, Grimaldi R, Hart T, Morandini V, Leonardi S, Uhart M,
Younger J, Wille M (2023). International team of scientists
determine further spread of High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza
(HPAI) in the Antarctic Peninsula Region. Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research.
Dewar M, Wille M, Gamble A, et al. The risk of highly pathogenic
avian influenza in the Southern Ocean: a practical guide for
operators and scientists interacting with wildlife. Antarctic Science.
2023;35(6):407-414. doi:10.1017/S0954102023000342
Caliendo, V., Lewis, NS, Pohlmann, A. et al. Transatlantic spread of
highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 by wild birds from Europe
to North America in 2021. Sci Rep 12, 11729 (2022). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-13447-z
https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu
