The Value of Low-Powered Geospace Instrumentation in Antarctica
The Value of Low-Powered Geospace Instrumentation in Antarctica
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
Naturally occurring phenomena in near-Earth space, or geospace,
can lead to negative impacts on human life and technology. This
‘space weather’ is a major national interest of the United States and
other countries, as the most significant space weather events can
affect humans’ technological infrastructure “critical to the economy
and security of the United States and nations around the world.
Technologies such as the electric power grid, the Global Positioning
System (GPS), satellite and other space activities, communications,
aviation, and pipelines may be degraded or disrupted during space
weather events,” [Space Weather Advisory Group, 2023]. Much like
wind and temperature are vital measurements for understanding
and monitoring atmospheric weather, measurements of magnetic
fields at the Earth’s surface (B) are key parameters for
understanding and monitoring space weather. The ground-based
magnetometers that measure B are remote sensing tools for
electrical currents that define the electrodynamics of geospace, and
they have made it possible to track and comprehend the way
electromagnetic energy propagates throughout the geospace system,
in addition to many other applications [Engebretson and Zesta,
2017 and references therein].
Background
Measurements of B in high-latitude polar regions are critical to
space weather research and modeling as much of the energy from
the Sun and solar wind enters the upper atmosphere near the poles.
Polar regions are crucial for modeling global geospace dynamics
and potential space weather impacts including atmospheric heating
that causes enhanced satellite drag, loss of tracking, and/or
unplanned satellite re-entry. Ground-based magnetometers are
needed to be deployed in both polar regions since numerous north-
south hemisphere asymmetries exist and space weather phenomena
occurring in the Arctic may differ significantly from the Antarctic.
Thus, to develop our understanding of space weather and validate
models used for space weather predictions, we need simultaneous B
measurements from both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
The greater polar land area in the Antarctic (relative to the Arctic
which is mostly the Arctic Ocean) also provides opportunities for
instrument deployments up to very high latitude regions that are
difficult to sample in most of the Northern Hemisphere.
Several autonomous, low-power magnetometer systems supported
by the U.S. National Science Foundation/United States Antarctic
Program (NSF/USAP) like the site shown in Figure 1 have been
deployed at strategic locations in remote regions of the East
Antarctic Plateau to enable investigations of space weather
phenomena in both hemispheres simultaneously [e.g., Clauer et al.,
2014; Xu et al., 2020]. These systems, when combined with other
autonomous magnetometer systems and magnetometers at
permanent bases, provide novel 2D coverage that has led to several
key outcomes and results in recent years.
Key Outcomes
In this section we provide two examples of key outcomes from
distributed networks of low-powered magnetometers in the
Antarctic.
Figure 1 – A Twin Otter plane arrives to bring the team back to
South Pole Station after they deploy an Autonomous Adaptive Low
Power Instrument Platform [Clauer et al., 2014] at the PG4 site in a
remote part of the East Antarctic Plateau. Credit: Zhonghua Xu,
Accessed from https://eos.org/science-updates/space-weather-from-
a-southern-point-of-view.
1 – Researching the causes and consequences of north-south
hemisphere asymmetries in the Geospace system
Routine simultaneous measurements from distributed networks of
low-power autonomous magnetometers are already producing new
understanding of the geospace system dynamics and space weather.
These include significant advances in the understanding of
mesoscale (<~500 km) electrical current systems and their
corresponding geomagnetic disturbances, a key objective of the
broader space weather research community [Gabrielse et al., 2023].
Figure 2 shows one example that takes advantage of 2D networks
(distributed in latitude and longitude) of magnetometers with close
enough spacing to resolve a north-south hemisphere asymmetry in
electrical currents related to a particular solar wind driving
condition [Weygand et al., 2023]. Critically, the ground-based
magnetometers shown in the top part of this Figure are providing
sufficiently dense spatial sampling to capture mesoscale electrical
currents, whereas the bottom currents (red/blue color) inferred
from satellites provide only large-scale currents; the magnetometers
can also sample the 2D electrical currents far more frequently,
every second rather than every ~10 minutes for the satellites. This
Figure, and the discussion in Weygand et al., 2023, point to large
asymmetries in mesoscale current intensity and location between
the two hemispheres. This example of research enabled by 2D
networks is crucial to understand the generation of electrical
currents that cause upper atmospheric heating and other space
weather phenomena; thus, to improve the development of models
that can predict unwanted space weather impacts such as the
unplanned re-entry of spacecraft.
2 – Assimilation of ground magnetometer data into geospace
models for space weather modeling and monitoring
Advances in data assimilation techniques have made it possible to
combine ground-based magnetometer measurements with other
measurements such as radars and satellite measurements to more
comprehensively sample the geospace environment and
fundamental parameters needed to understand and model space
weather, including electrical current. For example, these tools make
it possible to more accurately specify space weather model
boundary conditions needed to specify upper atmospheric heating.
Smith et al., [2023] used the Assimilated Modeling of Ionospheric
Electrodynamics (AMIE) framework to assimilate measurements
from 217 magnetometers (173 in the north, 44 in the south) to
constrain a
numerical simulation during a geomagnetic storm, finding major
asymmetries in atmospheric heating between the north and south.
Figure 2 – Taken from Weygand et al., 2023 Figure 6. The left is for
electrical currents flowing above the northern hemisphere, the right
for the southern hemisphere. The top panels are remote sensed
currents based on closely spaced networks of magnetometers, while
the bottom shows these currents superposed on radial currents
(red/blue color) inferred from more sparse satellite measurements.
These results highlight the need for southern hemisphere
magnetometer measurements to capture the electrodynamic
processes that lead to atmospheric heating and space weather
impacts: northern hemisphere measurements alone are not enough
to specify space weather models. As the demand for increasingly
accurate space weather nowcasts and forecasts increases in the
coming years [Space Weather Advisory Group, 2023], so too will
the demand for increased spatial and temporal sampling of B from
Antarctica that can be assimilated into these nowcasts and forecasts.
Lessard et al., [2014] noted that “The Antarctic region forms an
important source of high latitude data that can be made available in
real, or near-real, time for space weather use by government and
other agencies. The geography in the Earth’s polar regions makes
the Antarctic essentially the only Earth-based platform from which
these latitudes can be monitored on a continuous basis and to the
highest latitudes.”
The future of low-power magnetometers in Antarctica and NSF
Geospace Facilities
Networks of low-power, autonomous magnetometers in Antarctica
are already transforming our understanding of Geospace
environment dynamics and space weather. However, coverage
across the Antarctic continent is still very sparse with gaps in key
regions needed to both understand and monitor space weather (e.g.,
compare top left and top right of Figure 2). This is due in large part
to the challenges of operating and deploying systems in Antarctica.
In the coming years, advances in technology and international/
interdisciplinary partnerships can help address these challenges. For
example, autonomous instrument networks are becoming more
reliable and robust, with some systems operating unattended for
more than a decade due to the ability to service systems remotely,
fewer moving parts, etc. [Clauer et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2020]. At
the same time, magnetometer sensors are becoming less expensive
and much smaller [Regoli et al., 2018], solar panels more efficient,
etc. These advances should lead to fewer logistical resources needed
to operate and maintain magnetometers, thus enabling the
deployment of larger networks of magnetometers.
International and interdisciplinary partnerships can also be
leveraged to expand networks of magnetometers into key polar
regions. Indeed, the results shown in Figure 2 are already
combining data collected by multiple countries, including the
United States, Canada, Denmark, the United Kingdom, and
Germany. As another example, joint funding of instrument
platforms and sharing of logistical resources have both proven
successful in several projects.
Literature Cited
Clauer, C. R., Kim, H., Deshpande, K., Xu, Z., Weimer, D., Musko,
S., Crowley, G.,
Fish, C., Nealy, R., Humphreys, T. E., Bhatti, J. A., & Ridley, A. J.
(2014). Autonomous adaptive low-power instrument platform (AAL-
PIP) for remote high-latitude geospace data collection. Geoscientific
Instrumentation, Methods and Data Systems, 3, 211-227. https://
doi.org/10.5194/gi-3-211-2014
Engebretson, M., & Zesta, E. (2017). The future of ground
magnetometer arrays in
support of space weather monitoring and research. Space Weather,
15, 1433–1441. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017SW001702
Gabrielse, C., Gkioulidou, M., Merkin, S., Malaspina, D., Turner, D.
L., Chen, M. W.,
Ohtani, S.-i., Nishimura, Y., Liu, J., Birn, J., Deng, Y., Runov, A.,
McPherron, R. L., Keesee, A., Yin Lui, A. T., Sheng, C., Hudson, M.,
Gallardo-Lacourt, B., Angelopoulos, V., Lyons, L., Wang, C.-P.,
Spanswick, E. L., Donovan, E., Kaeppler, S. R., Sorathia, K., Kepko,
L., & Zou, S. (2023). Mesoscale phenomena and their contribution
to the global response: A focus on the magnetotail transition region
and magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. Frontiers in Astronomy
and Space Sciences, 10, 1151339. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fspas.2023.1151339
Lessard, M.R., Gerrard, A.J., Weatherwax, A.T (2014). Solar-
Terrestrial Research in
Polar Regions: Past, Present, and Future, “Proceedings of the Polar
Research Meeting: November 12-13, 2012,” UNH
Regoli, L. H., Moldwin, M. B., Pellioni, M., Bronner, B., Hite, K.,
Sheinker, A., &
Ponder, B. M. (2018). Investigation of a low-cost magneto-inductive
magnetometer for space science applications. Geoscientific
Instrumentation, Methods and Data Systems, 7, 129–142. https://
doi.org/10.5194/gi-7-129-2018
Smith, A. R., Ozturk, D. S., Delamere, P., Lu, G., & Kim, H. (2023).
Investigating the
interhemispheric asymmetry in Joule heating during the 2013 St.
Patrick's Day geomagnetic storm. Space Weather, 21,
e2023SW003523. https://doi.org/10.1029/2023SW003523
SWAG. (April 17, 2023). Findings and Recommendations to
Successfully Implement
PROSWIFT and Transform the National Space Weather Enterprise.
Retrieved from https://www.weather.gov/swag
Weygand, J. M., Hartinger, M. D., Strangeway, R. J., Welling, D. T.,
Kim, H., Matzka,
J., & Clauer, C. R. (2023). Interhemispheric asymmetry due to IMF
By within the cusp spherical elementary currents. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Space Physics, 128, e2023JA031430.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2023JA031430
Xu, Z. H., Hartinger, M. D., Clauer, R., et al. (2019). Newly
established autonomous
adaptive low-power instrument platform (AAL-PIP) chain on East
Antarctic Plateau and operation. Advances in Polar Science, 30(4),
362-374. https://doi.org/10.13679/j.advps.2019.0028
