Ten-Year Plan for Antarctic Science in Brazil 2023-2032
Ten-Year Plan for Antarctic Science in Brazil 2023-2032
Abstract
The Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR), through the
National Committee for Antarctic Research (CONAPA), coordinated
by the Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation (MCTI),
establishes the scientific guidelines for Brazilian research on the
Antarctic continent over the next decade through the Ten-Year Plan
for Antarctic Science in Brazil 2023-2032. The Ten-Year Plan was
instituted with the aim of providing strategic guidance for Antarctic
research and promoting coordination among actors in the National
System of Science, Technology, and Innovation. It provides
reference information for scientific cooperation and coordination
with other Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
Introduction
The Ten-Year Plan for Antarctic Science was developed by MCTI
through CONAPA, with extensive participation from the national
scientific community to establish the objectives and expected
outcomes of Brazilian research in Antarctica for the next 10 years.
The new plan also expanded the number of thematic research
programs from five to seven. In addition to Ice and Climate,
Antarctic Biodiversity, Southern Ocean, Geology and Geophysics,
and Upper Atmosphere, programs in Human and Social Sciences,
and Polar Health were added. A separate chapter for the Arctic was
included to facilitate the development of Brazilian research in the
other polar region. Studies conducted in both extremes can provide
comparative results, allowing Brazil to understand the role of polar
regions in the Brazilian environment and the consequences for
national daily life, including their effects on society from both
socio-economic and climate change perspectives. The document
facilitates the expansion and coordination of partnerships, as well as
ensures the execution of a continuous scientific program.
General Description
The main objective of PROANTAR is to produce scientific
knowledge about Antarctica and its relationships with the Earth
System, involving the cryosphere, oceans, atmosphere, biosphere, as
well as human and social sciences. It is within this context that the
implementation and promotion of the Ten-Year Plan for Antarctic
Science in Brazil 2023-2032 leads to the expansion of
internationally excellent research on the Antarctic region and its
adjacent areas. The Ten-Year Plan is a national strategic planning
instrument and it is aligned with the strategic programs of
international scientific committees for Antarctica (SCAR - Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research), Ocean (SCOR - Scientific
Committee Ocean Research), with the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) of the UN's Agenda 2030, and the Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development.
The document presents seven objectives for Antarctic science to
impact sustainable development, benefiting society through the
knowledge and technologies generated from scientific research in
the Antarctic continent. Among the objectives is to promote
diversity, equity, and inclusion, expand Brazilian scientific
leadership in Antarctic forums, and provide scientific advice for
public policies. The strategic document also guides research areas
through the seven thematic research programs included, namely:
The cryosphere in the Earth system and its interactions with South
America;
Antarctic biodiversity: climate change and connections with South
America and the Arctic;
Climate Change and the Southern Ocean;
Geodynamics and geological history of Antarctica and its relations
with South America;
Dynamics of the middle and upper Antarctic atmosphere:
interactions with the geospace and connections with the South
American tropical region;
Human and Social Sciences; and
Polar Health.
Conclusion
The main objective of the Ten-Year Plan for Antarctic Science in
Brazil 2023-2032 is to continuously promote excellence in science
about the Antarctic region and its connections with the Atlantic
Ocean, South America, and the Arctic; as well as to support public
policies and scientific priorities for Brazilian research in the White
Continent.
Access link: https://cienciaantartica.mcti.gov.br/wp-content/
uploads/2023/08/Plano-Decenal-210x250-ENGLISH-Retrato.pdf
