Actions taken by the Peruvian Antarctic Programme to tackle
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in the surroundings of
the ECAMP - Antarctic Peninsula
Actions taken by the Peruvian Antarctic Programme to tackle
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in the surroundings of
the ECAMP - Antarctic Peninsula
Summary
The purpose of this report is to publish the measures taken by the
Directorate of Sovereignty, Limits and Antarctic Affairs of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in anticipation of any birds and/or
mammals showing symptoms of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI). These measures were aimed at the surroundings of the
Machu Picchu Antarctic Scientific Station (ECAMP) located at
Crepin Point (Mackellar Inlet - Antarctic Peninsula).
Background
In 2021, HPAI spread rapidly throughout the northern hemisphere,
then in 2022 it spread southwards to South America and South
Africa with an increase in cases among sea birds with high
mortality; infected mammals were also observed. At ATCM XLV
(2023), COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR jointly presented IP101
«Heightened risk of avian influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area» to
alert the community about the disease and its likely arrival through
natural migration to Antarctica in the 2023/2024 season.
Consequently, the Directorate of Sovereignty, Limits and Antarctic
Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs held coordination meetings
with the Multisector Working Party for Monitoring, Prevention and
Control of Avian Influenza, which reported to the Ministry of
Health of Peru (MINSA). The purpose of these meetings was to
define the best plan to follow in the event of a case of HPAI
occurring in the surroundings of the ECAMP.
Based on the likely impacts of HPAI on wildlife and the risks to
human health if present in Antarctica, the Antarctic Wildlife Health
Network of SCAR (Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research) has
worked for over a year with the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP), the International Association of Antarctica Tour
Operators (IAATO) and the Multisector Working Party for
Monitoring, Prevention and Control of Avian Influenza of MINSA,
and the following recommendations were made:
General Recommendations
In the «Biological Risk Assessment of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza in the Southern Ocean»
Adopt basic biosafety measures in all areas when visiting/working
in colonies, including the use of N95 masks, protective goggles (or
sunglasses) and gloves, as well as washing and disinfecting boots
and clothing after field work.
Assess the colonies before entering and beginning field work/
tourism activities to look for animals with signs of illness or unusual
numbers of carcasses in the area.
If there are signs of a possible HPAI outbreak, avoid handling
animals, but continue to perform remote monitoring (e.g.
binoculars, cameras or drones).
Notify disease experts and National Antarctic Programme (NAP)
and IAATO authorities
Additionally, numeral 5.1.2. of the «Biological Risk Assessment of
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in the Southern Ocean»https://
www.scar.org/library/science-4/life-sciences/antarctic-wildlife-
health-network-awhn/5973-risk-assessment-avian-influenza/file/
,Response of national Antarctic programmes to a suspected HPAI
event, points out:
In dealing with suspected HPAI events before laboratory
confirmation of the virus in the region, keep in mind that no
personnel should enter a site where there is suspected HPAI without
adequate training and PPE.
In dealing with suspected HPAI events, our protocols during ANTAR
XXX were:
Personal protective equipment
In the event of an HPAI outbreak, all personnel working in the field
were required to use appropriate personal protective equipment
(PPE) to protect themselves from contamination. The recommended
PPE consists of:
N95 face mask or N95 respirator.
Examination gloves (latex or nitrile): The recommendation is to
wear two pairs of gloves as this helps reduce the risk of
contamination during PPE removal. Gloves should cover the wrist
and overlap the cuff of the overalls.
Waterproof overalls with seam and closure.
Protective goggles.
Reusable and washable rubber boots.
It was established that the PPE must be put on correctly before
entering a suspected/confirmed site, and removed upon completion
of the work at the site. For further details, reference was made to
the Technical Health Standard for the Use of Personal Protective
Equipment Norma Técnica de Salud para el uso de los Equipos de
Protección Personal. RM N° 456-2020-MINSA (03/07/2020)
[Technical Health Standard for the Use of Personal Protective
Equipment. RM No. 456-2020-MINSA (3 July 2020)]. Available at:
https://cdn.www.gob.pe/uploads/document/file/931760/
RM_456-2020-MINSA.PDF?v=1687617945 .
Biosafety
Biosafety measures were increased so that if the virus is detected, it
will not be prevented from spreading to other colonies of wild
animals. This included the closure of any site with a suspected
outbreak, access to which would only be permitted for sample
collection to confirm the HPAI outbreak or post-mortem
examination by a highly trained veterinarian (the corpse had to be
triple bagged for extraction/transport). Likewise, increased cleaning
and washing of clothing, boots and vehicles was recommended after
visiting wildlife in the vicinity of an outbreak area.
Preparations were made for the following Potential Scenarios:
Scenario 1. Potential exposure to HPAI at the Machu Picchu Station:
Sick or dead specimens of birds or mammals are found in the
vicinity of the Machu Picchu Scientific Station in Antarctica.
In this scenario, given that there is a risk of exposure of personnel
to corpses or animals potentially infected with HPAI, it was
recommended that the ANTAR Coordinator should be informed so
that they could be removed from the vicinity of the Machu Picchu
Station, while using the appropriate PPE, followed by disinfection
as indicated in the information relating to «Before visiting a
colony.»
Scenario 2. Potential exposure to HPAI during transit to field work
sites:
Specimens of sick or dead birds or mammals are found during the
transit of personnel between the vicinity of the Machu Picchu
Scientific Station in Antarctica and the field work sites.
In this scenario, given that the risk of staff exposure to carcasses or
animals potentially infected with HPAI can be considerably reduced
by using alternative transit routes, the recommendation was to take
this measure as a first option, whenever possible, informing the
ANTAR Coordinator of the situation.
Conclusion
At ANTAR XXX, the above recommendations were carried out, and
no cases of dead birds and/or mammals or symptoms compatible
with HPAI were encountered during the expedition.
