French inspection pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection:
February 2024
English version provided by the author
French inspection pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection:
February 2024
English version provided by the author
Summary
Pursuant to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the
Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, France conducted
an inspection of Casey station, the abandoned Wilkes station and
Wilkins aerodrome in February 2024. The attached report describes
the observations and conclusions of the Inspection Team. A
summary of those observations and conclusions is included in this
Information Paper.
Background
During the period 21 to 29 February 2024 a team of three French
observers carried out an inspection of the Australian Antarctic
Station of Casey, the abandoned Wilkes Station and the Wilkins
aerodrome.
The inspection mission was organized as part of a cooperative effort
between Australia and France to cross-inspect their Antarctic
facilities during the 2023/2024 polar season.
The inspection team was given full access to all the infrastructures
and sites of interest and was able conduct interviews with personnel
onsite. The provision of the ATCM checklist A by the Australian
Antarctic Division of the Department of Climate Change, Energy,
the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) prior to the visit was a great
help in carrying out the in-site inspections efficiently.
In accordance with Article 14(4) of the Environmental Protocol,
France provided the report to Australia for comment. Comments
received were considered and addressed as appropriate when
finalising the report.
General Conclusions
During its inspection visits, the French team found that the
infrastructures and activities complied with the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection. No
military activities or equipment were observed or declared during
the inspection.
The inspection team identified a number of points of caution and
possible areas for improvement, which it submitted in the report for
Australia's consideration.
Casey station
Casey Station is one of Australia's three permanent Antarctic
scientific stations, operated by the Australian Antarctic Division of
the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and
Water (DCCEEW). The French inspection team was able to observe
on site the very high level of compliance of the station and its
management with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on
Environmental Protection, and the quality of the maintenance
operations and upgrades to the installations since the station was
commissioned.
No cases of non-compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its
Protocol on Environmental Protection have been noted by the
inspection team.
Wilkes station
The remains of the Wilkes station are located 3 kilometres from the
Casey station. Abandoned in 1969, the site is characterised by the
presence of old buildings and storage areas for oil drums and
hazardous substances as well as different sites of rubbish and waste
deposits of various kinds, spread over a surface of around 33
hectares. The inspection team was concerned about the state of
deterioration of the site, which constitutes a significant risk for the
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems, including marine ones.
The inspection team welcomed the efforts initiated by Australia to
carry out a full site assessment and strongly encouraged the
planning of future clean-up actions, while being aware of the
environmental, logistical and financial constraints.
Wilkins aerodrome
Wilkins aerodrome, located inland 67 kilometres from Casey
Station, is an important logistical hub for Australia's Antarctic
activities, providing transport for equipment and personnel. The
French inspection team was able to observe the excellent
management of the site and the efficiency of the infrastructure. The
team was also appreciative of the care taken to limit the human
presence and the footprint of the permanent infrastructures.
Acknowledgements
France extends its gratitude to Australia for its support and
cooperation in the conduct of this inspection.
The French inspection team was grateful for the warm welcome and
valued assistance it received from all the teams on site at Casey
station and Wilkins aerodrome.
