Proposed Measures to Upgrade the Management Plan of ASPA N°
125, Fildes peninsula, King George Island (25 de Mayo)
Proposed Measures to Upgrade the Management Plan of ASPA N°
125, Fildes peninsula, King George Island (25 de mayo)
Summary
The conservation of the values of the ASPA N° 125 began with a
proposal from Chile five decades ago. In 2014, the management
plan was updated to the SGMP to renew the 2009 version. The
resolution of comments from the 2014 update is presented in this
document within the scientific advances of the last fifteen years and
the new conservation measures to protect the values of the Fildes
peninsula.
Introduction
The conservation of paleontological values on the Fildes Peninsula
started five decades ago with a Chilean proposal to protect five sub-
sites covering an area of 1.8 km². In 2002, the area was included in
the ASPA system, receiving the number 125. In 2009, because of
the key fossils that contributed to the reconstruction of the
Cretaceous era, the last management plan (MP) proposed three new
sites, including the frontal border of Glacier Collins, and expanding
the protected area within a total territory of 2.25 km². The history
of ASPA N° 125 has presented an expansion trend primarily due to
the paleontological findings that need to be protected because of
the proximity of the highest density of Antarctic stations. Although
the creation of ASPA N° 125 was originally proposed for the
protection of paleontological richness, it also harbours a diversity of
lichens, mosses, and avian values, mostly because of the spatial
diversification of the sub-sites.
The available MP was approved fifteen years ago, and between
2014 - 2015, a new version of the MP was submitted to the SGMP.
This information paper presents information regarding i) resolving
commentaries of the SGMP revisors. ii) the new scientific findings
since the last presentation of the MP, and iii) an upgrade of
measurements to improve the conservation of the values from the
Fildes peninsula.
Although the document is almost drafted, the MP maps still need to
be updated to complete the final version. For this reason, the
presentation of this informative paper allows the proponent to show
progress and concretize agreements in the next ATCM.
Below is the summary of the solved commentaries of the SGMP,
which are included in the new MP version.
1.- It was recommended to protect fossil values from stepping by
using GPS devices with polygons of the ASPA sub-sites previously
loaded. In this regard, the free cell phone application called
MAPS.ME is included in the MP, where visitants can visualize off-
line
maps of Antarctica, showing personal positioning and the polygons
of the ASPAs. Using this phone App, people can know in one step
when they are getting close to protected areas with no need to load
the polygons in GPS devices. This tool was helpful during the
Chilean Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ECA) carried out in
2023-2024 in Fildes Peninsula, where researchers, tourists, and
logistics (governmental and non-governmental) were informed to
use the application.
2.- The following paragraph was added to provide information
about how the area complements the Antarctic Protected Areas
system. The boundaries of the ASPA N° 125 contribute to a unique
outcrop record of the cretaceous and Eocene times, being the core
of the eight sub-sites of the protected area, to also conserve living
values. According to the Environmental Domains Analysis for
Antarctica (Resolution 3, 2008), the area lies within Environment G
- Antarctic Peninsula Offshore Island geologic. Under the Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Regions (v2) (Resolution 3, 2017) the
Area lies within ACBR 3 - North-West Antarctic Peninsula.
3.- All maps and tables presented in the MP are respectively
referred to in the text as suggested by the SGMP.
4.- Approved place names are used in the MP.
Below is a summary of the scientific advances developed in the last
fifteen years.
In the last decade, several articles present advances in terms of
contaminants and the influence of the anthropogenic pressure in the
Fildes peninsula (Perfetti-Bolaño A et al 2022; Alekseev I. and
Abakumov E. (2020)). For instance, researchers from the Chilean
Scientific Research Program (PROCIEN) have recently found
microplastic concentrations in Fildes Bayhia that are equivalent to
amounts found in urban places (González-Aravena et al., 2024).
 
Regarding fauna, fewer nests of giant southern petrels have been
counted in the last ten years on the west coast of Fildes Peninsula
(Braun C., et al 2021). Respecting the access of subsites of ASPA N
°125 h and g can reverse this situation because it has been shown
that these areas are also the preferred places for petrels to
reproduce. Therefore, the sub-sites of ASPA N°125 can be core to
protect not only paleontological values but also fauna and flora.
Regarding vegetation, Peninsula Fildes is highly exposed to stepping
and vehicular transit. Route maintenance is essential to avoid
damage to mosses and lichens.
Map 1 (general view showing King George Island (25 de Mayo) is
replaced to improve the resolution. Images were obtained from the
Quantartctica QGIS package.
 
Maps with sub-site polygons are updated with orthophotography
mosaic obtained with a Remote Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS).
This was achieved in March 2024 in collaboration with the Instituto
Antártico Uruguayo and the Instituto Antártico Chileno. Moreover,
according to the comments of the SGMP, access with coordinates is
included in both the MP text and maps.
Findings related to climate change have shown that native plants
could spread further south or to higher latitudes, while species from
sub-Antarctic latitudes could succeed them. For example, such
spatial shifts or expansions have been documented for two native
flowering plants in Fildes Peninsula. An expansion of endemic
flowering plants into areas colonized initially by mosses and lichens
due to rising temperatures leads to higher trophic relationships and,
thereby, to changes in the soil formation process. In the long term,
the development of extensive areas of tundra vegetation is
expected. Moreover, because the growth rates of lichens strongly
depend on temperature and the availability of water, regular
monitoring of lichens can provide valuable clues to climate change
(Braun et al. 2017).
Bellow the proposal of the conservation measurements to protect
the values.
Recent field studies at the margin of the Bellingshausen glacier
(ASPA N°125c), performed by researchers from the PROCIEN, have
found that the glacier boundary may be up to 70 meters more
inland than fifteen years ago (study still not published). As a result
of ice retraction, new fossiliferous outcrops are exposed. However,
because the ASPA N°125c limit was established more than a decade
ago, new outcrops are not under protection, requiring the expansion
of the polygon to conserve the newly exposed fossils. A proposed
area to expand the polygon of ASPA N°125c is presented in Figure
1. Additionally, researchers from Korean Polar Research Institute
(KOPRI) in collaboration with the Chilean Antarctic Institute
(INACH) have recently discovered three fossils out of the current
ASPA N°125e (Oh et al., 2019).
Figure 1.- sub-sites of ASPA N° 125. In grey are the polygons that
represent the current subsites; in green is a proposal polygon
expansion for subsites 125c and e.
Fossils are a finite value; hence, the SGMP has recommended
building a repository of fossils found in peninsula Fildes. Following
this alignment, researchers should inform about the amount and
location of collected samples to avoid research duplication.
Bibliography
Alekseev I. and Abakumov E. (2020). The content and distribution
of trace elements and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soils of
Maritime Antarctica. Environmental Monitoring Asses. 192: 670.
Braun C, Esefeld J, Larisa Savelieva and Hans‐Ulrich P. (2021)
Population decline of the cape petrel (Daption capense) on King
George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Polar Biology.
Braun C, Esefeld J, Hans-Ulrich P & Schiller F. 2017. Monitoring the
consequences of local climate change on the natural resources of
the ice- free regions of Maxwell Bay King George Island, Antarctic.
González-Aravena M, Rotunno C, Cárdenas C, Torres M, Morley S,
Hurley J, Caro-Lara L, Pozo K, Galban C and Rondon R. (2024)
Detection of plastic, cellulosic micro-fragments and microfibers in
Laternula elliptica from King George Island (Maritime Antarctica)
Marine Pollution Bulletin. V 201, 116257.
MAPS.ME Web Site: https://maps.me/
Oh C, Philippe M, McLoughlin S, Woo J, Leppe M, Torres T, Park T
and Goi H. (2019). New fossil woods from lower Cenozoic volcano-
sedimentary rocks of the Fildes peninsula, King George Island, and
the implications for the trans-antarctic peninsula Eocene climatic
gradient. Papers in Palaeontology, 2019, pp. 1–29.
Perfetti-Bolaño A, Araneda A, Muñoz K, and Barra R. (2022).
Occurrence and Distribution of Microplastics in Soils and Intertidal
Sediments at Fildes Bay, Maritime Antarctica. Frontiers in Marine
Science. V8, 774055.
