High Greenhouse Gas Reduction Ambitions at Troll Research
Station
High Greenhouse Gas Reduction Ambitions at Troll Research
Station
Summary
Norway has initiated a process towards modernization and renewal
of its Troll Research Station. Norway – in the planning concept –
has set high ambitions for greening the operations – and aims for a
50% greenhouse reduction of emission associated with station
operations (incl. emissions associated with transport of the fuel
required to operate the station). This paper provides information
about the plans as they currently stand.
Background
In Information Paper 61 submitted to ATCM XLIII Norway informed
the Parties that it was in the process of completing a concept study
for Troll Research Station (Troll) to identify future upgrade needs.
Furthermore, in Information Paper 20 submitted to ATCM XXLV
Norway informed that the Norwegian Government in April 2023,
had decided to go ahead with the planning phase based on a
concept entailing a total renewal of the Troll Research Station, in
line with the conclusions of the concept study.
One of the key aspects of the chosen concept is, as noted in ATCM
XLV IP 20, to implement a total renewal of the energy system at
Troll – upgrading to green energy solutions.
Point 7 in the ATCM Multi-year Strategic Plan (MYSP) relates to
Modernisation of Antarctic Stations. As a specific task for the 2024
meeting, it states: Parties to continue sharing information on
modernisation of Antarctic stations.
Furthermore, Point 6 in MYSP aims to advance in the
implementation of Resolution 4 (2022), including issues related to
the development and/or strengthening of research activities and the
dissemination of their results. For the 2024 meeting it encourages
Parties to share information on their experiences on inter alia ways
to increase energy efficiency.
Finally, the Helsinki Declaration (Resolution 2 (2023)) specifically
encourages all Antarctic operators, including national Antarctic
programs, tourist and non-governmental operators to continue to
reduce their carbon footprints and investigate pathways and move
towards carbon neutral (‘net zero’) operations, as well as to reduce
their impacts on the Antarctic environment and its associated and
dependent ecosystems and to continue deliberations on possible
policy recommendations to this end.
This Information Paper provides Parties with an insight into the
planned ambitions for reduced greenhouse gas emissions and
renewal of the energy system at the new and modernized Troll
Research Station, and the solutions currently under planning.
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Ambition
The concept for the new Troll includes a number of outcome
objectives, of which one is that “Troll will have low greenhouse
emissions and limited environmental impacts”.
Specifically, the aim of the Norwegian Government for the new and
modernized Troll Research Station is to achieve a 50% reduction of
CO2 emissions associated with station operations (incl. emissions
associated with transport of the fuel required to operate the
station).
A combination of renewable energy production and storage
solutions, as well as standard and innovative energy saving
approaches, will be the key pathway to achieve the high ambition.
Current emission patterns
The main sources of greenhouse gas emissions at present-day Troll
are vessel transportation, land-based transportation, air operations
and fuel combustion for station operations. Total emission
associated with basic station operation is estimated at around 2000
tonn (2022), distributed to source as indicated in Table 1.
Table 1: Percentage greenhouse emissions from the various
emission sources associated with operation of Troll Research Station
Source
Percentage associated with basic station operations
Vessel transportation
33%
Land-based transportation
8%
Aircraft operations
2%
Generator combustion
57%
Planned pathways to the 50% CO2 reduction
Current plans under consideration for achieving the 50% reduction
in CO2 emissions include:
An ambitious renewable energy system:
The aim is an energy system that to the largest degree possible is
based on renewable energy. This will, in addition to the obvious
contribution to greenhouse emission reductions, contribute to
lowering costs and local pollution, while maintaining operation
safety. The system will be tailored to the seasonal changes in
operation and energy requirements. While fossil fuel combustion
still will be part of the energy mix, the plan is to establish an
extensive renewable energy infrastructure, including both a solar
and wind energy park in the vicinity of the station.
Expanded storage capacity for renewable energy:
The concept will focus on storing energy with batteries and thermal
energy. When surplus renewable energy is created water will be
heated and stored.
Building in energy saving technology and approaches in the station
concept:
The new station design will focus on high energy conservation and
recycling of energy for heating. The design will also focus on
minimizing and recycling wastewater to reduce the amount of
water that needs to be produced. Large parts of the station will only
be used during the four summer months and will therefore be
sealed off and put in sleep mode (reduced ventilation and heating)
during the periods with low activity.
Conclusion
Norway has initiated a process towards modernization and renewal
of its Troll Research Station. Norway – in the planning concept –
has set high ambitions for greening the operations – and aims for a
50% greenhouse reduction of emission associated with station
operations (including emissions associated with transport of fuel for
station operations).
Norway has in this first stage of developing the concept had useful
exchanges with other national programs with regard to experiences
relating to renewable energy and energy efficiency at their stations.
Norway encourages such exchanges on a broad basis, as it will
surely contribute to climate sensitive developments across the
Antarctic station network.
Norway will continue to share information about the plans and
development of its modernization process and reminds Parties that
a draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation will be prepared
in due course, currently expected to be circulated at the earliest in
2026.
