The Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program:
2024-2028 Aviation Safety Initiatives
The Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program:
2024-2028 Aviation Safety Initiatives
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program is a
portfolio of investments in facilities and infrastructure across the U.
S. National Science Foundation’s U. S. Antarctic Program (USAP)
stations and gateways that will assure safety, enhance efficiency,
and increase resilience (see ATCM XLV IP125 The Antarctic
Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program: An Enduring
Approach to Maintaining and Modernizing Antarctic Stations for
more information). As part of this effort, starting this year (2024),
the USAP has initiated three procurements that will replace aging,
end-of-life aviation support equipment with new systems. All three
investments will target improved operational aviation station safety
at McMurdo, as well as enhanced general station safety. At Palmer,
the Environmental Satellite Ground Station investment will support
station and other sea-based activity safety in the Peninsula region.
These three investments are:
Recapitalization of the Tactical Air Navigation Systems
The Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) System is an aid to navigation
that radiates both bearing and distance from its ground location to
an aircraft. The signal can then be used by the aircraft to navigate/
fly published flight information procedures (arrivals, departures,
and approaches) that are constructed off the TACAN for use in
instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) whether in a radar or
non-radar environment. These new TACANs will have increased
reliability, supply supportability and be specifically designed to
withstand the harsh Antarctic environment and are available for use
at any time of the year. We expect the first TACAN to be delivered
into operational status at McMurdo Station’s Phoenix Airfield and
flight checked for operational use by October 2026. Two additional
TACANs will be delivered in 2027, one to McMurdo Station’s
Williams Field Skiway and the other will serve as a spare.
Table 1 – TACAN Life Safety and Operational Improvements
TACAN Recapitalization Safety and Operational Enhancements to
the McMurdo Area of Air Operations
Life Safety
Will allow for arrivals and departures to/from McMurdo airfields in
poor weather conditions, providing a non-precision approach
capability with weather conditions as low as 91-m (300-ft) ceiling
and 1600-m visibility.
More Efficient USAP Operations
Will reduce the power consumption through use of modern digital
systems versus present tube-based analogue systems.
Prevents Loss or Enhances USAP Capability
Increases air safety through increased reliability of a critical system.
Addition of a Dual-Polarization Portable Doppler Weather Radar
USAP weather forecasters have limited data to base forecast
decisions. This is exacerbated during satellite blackout periods
when no visual information is available for several hours and occurs
during the middle of the operational day. A Dual-Polarization
Portable Doppler Weather Radar (PDR) at McMurdo Station’s
Phoenix Airfield will provide forecasters with the necessary visual
information to assist in predicting the timing of weather systems in
and around the
McMurdo area 24 hours per day. We expect the PDR to be delivered
to by October 2026. Installation and testing are scheduled for
October-December 2026 and the PDR is expected to be fully
operational by January 2027.
Table 2 – PDR Life Safety, Operational and Science Improvements
Portable Doppler Radar Safety and Operational Enhancements to
the McMurdo Area of Air Operation
Life Safety
Improves weather situational awareness at McMurdo Station for
both general station activities and for aviation operations.
More Efficient USAP Operations
Enhances forecasting capability provided by 185 km look at current
weather conditions. This will improve decisions for aviation support
to deep field locations. Improved decisions based on real-time data
will reduce wasted logistical effort.
Prevents Loss or Enhances USAP Capability
Enhances weather forecasting capability and improves weather
decision reliability.
Advances Scientific Capability
Provides a new dataset for scientific research. Data will now be
captured 24 hours/day in the local McMurdo area.
USAP Environmental Satellite Ground System replacement
Current Environmental Satellite Ground Systems (ESGS) at
McMurdo and Palmer Stations are beyond end of life, with
continued operational capability provided by a service life
extension executed in 2019-2020. The new ESGS will focus on
future weather and imagery product requirements for the USAP
mission, while formulating a solution based on all available sources,
systems and services that are now in the marketplace. The USAP
plans to replace the one system at Palmer Station and the two
existing systems at McMurdo Station with three new. The project
will commence in 2025, with system design and delivery completed
in the 2026-2027 seasons and becoming operational in the
2027-2028 seasons.
Table 3 – ESGS Life Safety, Operational and Science Improvements
ESGS Replacement Safety & Operational Enhancements to the USAP
& McMurdo Area of Operations
Life Safety
Improves weather situational awareness with redundant 100% data
capture at McMurdo Station, enhancing both general station and
aviation operational safety.
More Efficient USAP Operations
Enhances forecasting capability provided by redundant capture
capabilities. Ability to capture data from newer weather satellite
systems further enhances forecasting capability, therefore improves
decisions for aviation support to all Antarctic area locations.
Improved operational decisions will reduce wasted logistical effort
decisions for aviation support to deep field locations.
Prevents Loss or Enhances USAP Capability
The new systems will significantly improve operational reliabilities,
with the three systems at MCM allowing for nearly 100% data
capture and uploads with one system down. Enhances weather
forecasting capability and improves weather decision reliability.
Advances Scientific Capability
Provides robust and redundant data capture and upload capability
for scientific research. Data captured here feeds the Antarctic
Meteorological Research Data Center and is available to any
researcher.
Figure 1 – Left: C-17 lands at Phoenix Airfield. Right: Two LC-130s
preparing for departure at Williams Field Skiway. Photo Credit:
United States National Science Foundation.
