Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) Symposium 2023
Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) Symposium 2023
Information paper submitted by SCAR on behalf of the Southern
Ocean Observing System (SOOS)
Summary
The Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) held its inaugural
SOOS Symposium in August 2023, in Hobart, Australia. In light of
the escalating climate crisis, a community statement calling for an
urgent expansion of Southern Ocean observations was released:
“The Southern Ocean is a critical component of the global climate
system. The Southern Ocean controls to a large extent the uptake of
human generated heat and carbon into the ocean. Yet, we are
currently observing critical changes in the Southern Ocean that are
seen in the record low levels of sea-ice extent, record high
temperatures and dramatic shifts in penguin populations, among
other striking changes. The chronic lack of observations for the
Southern Ocean challenges our ability to detect and assess the
consequences of change. As such, it is more pressing than ever to
have a sustained and coordinated Southern Ocean observing system
to provide an understanding of current conditions, inform
predictions of future states, and support policies and regulations for
the benefit of society.”
Background
The Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) held its inaugural
SOOS Symposium, “Southern Ocean in a Changing World” from the
14th to 18th August 2023 in Hobart, Tasmania. The Symposium
was attended by 300 scientists from 25 nations for a week of
plenary presentations, parallel sessions and workshops covering a
wide spectrum of Southern Ocean research. The Symposium was
also a coalescence of presentations on the escalating climate crisis
and devastating impacts the changing climate is having in the
Southern Ocean.
The importance of the Southern Ocean in the operation of the Earth
System has been clearly recognised (IPCC, 2019). It occupies a
central position in the ocean circulation system and is critical for
the mixing, storage and distribution of ocean heat, salt and
dissolved constituents throughout the Earth’s ocean basins,
influencing ocean processes globally. Air-sea fluxes of momentum,
heat and freshwater, carbon dioxide and other dissolved gases
across the Southern Ocean regulate global climate and oceanic
processes on short to long timescales. The Antarctic cryosphere
(comprising sea ice and its snow cover, the ice sheet, ice shelves
and icebergs) exerts a strong control on Southern Ocean physics,
chemistry and biology, as well as large-scale atmospheric processes
and the Earth’s radiative heat budget. Southern Ocean ecosystems
are globally important for resident and migratory organisms, its
biogeochemical cycles and productivity, and contribute to ocean
health, biodiversity and ecosystem services. The Southern Ocean is
changing in response to climate change and variability, and is also
modulating this climate change and variability through a series of
complex ice-ocean-atmosphere-ecosystem feedbacks.
The Southern Ocean in a Changing World
Through the SOOS Symposium, the critical changes currently being
observed in the Southern Ocean came to the forefront. From record
low levels of sea ice to catastrophic breeding failure
of emperor penguins (among others), the urgent need for sustained
and coordinated observations of the Southern Ocean was clear.
In 2023, the Antarctic community was shocked by a large record
low in Antarctic sea ice. On September 10 2023, Antarctic sea ice
reached its annual maximum extent at 16.96 million square
kilometres, 1.03 square kilometres lower than the previous low
maximum on satellite record (set in 1986) and 1.75 million square
kilometres below the 1981 to 2010 average (National Snow and Ice
Center). Since, it has been suggested that Antarctic sea ice has
undergone an abrupt regime shift (Hobbs et al., 2024). However,
questions have been raised on the drivers of the record low.
Understanding these changes is considerably challenging due to the
short timeframe over which we have a sea ice time series, and lack
of sustained under-ice observations (Hobbs et al., 2024; Purich and
Doddridge 2023).
Sea ice is a vital component of the Antarctic ecosystems and
changes in sea ice extent can have profound impacts on these
ecosystems and species that rely on them. Satellite imagery has
been increasing used to monitor animal populations from space
(e.g., SOOS Censusing Animal Populations from Space Capability
Working Group) including emperor penguin colonies. The spring
and summer record low sea ice extent in 2022 was particularly
evident in the Bellingshausen Sea where some regions experienced
100% loss in sea ice concentration. Sentinel2 satellite imagery
showed that of the five breeding sites in the Bellingshausen Sea
region, all except one had complete breeding failure of emperor
penguin colonies. This failure was due to the early sea ice break-up
occurring prior to fledging when emperor penguin chicks develop
waterproof feathers (Fretwell et al., 2023). This is the first observed
widespread breeding failure of emperor penguins, which would not
have been detected if it were not for sustained observations
collected from satellite imagery.
Urgent call for sustained and coordinated observations
These widespread, unpredicted changes highlight the need for an
urgent expansion in Southern Ocean observations. Therefore, a
community statement was released at the conclusion of the SOOS
Symposium:
The Southern Ocean is a critical component of the global climate
system. The Southern Ocean controls to a large extent the uptake of
human generated heat and carbon into the ocean. Yet, we are
currently observing critical changes in the Southern Ocean that are
seen in the record low levels of sea-ice extent, record high
temperatures and dramatic shifts in penguin populations, among
other striking changes. The chronic lack of observations for the
Southern Ocean challenges our ability to detect and assess the
consequences of change. As such, it is more pressing than ever to
have a sustained and coordinated Southern Ocean observing system
to provide an understanding of current conditions, inform
predictions of future states, and support policies and regulations for
the benefit of society.
This community statement has already had lasting impact,
including international media attention, propelling the importance
of Southern Ocean research into the spotlight. It has also been used
as support for discussions on the need for sustained and coordinated
observations of the Southern Ocean in policy and decision-making
forums.
References
Fretwell, P.T., Boutet, A., and Ratcliffe, N. (2023). Record low 2022
Antarctic sea ice led to catastrophic breeding failure of emperor
penguins. Communications Earth & Environment, 4, 273. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00961-9
Hobbs, W., Spence, P., Meyer, A., Schroeter, S., Fraser, A.D., Reid,
P., Tian, T.R., Wang, Z., Liniger, G., Doddridge, E., and Boyd, P.W.
(2024). Observational evidence for a regime shift in
summer Antarctic sea ice. Journal of Climate, 37 (7), 2263-2275.
https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-23-0479.1
IPCC (2019). IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-
Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A.
Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.W, Weyer
(eds.)]
Purich, A., and Doddridge, E.W. (2023). Record low Antarctic sea
ice coverage indicates a new sea ice state. Communications Earth &
Environment, 4, 314. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00961-9
