Observing systems in Antarctica
Observing systems in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Well-supported, long-term monitoring of the physical and living
environment is essential to understanding ongoing environmental
changes in Antarctica. The collection of long-term observations is
critical for detecting and understanding change, and to obtain data
needed as the basis for analyses and modelling. This paper provides
an overview and examples of current long-term observation efforts
in Antarctica, to inform further work to assess gaps and to establish
sustained and coordinated observing systems. 
SCAR dedicates this paper to Prof Craig Cary (1954-2024), a
distinguished Antarctic ecologist, teacher, mentor, and long-
standing SCAR expert. Craig was instrumental in setting up and
chairing the Antarctic Nearshore and Terrestrial Observation
System (ANTOS), which aims to develop a trans-continental,
biologically-focused, coordinated observation system to identify and
track environmental variability and change. ANTOS was set up with
a long-term vision – it was Craig’s wish that ANTOS should extend
well past the life of any researcher.
Background
The 2022 SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
report (Chown et al., 2022) identified the critical importance of
long-term monitoring programmes and observatories in the first of
its research recommendations:
ACCE Research Recommendation 1: Further support the research
required to reduce uncertainty about the future of the region and its
impact on the Earth System and to identify commensurate
management responses. Integrated, international and targeted long-
term monitoring programs and observatories are among the most
important for reducing uncertainty and for understanding the likely
impacts of mitigation and adaptation responses.
The ATCM has also recognised that well-supported, long-term
monitoring of the physical and living environment is essential to
understanding ongoing environmental changes in Antarctica.
(ATCM XLV Final Report, paragraph 180). The Meeting encouraged
Parties to ensure that data collected in Antarctica would be made
available to the international scientific community, to facilitate
better understanding of climate change impacts and enable
informed decision-making.
Parties also noted the relevance of this aim to the CEP’s plans to
progress the development of a harmonised approach to
environmental monitoring by identifying and analysing existing
monitoring activities and available data. 
ATCM XLV Working Paper 31 explored the state of coordinated
observing efforts in Antarctica, including the Troll Observing
Network (TONe), and suggested actions toward further coordinated,
comprehensive and complimentary observation networks. It
recommended that the ATCM invite SCAR to give Parties an
overview and assessment of Antarctic long-term observation efforts
to enhance their use and robustness, as well as to identify gaps in
observation needs. This paper is a first step towards providing
information on existing observation efforts, and SCAR will continue
to develop further work on assessing gaps and facilitating
collaboration.
Observing and monitoring
The routine collection of long-term observations is critical for
detecting and understanding change, and to obtain data needed as
the basis for analyses and modelling. 
Nations operate regionally in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean,
which without coordination and collaboration, leads to patchy
observational coverage and a lack of circumpolar integration. A
fully integrated, coordinated and sustained observing system would
involve national and multinational investigations, sustained time-
series and internationally coordinated programs operating to
facilitate aspects of planning, organization, collection and
management of specific observational data and/or platforms. 
Internationally coordinated observing programs ensure sustained
data delivery of a core set of variables, using prescribed platforms,
methods and standards. Combined, these various programs and
infrastructure form the backbone of an observing system and are
integral to efforts to deliver sustained observations. In addition,
other internationally coordinated programmes exist that facilitate
and coordinate the planning, organisation, collection, and
management of observational data. 
Over the last fifteen years, the number of Antarctic and Southern
Ocean observations has increased considerably. This includes
observations from national and multinational investigations varying
from mid-length, science question-focused observing efforts (>4
years) to the short, more process-focused studies (<4 years) which
make a significant contribution to the coverage of data required in
an observing system. In addition, observations collected through
sustained time-series provide long-term observational efforts (+10
years) that provide vital data for revealing ongoing change at
decadal scales. 
Examples of current long-term observation efforts
The information on current long-term observation efforts provided
here is not exhaustive, but highlights some of the investigations and
programs currently established both regionally and at a continental
or oceanic scale, and those planned for further development.
National/multinational investigations
East Antarctic Monitoring Program (Australia) – aims to deliver
sustained, coordinated, and long-term (multi-decadal) observations
of essential climate, ocean and biological/ecological variables in
key areas of East Antarctica and the Southern Ocean at the
appropriate temporal and spatial scales.
Ross Sea-far East Antarctic Region observing system (RSfEAR) (Heil
et al., 2023) – aims to deliver an integrated observing system for
the Ross Sea-far East Antarctic region including observations to
cover sea-ice, oceanic, and atmospheric drivers.
Integrated Marine Observing System (IMOS) (Australia) – sustained
ocean observing infrastructure, including animal tagging, Argo
floats, deep-water moorings and satellite observations.
Grupo de Oceanografia de Altas Latitudes (GOAL) (Brazil) – ocean
ventilation process and carbon cycle in the Northern Antarctic
Peninsula.
Ocean Cryosphere Exchanges in ANtarctica: Impacts on Climate and
the Earth system (OCEAN:ICE) (EU and UK) – aims to make
circumpolar observations with a focus on understanding how the
Antarctic ice sheet and the surrounding Southern Ocean influence
our global climate, and reducing the level of uncertainty around
how much ice will be lost from the Antarctic ice sheet in the
coming centuries.
Heart of the East AnTarctic Cryosphere-Ocean Synergy System
(HEAT-CROSS) (Japan) – aims to elucidate the mechanism of mass
loss from the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and its impacts on
biogeochemical cycle in the surrounding Southern Ocean.
Robotic Observations and Modelling of the Marginal Ice Zone
(ROAM-MIZ) (Sweden) – aims to capture high resolution
observations of how the upper ocean near and under sea ice
responds to sea ice growth or melt.
Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling
(SOCCOM) (USA) – focused on the influence of the Southern Ocean
on climate. A large array (~200) of profiling floats with
biogeochemical sensors will be deployed throughout the Southern
Ocean to develop a new observing system for carbon, nutrients, and
oxygen that will complement and expand on the existing observing
system for heat and freshwater.
Weddell Sea Observatory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Change
(WOBEC) (Belgium, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Sweden, USA) – aims to establish a systematic ecosystem
monitoring framework in the Eastern Weddell Sea, to support the
assessment of how ecosystems will change under progressing sea-ice
decline, ocean warming and ocean acidification.
Sustained time-series programs
Antarctic Automatic Weather Stations (AntAWS) – measurement of
meteorological parameters from 267 current automatic weather
stations, 27 of which have been operating for more than 30 years
(Wang et al., 2023). The SCAR MetREADER (Reference Antarctic
Data for Environmental Research) database contains monthly mean
surface and upper air climatological data derived from the in-situ
meteorological observations made at Antarctic stations with long-
term records (see Figure 1). MET-READER also contains available
metadata about changes of instrumentation and station location.
Data are available on temperature, surface pressure, wind speed/
direction and geopotential height. The web site is updated each
month using data received over the WMO Global
Telecommunications System.
Palmer Station Long-Term Ecological Research (Pal-LTER) (USA) –
marine ecology of the western Antarctic Peninsula area (since
1990), including: physical forcing (atmospheric, oceanic and sea
ice) of the ecosystem with emphasis on the ecological consequences
of sea-ice variability; biological processes with emphasis on
microbial, primary production and the life-history parameters of
secondary producers (krill) and apex predators (penguins);
physical/optical/chemical/biological modeling that links ecosystem
processes to environmental variables.
Rothera Time Series (RaTS) (UK) – sustained year-round
oceanographic measurements (since 1997) relevant to
investigations of climate change impacts on the ocean and
ecosystem, and their feedbacks. The time series includes water
column profile data (such as temperature, salinity, fluorescence)
and discrete sample measurements (ammonium, nitrate, nitrite,
phosphate, silicic acid and oxygen isotopes), which inform on
physical and biogeochemical ocean variability on timescales from
days to decades. Direct observations of sea ice conditions are also
collected. (Venables et al., 2023). RaTS is also a key contribution to
the Pal-LTER programme.
Potter Cove Time Series (Argentina/Germany) – dynamics of coastal
hydrography, sea ice, and productivity (since 1991).
Marine Ross Sea Observation (MORSea) (Italy) – moorings deployed
(since 1994) to monitor the oceanographic condition of the shelf
waters, and to study the biogeochemical cycles of the largest
Antarctic continental shelf sea and most biologically productive
region of the Southern Ocean.
Troll Observing Network (TONe) (Norway) – comprehensive
infrastructure which aims to contribute significantly to observation
and data gathering efforts, centred at the Norwegian Antarctic
research station Troll. By utilizing TONe infrastructure and
observations the research community will be able to answer
questions and generate knowledge related to climate and sea-level
change, atmosphere dynamics, solid Earth structure, cryosphere
dynamics, space weather
effects, robustness of communication networks, quality of weather
and climate models, and the effects of global changes on marine
ecosystems.
Internationally coordinated observing programs
Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) – an international
initiative of SCAR and the Scientific Committee on Oceanic
Research (SCOR) with the mission to facilitate the sustained
collection and delivery of essential observations of the Southern
Ocean to all stakeholders, through design, advocacy, and
implementation of cost-effective observing and data delivery
systems. SOOS is achieving this through building collaborative
networks and products that align priorities, supporting resource
sharing across the international community and removing barriers
to collaboration. SOOSmap provides curated and standardised
observation data from oceanographic and Antarctic research
programs from many nations and scientific disciplines (Figure 2).
Maps of existing observational coverage and data availability are
being developed by SOOS Regional Working Groups for SOOS
Science Themes including cryosphere, circulation, carbon and
biogeochemistry, ecosystems and biodiversity (Figure 3), and
ocean–sea ice–atmosphere fluxes (see ATCM XLV IP168 Status of
Southern Ocean Observational Coverage).
SCAR Antarctic Near-Shore and Terrestrial Observation System
(ANTOS) – aims to establish a biologically focussed, integrated and
coordinated Antarctic-wide observation, to identify and track
environmental variability and change at biologically relevant scales,
and to use this information to inform biological, physical, and earth
science studies. Establishment of at least one ANTOS site in each
Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic bioregion, including each of the 16
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) is desired to
begin to meet the goal of comprehensive spatial coverage.
Thirteen potential ANTOS sites have been identified in the Antarctic
Treaty Area, following a consultation process that included two
SCAR community surveys to assess where long-term biological
monitoring is currently occurring (see Figure 4) and to nominate
other potential sites.
SCAR Antarctic Permafrost, Soils and Periglacial Environments
(ANTPAS) Expert Group – aims to develop an internationally
coordinated, web-accessible database and monitoring system on
Antarctic permafrost and soils, including a system of boreholes
providing data on permafrost and soils properties, records of past
environmental change, and recording permafrost responses to
climate change.
Network for the Collection of Knowledge on Melt of Antarctic Ice
Shelves (NECKLACE) – aims to facilitate a long-term circum-
Antarctic network of instruments to provide time series of basal
melt rates from Antarctic ice shelves. This would provide urgently
needed control and validation data for models of ice shelf- ocean
interaction, and a source of ground truth for satellite-derived
estimates of average ice shelf basal melt rates. The goal is for
circum-Antarctic coverage over a time interval of roughly five years
but to provide the basis for longer-term monitoring.
Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) – tide gauge
observations provide information on a wide spectrum of
oceanographic processes, ranging from surface and internal tides to
surface currents and ocean eddies. In situ observations of sea level
are also needed to monitor and understand global sea level rise, as
well as interannual to decadal sea level variations, which provide
insight into ocean circulation changes on climate time scales. There
are currently 11 core network stations around the coast of
Antarctica.
Considerations for further development of observing systems
It is more pressing than ever to have an integrated, sustained and
coordinated observing system to provide an understanding of the
current Southern Ocean and Antarctic conditions, inform
predictions of future states, and support policies and regulations for
the benefit of society. This
system requires coordinated observations from the entire southern
polar region to understand larger-scale processes and such as an
understanding of the impact of the Southern Ocean on heat,
freshwater and carbon exchange and storage on the global ocean
and understanding the changes in the Antarctic Ice Sheet and its
impact on global sea level. Regional efforts nested within these
broader perspectives are also important to understand how regional
physical changes are impacting ecology and biogeochemistry such
as the changing sea ice conditions on key species in regional food
webs. 
Due to the size and unique governance of the Southern Ocean and
Antarctic, this requires international agreement, coordination and
collaboration to determine the priority observations to be collected,
and internationally coordinated data management and delivery. The
community needs to align and advocate for scientific and
observational priorities to provide a unified voice to funders,
national programs and intergovernmental agencies. Integrated
networks, tools and opportunities need to occur across nations,
organisations, programs and stakeholders to deliver sustained and
coordinated observing and data delivery systems.  
The growth in observations is projected to increase considerably
into the future with the development, capability and use of
autonomous, remote and robotic systems driving a step change in
Antarctic and Southern Ocean observing systems, allowing
observations to be collected at previously difficult to observe
seasons and/or regions to leverage improved data collection and
coverages, scientific outcomes and coordination.
Priorities for further development of Antarctic observing systems
could include key areas highlighted in the SCAR ACCE Report, e.g.
permafrost (active layer thickness), sea ice extent, ice sheet
processes (Marine Ice Sheet Instability and Marine Ice Cliff
Instability), long-term monitoring of terrestrial and marine
biodiversity, and species colonisations, local extinctions and
invasions.
Further assessment and community consultation is needed to
identify gaps in current observations, at both the circumpolar scale
and regional scales. Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions
could be further used to help define observational requirements and
coverage (e.g. Figure 4). Further assessment of gaps in observing
systems could be undertaken by the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
workshop, particularly recognising the common interest in Southern
Ocean observations. Large-scale, internationally collaborative
programmes such as Antarctica InSync and the International Polar
Year will also provide an opportunity to establish sustained and
coordinated observing systems.
References
Heil, P, Stevens C., Lee W.S. et al. (2023) Bridging the gap for ice–
ocean–ecosystem processes: integrated observing system for the
Ross Sea-far East Antarctic Region. Front. Mar. Sci. 10:1206119.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2023.1206119.
Terauds, A., & Lee, J. R. (2016). Antarctic biogeography revisited:
updating the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions.
Diversity and Distributions, 22(8), 836-840.
Venables, H., Meredith, M.P., Hendry, K.R. et al. (2023) Sustained,
year-round oceanographic measurements from Rothera Research
Station, Antarctica, 1997-2017. Scientific Data, 10. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41597-023-02172-5.
Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Ning, W. et al. (2023) The AntAWS dataset: a
compilation of Antarctic automatic weather station observations.
Earth System Science Data. 15, 411-429. https://doi.org/10.5194/
essd-15-411-2023
Figure 1: Automatic Weather Stations in Antarctica (2023). https://
amrc.ssec.wisc.edu/aws/index.html
Figure 2: The growth of the observing system showing all data
available through SOOSmap (as of December 2021) and a timeline
highlighting key example observational platforms, programs and
tools that contribute to SOOS.
Figure 3: Example map of existing observational coverage and data
availability for SOOS Science Themes – understanding and
quantifying the state and variability of Southern Ocean ecosystems
and biodiversity. See ATCM XLV IP168 Status of Southern Ocean
Observational Coverage for additional maps.
Figure 4: Map of Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions
(ACBRs) (modified from Terauds & Lee, 2016), with current long-
term biological monitoring efforts described in ANTOS survey
responses (yellow dots). ACBRs highlighted in red do not have
active long-term biological monitoring.
