Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Sixth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Sixth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
CCAMLR-42 (October 2023)
1. The 42nd Annual Meeting of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR-42)
met in Hobart, Australia, from 16 – 27 October 2023. It was chaired
by Mr V. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine). The Report of the Meeting is in the
public domain.
2. The Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance
(SCIC), the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance
(SCAF) and the Scientific Committee also met in Hobart in the week
of 16-20 October.
Organisation of the Meeting
3. The Commission noted that the Russian Federation was not
present for the opening of the meeting or in the first week of the
meetings of the Scientific Committee, SCIC or SCAF, as the
delegation was awaiting visas until Tuesday of the first week of the
CCAMLR meeting. The Commission requested the Executive
Secretary to consult with the Australian authorities on the
application of the Headquarters Agreement in order to ensure equal
right to representation of all Members in accordance with the
Convention.
Management of marine resources
4. Responding to the threats associated with Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza (HPAI) the Commission requested that the
Secretariat cooperate with other organisations tracking HPAI
outbreaks and develop guidance on HPAI for fishing vessels and
scientific observers.
5. Several modifications to krill-related conservation measures were
proposed in relation to the new krill management approach being
developed by the Commission, including a proposal for collection of
acoustic data by fishing vessels. The current Conservation Measure
51-07 was rolled over for a further year, but the Commission agreed
that a revision of the measure was necessary to ensure that the
temporal and spatial management of krill resources was based on
the best available science and requested that the Scientific
Committee finalise the acoustic survey methodology in 2024.
6. The Commission agreed to hold, jointly with the Scientific
Committee, a Symposium in 2024 which will provide
recommendations to CCAMLR on steps to harmonise the
implementation of the revised krill fishery management approach
and the establishment of a Domain 1 MPA in the Antarctic
Peninsula Region.
7. The Commission noted that an external panel from the Center for
Independent Experts had provided an independent and scientific
evaluation of the approaches and methods used to assess the status
of toothfish stocks, which the panel considered as using the best
available science and representing global best practice in stock
assessment. The Commission also noted the short-term workplan
established by the Scientific Committee to address issues related to
potential biases in toothfish stock estimates from the effects of
spatial patterns in fishing effort, to investigate methods for
estimating recruitment used in projections, and to investigate the
performance of the CCAMLR decision rules.
8. The Commission adopted revised conservation measures relating
to toothfish and icefish fisheries. However, the Commission was
unable to agree a catch limit for the fishery for
Patagonian toothfish in Subarea 48.3. Noting the lack of consensus
on Antarctic toothfish in Division 58.4.1, the Commission agreed
that this fishery would not take place in 2023/24.
9. The Commission was unable to reach consensus on the advice
from the Scientific Committee regarding the adoption of a
conservation measure to provide protection to Neopagetopsis ionah
fish nest areas in the southern Weddell Sea.
Spatial management
10. The Third Special Meeting of the Commission (CCAMLR-SM-III)
was held in Santiago, Chile, from 19 June to 23 June 2023 to
consider the way forward to progress MPA design, designation and
implementation. The Commission noted that despite not achieving
the desired outcome of creating a roadmap to the establishment of a
representative system of MPAs, the meeting generated a better
understanding of the different positions among Members,
facilitating a clearer vision for a way forward.
11. The Commission had an extensive discussion on three existing
proposals for MPAs (Domain 1 MPA, Weddell Sea MPA Phase 1 and
East Antarctic MPA) and one new proposal, introduced by Norway,
for a Weddell Sea MPA Phase 2. The Commission did not reach
consensus on any of these proposals but welcomed the intention of
Norway to hold a workshop to further develop the research and
monitoring plan associated with the Weddell Sea MPA Phase 2
proposal.
12. The Commission approved the revised management plan for the
merger of ASPA No. 152 Western Bransfield Strait and ASPA
No.153 Eastern Dallmann Bay ASPA and forwarded it to the ATCM
for final approval.
Climate change
13. The Commission noted the significant threats of climate change
to Antarctic marine ecosystems including the record low sea ice
extent observed this year. It also noted that management responses
to the effects of climate change need to be precautionary given that
past environmental and ecological conditions may not endure in the
future.
14. The Commission welcomed the suggestion that an annual report
on the status of Antarctic marine living resources be developed by
the Scientific Committee.
Implementation and compliance
15. The Commission adopted a compliance report, noting that the
analysis reflected an overall high rate of compliance.
16. The Commission adopted a revised NCP-IUU Vessel List with the
inclusion of one new vessel, the Cobija.
17. Singapore, Mexico, the Kingdom of Thailand and the Republic
of Colombia are now cooperating with CCAMLR through voluntary
implementation of the Catch Documentation Scheme.
Administration and Finance
18. The Commission adopted its budget for 2024. Recognising the
need to consider increased cost recovery for fisheries management
and other administrative activities to ensure financial sustainability
of the General Fund the Commission requested the Intersessional
Correspondence Group (ICG) on Sustainable Finance to continue its
work to identify sustainable financing options in 2024 and provide
a proposal to CCAMLR-43.
19. The Commission considered a proposal for a code of conduct for
CCAMLR meetings but could not reach consensus.
Next meeting
20. Ukraine (Mr V. Tsymbaliuk) will Chair the 43rd Meeting of the
Commission to be held in Hobart, Australia, from 14 to 25 October
2024. Belgium was elected to serve as Vice-Chair for 2024 and
2025. Dr Cardenas (Chile) was elected as Chair of the Scientific
Committee for 2024 and 2025.
