Environmental Bioremediation “Recovering an environmental
liability of more than 8 decades"
Environmental Bioremediation
“Recovering an environmental liability of more than 8 decades"
Summary
This document provides information on the commitment to
environmental protection by the Chilean Army, which has led to the
General Bernardo O'Higgins Riquelme Antarctic Army Base (BAE)
having facilities and equipment for the development of Antarctic
activities with a focus on protecting the Antarctic environment.
1. Background
The Antarctic Army Base (BAE) “CGL. Bernardo O'Higgins
Riquelme" located on Isabel Riquelme Islet, has maintained its
permanent and uninterrupted operation for 76 years, providing
support for national and international scientific development, land
surveys and explorations and, above all, concern about the
protection of the environment.
In this context, the Chilean Army has implemented various
measures to reduce the impact on the Antarctic environment in
order to respect the provisions of the Protocol to the Antarctic
Treaty on Environmental Protection, and the National Antarctic
Policy.
Regarding the environmental tasks of the Chilean Army, the
implementation of an Environmental Management System is
established at the O'Higgins Base that improves environmental
performance through certification based on the ISO 14001:2015
standard.
On the other hand, in 2003, the Chilean Army signed a Scientific
Cooperation Agreement with the University of Magallanes to
develop and support specific research studies representing a
contribution to the Antarctic programmes of both institutions and
the country in general. The Convention has made it possible to
maintain permanent monitoring of the quality of waste water
discharged into the Antarctic Sea. Another line of cooperation in
execution is associated with studies based on the Bioremediation of
Antarctic Soil Contaminated with Diesel Hydrocarbons, thus
generating the necessary mechanisms to clean contaminated soils
through a bioremediation approach.
The commitment assumed by the Chilean Army has led to the
O'Higgins Base having facilities and equipment for the development
of Antarctic activities with a focus on the protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, tending at
all times to eliminate or minimise the impacts caused in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
2. Reverse logistics and equipment
The logistical support of the O'Higgins Base is provided jointly
through naval and air means of the Chilean Navy and Air Force,
with the purpose of having the necessary logistical supplies to carry
out the tasks and activities ready for both the Summer and Winter
Antarctic Campaign.
Supply planning in the different logistics areas and classes is
developed through the shipment of cargo in containers and in bulk
for the operation of the O'Higgins Base. The supply is based on the
concept of reverse logistics and in this way complies with the
provisions of Annex III “Waste Disposal and Treatment" of the
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection.
The O'Higgins Base has a Non-Hazardous Waste and Hazardous
Waste Management and Treatment Plan (RESPEL), which aims to
establish the standards for the storage, treatment, incineration,
removal and transportation of waste and RESPEL procedures in
order to minimise the risks of environmental impact in Antarctica.
The Centre for Antarctic Affairs of the Chilean Army has
implemented several special measures, equipment and systems at
the O'Higgins Base in order to minimise the impact produced by
human presence, with the following equipment for waste treatment.
a. Rubbish incinerator
Element specially conditioned for the incineration of organic waste.
b. Compactor press
Multi-chamber compactor to classify and compact different types of
materials, facilitating collection for shipment to the continent.
c. Collection centre
Duly signposted area for all treated, packaged and labelled waste to
be gathered in one single place for subsequent evacuation.
d. Waste water treatment system
Waste water treatment plant, which complies with the regulations
required for this purpose and is connected to the drainage network
built in 1988, whose waters are emptied directly into the sea in an
area of rapid dispersion due to the strong sea currents, which are
monitored and controlled monthly by the Logistics Officer and
Environmental Matters Advisor and validated by the University of
Magallanes.
e. RESPEL warehouse
Warehouse for the storage of hazardous waste, which is placed in
different labelled containers that are stored for subsequent
evacuation to Punta Arenas.
3. Results
A. Collection and recycling
The collection and recycling process in the Waste Warehouse has
generated waste that is classified by type of product, in order to
facilitate its treatment and packaging, to be shipped in containers to
Punta Arenas and dumped in duly authorised controlled landfills.
Below is the annual average of duly classified and labelled waste for
the last 5 years (2019-2023), which has been eliminated from the
O'Higgins Base.
Classification
kg
Clothing
76
Aluminium cans
895
Glass
1,440
Ash
1,860
Aerosol containers
27
Plastics in general
2,874
Construction waste
4,631
Compressed plastic bottles
284
Plastic bottle caps
3
Table 1: “Average waste removed from the Chilean Antarctic
territory.”
Other substances that are removed entirely from the Antarctic
Treaty Zone in which the O'Higgins Base is immersed are the
RESPEL generated by the logistical and operational functioning of
the Base.
The substances that are evacuated correspond to industrial oils,
contaminated rags, solvents, paints, batteries, contaminated plastics
and containers that have contained hazardous substances. Being the
main oils and filters used in generators, machinery and vehicles for
transporting personnel.
There is exhaustive control by the Chilean Army over all supplies
and waste generated at the Base, for their subsequent evacuation, in
order to minimise the impacts on the Antarctic environment.
B. Waste water disposal system
Waste water treatment is intended to eliminate, reduce or neutralise
contaminants present in water that has been used in industrial,
domestic or commercial processes. The main objective is to improve
the quality of waste water generated at the Base before being
returned to the Antarctic environment. The treatment meets its
objective through various physical and chemical processes that
allow the reduction of different quality and environmental impact
parameters:
a) pH: Measurement of acidity or alkalinity of an aqueous solution.
b) Temperature: Measurement of the average kinetic energy of
water molecules.
c) Sedimentable Solids: Solid particles present in water that tend to
settle quickly due to their weight.
d) Faecal or Thermotolerant Coliforms: These are bacteria that
indicate faecal contamination. Their presence suggests the possible
presence of pathogens.
This process is fundamental for the environment in the sense of the
preservation and protection of aquatic ecosystems, human health
and global sustainability, helping to fulfil different tasks thanks to
the eradication of these components. Helping to reduce the
presence of contaminants, such as nutrients, toxic chemicals, heavy
metals and pathogenic micro-organisms.
The O'Higgins Base waste water treatment plant has the purpose of
improving the quality of waste water to return it to the
environment so that it complies with Chilean regulations. The Base
has implemented a strict protocol for taking serial samples, which
are taken and analysed monthly in order to control the operation of
the plant and the repercussions it is having on the environment.
Analyses are currently carried out at the base, the main ones being
pH, temperature, sedimentable solids and faecal or thermotolerant
coliforms. From this, the parameters followed are:
Parameter
Unit
Expression
Maximum Allowed Limit
pH
-
pH
6-9
Temperature
°C
T
30
Sedimentable Solids
ml/L/h
S SED
5
Coliforms
NMP/100ml
Coli/100ml
1000
Table 2: “Maximum limit allowed for each parameter analysed
based on O'Higgins according to D.S. No. 90”.
This makes it possible to identify how the treatment plant is
operating. For this, once a month the nurse in charge of this task at
the base is responsible for analysing these parameters by extracting
a sample from the O'Higgins Base, which are sent periodically for
control and registration to the University of Magallanes.
Despite its remote location and extreme conditions, the
implementation of a treatment plant at the Bernardo O'Higgins Base
demonstrates an advanced technological approach and an active
commitment to Chilean environmental regulations.
The analyses carried out at the Base reflect effective control and
meticulous attention to environmental standards. Although seasonal
variations are observed, the Army demonstrates efficient adaptation
to specific conditions, evidencing the effectiveness of the treatment
plant even during periods of higher biological load.
Regular monitoring and adaptation to specific conditions is
important, and essential to ensure effective and sustainable
treatment of waste water, thus contributing to environmental
preservation and health protection.
4. New challenges
The Chilean Army is currently in the process of gathering
information to establish a certified Environmental Management
System for the O'Higgins Base according to the ISO14001:2015
international standard, ensuring the protection of the environment
in all the processes and operations developed at the base, whether
they are associated with the base's own logistical support, tasks in
support of science, research and development of knowledge or
related to reconnaissance and exploration. The above, ensuring
legal compliance in environmental matters and above all achieving
a development based on continuous improvement in its operation.
This process is currently in development of the first phase,
specifically in the preparation of the “Environmental Background
Survey Files”,thus allow knowing the scope of the “Environmental
Policy of the Army Antarctic Base”.
