Monitoring of the presence of a non-native fly, Trichocera
maculipennis, in ASPA No. 128
Monitoring of the presence of a non-native fly, Trichocera
maculipennis, in ASPA No. 128
Summary
The document is intended to report to the Consultative Parties and
the wider Antarctic community the preliminary results of
monitoring of the presence of Trichocera maculipennis in ASPA No.
128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Island.
Monitoring was implemented in the 2023/24 season in response to
observations of flying individuals of Trichocera at two ASPA No.
128 locations in the preceding season (reported in IP42, ATCM
XLV/CEP XXV).
Background
The boreal trichocerid fly Trichocera maculipennis is a species that
is primarily known from the Northern Hemisphere, inhabiting the
Boreal Zone (also found in Europe in caves or mines) as well as the
sub-Arctic and Arctic Zones - Greenland, sub-Arctic islands, and
Scandinavia (Petrašiūnas & Weber, 2013). In the boreal zone, these
insects reproduce twice a year, whereas in the Arctic zone, they
reproduce only once a year during the summer season. T.
maculipennis has four larval stages, where pupation usually lasts
only a few hours, and adults can even emerge through the snow
layer (Hågvar & Krzemińska, 2008). It is believed that they were
brought to Antarctica with supplies for science stations or with
tourists. T. maculipennis flies are perfectly adapted to low
temperatures, which allows them to spread to high latitudes. They
mainly occur in the vicinity of human aggregates, preying on dead
organic matter, including sewage systems (Carlsson, 1962). Adults
are active at low temperatures, although they do not fly at
temperatures below -10 °C. The development of eggs and the
pupation of larvae is possible in the temperature range of -1.5 °C to
18.0 °C, and larvae are able to survive when frozen in ice (Dahl,
1969, 1970; Platcher, 1983). T. maculipennis larvae have been
detected in nutrient-rich substrates, such as decomposing plant
matter and excrement, or as pests in stored vegetables (Volonterio
et al., 2013).
The first report documenting the presence of T. maculipennis on
King George Island was from the Uruguayan Base Científica
Antártica Artigas in 2006 (Volonterio et al., 2013). Subsequently,
there have been reports of the fly within or in the surroundings of
the following stations on the island: Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero,
Frei, Fildes, and King Sejong. This species has established itself in
natural areas, as well as within buildings such as sewage treatment
plants, scientific research stations, military bases, and hydroponic
installations (Hughes et al., 2005; Volonterio et al., 2013).
The non-native T. maculipennis fly was first reported at the Polish
Antarctic Arctowski Station with live larvae and adult individuals in
the sewage system in October 2017 (Potocka & Krzemieńska, 2018).
Only a few adult individuals were observed outside the facility at a
distance of less than 50 cm from the septic tank (Potocka et al.,
2020). Since their discovery, their presence has been recorded on a
regular basis. Imago individuals of T. maculipennis have been
recorded at Arctowski Station throughout the year.
Since its first discovery, systematic monitoring and control
measures have been carried out at the Arctowski Station to
eradicate this invasive species. As the septic tank was considered to
be the main breeding location, it was regularly emptied at least
once every 14 days. Opening of the septic tank lid was accompanied
by alcohol spraying to immobilize any individuals, which if present,
were collected before the tank was emptied. Subsequently, the tank
was cleaned using fresh water and then washed with a solution of
hydrochloric acid at a concentration of
approximately 2-3%. The internal walls of the protective box, lid,
and available parts of the tank were sprayed with an insecticide
containing lambda-cyhalothrin, e.g., Oxyfly or Solfac. Spraying was
carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Applications were performed only within the sewage system, and
the chemical substances had an active period of up to 12 weeks,
which subsequently decomposed into non-hazardous substances.
Food stored at the station was regularly reviewed, with the storage
rooms being cleaned frequently and any developmental stages of
the flies present removed. Adhesive traps were installed in station
infrastructure buildings, particularly in food storages, to identify
population trends throughout the year. Traps were regularly
checked and changed. An ultraviolet lamp was deployed in the
main food storage area.
After the initiation of several control measures, the number of
recorded individuals dropped significantly, with fewer than 10
individuals being observed during the summer season of
2019/2020. In the 2020/2021 season, 1 individual was found in the
adhesive trap in a 4 °C storage container, and no flies were found in
the septic tank or in the buildings. The number of individuals
recorded on adhesive traps on station infrastructure increased to 33
individuals reported in two summer seasons combined: between
November 2021 and the beginning of April 2023. No T.
maculipennis was found in the septic tank during these seasons.
In the 2022/2023 austral summer season, a new sewage storage
system together with a sewage treatment plant were implemented
at Arctowski Station.
In December 2022, imago individuals of the genus Trichocera were
reported at two locations of ASPA No. 128. In response to the
alarming observations of the 2022/23 season, monitoring for the
presence of the non-native fly was implemented in ASPA No 128
during the 2023/24 season.
Preliminary report on the conducted monitoring
At intervals of 10 days between December 1, 2023, and April 15,
2024, control of the entire coast of ASPA 128 was conducted to
confirm the presence of Trichocera maculipennis.
Individuals of Trichocera were observed during this time interval at
the following 5 locations of ASPA No. 128 (locations are marked on
the image attached as an appendix to the paper):
Rakusa Point
Large numbers of flying individuals have been observed in the area
on several occasions, the largest number, more than 500
individuals, were observed on 25.01.2024 in the area adjacent to
Rakusa Point. Despite the inspections, no larvae were detected in
the area.
Llano Point
Flying individuals were observed repeatedly, with dozens of
individuals at a time. The presence of larvae and pupae in the
vicinity of penguin colonies was confirmed.
Paradise Cove
One individual in the imago stage was observed once.
Uchatka Point
Two individuals in the imago stage were observed once.
Blue Dyke
Single individuals in the imago stage were observed several times.
It is estimated that a total of approximately 1,000 individuals were
observed on ASPA No.128, 210 of which were caught.
Since adults were observed more than once at the Rakusa Point,
Llano Point and Blue Dyke locations, these Trichocera sighting
locations were included in the updated version of the ASPA No.128
detailed map in the draft of its revised management plan.
Monitoring of Trichocera was also carried out within the
infrastructure of the Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station, both inside
the buildings and in the area adjacent to them. Only individuals in
the imago stage were observed. A total of 5 flying individuals were
reported on the station's infrastructure and surrounding area during
the monitoring period.
Follow-up activities planned for the 2024/25 season
Monitoring of ASPA No.128 and the Arctowski Station
infrastructure will continue in the 2024/25 season. Eradication will
take the form of manual trapping of imago and larvae individuals.
It is highly recommended that the other stations on King George
Island carry out inspections in the vicinity of their stations and
report the results of the inspections to the ATCM forum.
Figure 1. Locations of Trichocera maculipennis sightings in ASPA
No.128
