Safety Risks at Cape Adare, North Victoria Land, Ross Sea region
Safety Risks at Cape Adare, North Victoria Land, Ross Sea region
Summary
New Zealand requested the Secretariat to circulate information in
Circular 25/2023 noting the potential safety risks identified at Cape
Adare from historic ammunition, explosives and flares that might be
buried somewhere near the hut associated with Carsten
Borchgrevink’s British Antarctic (Southern Cross) Expedition 1898–
1900 and later, Scott’s Northern Party expedition (1911). Work was
planned for December 2023 to send experts to the site to locate the
possible historic ammunition, explosives and flares and if needed,
plan for their disposal. For operational reasons, this work was
postponed for a year. This paper provides an update on this work
and outlines further information on the safety risks.
Background
Cape Adare in Northern Victoria Land is associated with Carsten
Borchgrevink’s British Antarctic (Southern Cross) Expedition 1898–
1900 and later, Scott’s Northern Party expedition (1911). The site is
notable not only for its role in the discovery of Antarctica but also
as the only example left of humanity’s first building on any
continent.
As outlined in Secretariat Circular 25/2023 dated 21 November,
2023, the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust had been planning
to undertake substantial conservation work including archaeology
and potential excavation around the hut, this austral summer at
Cape Adare, at the northern extremity of the Adare Peninsula,
North Victoria Land, on the Borchgrevink Coast, Ross Sea.
Safety Risks
With a focus on archaeology processes and potential excavation
around both huts, as part of the planning process the Trust carried
out a detailed risk assessment of the environs identifying 18 risks
associated with ordnance at Cape Adare. The risk assessment
research established the potential presence of a number of
hazardous materials, both as discrete artefacts, or as the by-product
of deteriorated artefacts.
Some types of ammunition can be confidently identified visually
both from photographs and from working on site (Figures 1 and 2).
Other types have been identified from reviewing the historic reports
available. These indicate the likely presences of a range of
ammunition, flares, and explosives. The greatest concern is the fact
that explosives were reportedly buried near the hut in 1900 and this
location has not been identified.
Due to the age/era of explosives, they are likely to contain Nitro-
glycerin. There is potential presence of Nitro-glycerin in both gun
powder and dynamite at Cape Adare. Nitro-glycerin’s properties are
highly explosive and toxic, sensitive to shock, friction and static.
Thawing out nitro-glycerin can be extremely sensitizing, especially
if impurities are present or the warming is too rapid and this
increases instability of dynamite.
Accidental detonation can be caused by:
Accidental excavation/ striking
Sudden change in temperature
Breaking frozen dynamite
Thermal/static exposure
Reactive – from other primary source (fire/ flares/ ordnance/
dynamite)
Sparks from excavation tools (i.e. breaker)
Fire
As it currently stands, and without mitigations, no New Zealand
Antarctic programme personnel will be approved to carry out
excavation work at Cape Adare, especially around the huts, until
the risk is neutralized.
Planning and next steps
The New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) Explosives Ordnance
Disposal (EOD) is planning to conduct a reconnaissance of the site
to understand the risk and to confirm or rule out the presence and
location of ammunition and explosives.
NZDF EOD have the required expertise to detect and adequately
dispose of any ammunition, explosives and/or flares materials. It is
expected that the outcome of the reconnaissance will determine if
subsequent work is required in future seasons. Any disposal work
will require deliberate and detailed planning to be conducted to
ensure that all environmental and safety objectives are met.
Planning is underway for the 2024/25 season and if possible, an
attempt will be made to carry out the reconnaissance.
New Zealand will continue to keep Parties, Observers and Experts
updated if any further information becomes available. If you have
any questions, email Antarctica@mfat.govt.nz.
Figure 1: Borchgrevink’s living hut and stores hut exterior artefacts
covered in guano.
Figure 2: The stores hut and external artefacts covered in guano.
