IceCube Neutrino Observatory and International Collaboration
IceCube Neutrino Observatory and International Collaboration
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
The IceCube Neutrino Observatory (https://icecube.wisc.edu/),
running in its present configuration since 2011, has realized the
dream of capturing neutrinos to explore the high-energy universe.
The goal is to explore and understand astrophysical objects and
phenomena that produce particles with energies millions to billions
of times higher than what is possible to detect at the most advanced
physics facilities on Earth. Their high-energy light is mostly or
entirely blocked (before reaching our advanced telescopes) either
by matter surrounding the source or by low-energy light left over
from the formation of the Universe, called the cosmic microwave
background. To see the rest of the high-energy universe, a new
approach is needed. Neutrinos—nearly massless, neutral particles—
are demonstrating that they can be valuable “cosmic messengers” to
decipher decades-long mysteries of where and how particles are
accelerated to extremely high energies.
IceCube transformed a cubic kilometer of South Pole ice at depths
between 1.5 and 2.5 kilometers into a versatile instrument capable
of observing neutrinos with energies spanning more than 10 orders
of magnitude. The array of 5,160 light sensors detects a high-energy
swath of light almost 3,000 times a second. About one in a million
of these can be associated with a neutrino interaction. Roughly one
in a thousand of these neutrino events can be distinguished as
originating from beyond our Solar System. The search for the
origins of astrophysical neutrinos is challenging due to both the low
number of neutrinos that interact with ice and the large background
signal—a persistent effective “fog” that masks sources not bright
enough to be seen through it. Improvements in identifying which
events are neutrinos and the ability to reconstruct their direction of
travel and estimate their energy have enabled the first steady-state
high-energy neutrino sources to be identified. IceCube has a
growing science scope made possible by a dedicated group of
technical staff and more than 350 scientists representing 58
institutions in 14 countries.
Background
The last century has produced a dramatically different
understanding of the size and composition of the Universe.
Advances in technology, starting with the ability to make larger
optical telescopes, led to the discovery of galaxies and the
realization that the universe was expanding. By the end of the 20th
century, almost the entire electromagnetic spectrum, from low-
energy radio waves to extremely high energy gamma rays, was
observable. Each new opened window revealed surprises and
identified more mysteries. One puzzle that has persisted for more
than six decades is where the extremely high energy particles from
space, known as cosmic rays, originate from and how they are
accelerated to such incredibly high energies.
There are two challenges to answering these questions. First, since
cosmic rays are electrically charged (primarily protons but also
heavier nuclei), their paths are altered when they encounter
magnetic fields. That means the direction measured by a detector
does not point back to where the particle was created. Second, the
number of cosmic rays decreases rapidly with increasing energy.
For each factor of 10 increase in energy, the number of cosmic rays
goes down by a factor of 100. That means that to see the same
number of particles per time when the energy increases by a factor
of a million, the detector would have to be a trillion times larger.
Neutrinos are produced when cosmic rays interact with matter or
light. Being electrically neutral, neutrinos are not deflected by
magnetic fields, so they do point back to where they were
created. This addresses the first issue with measuring cosmic rays
directly. Unfortunately, the same scaling factor rules the number-
energy relation for neutrinos—so, to find the rarer higher-energy
neutrinos, a larger volume of instrumented ice (or water) is needed.
The good news is that the ice at the South Pole is clearer than
expected over a greater depth range than estimated. Prior to
IceCube and its predecessor AMANDA, the optical properties of
deep ice had not been measured in situ. Now we know that the
horizontal spacing between the detector strings can be increased by
a factor of two for the proposed IceCube-Gen2 without loss of
performance at higher energies, and the instrumented length of a
string can be increased by about 40% and still have adequate
quality ice. That means IceCube-Gen2 can instrument about 8 times
greater volume of ice than the original IceCube array for about the
same real, inflation-adjusted cost.
IceCube and its international collaboration have done an incredible
job extracting an ever-increasing science scope because of clever
analyses, machine learning techniques, and refined models of the
optic properties of the ice. The neutrinos created when cosmic rays
hit the Earth’s atmosphere produce more than 100,000 events per
year that can be used to study the puzzling properties of neutrinos
generally. There are three known types of neutrinos—electron,
muon, and tau—and neutrinos can change from one type to another
while traveling between their source and detection site. This is
known as neutrino oscillation, and this unexpected behaviour is
now attributed to neutrinos having very small mass, rather than
being massless like a photon. The higher-energy neutrinos IceCube
measures can be used to study how often they interact by looking at
the rate at which neutrinos that have travelled through the Earth
are seen as a function of energy.
The observational successes have motivated the IceCube Upgrade
project (currently underway), which will enhance and extend the
low-energy performance of the observatory, improve the
understanding of the optical properties of the ice (thus enhancing
the fidelity of all past and future data), and serve as a testbed for
next-generation light sensors. A proposed high-energy extension,
IceCube-Gen2, still in the planning stage, would increase the
volume of instrumented ice eightfold, making it possible to see
more and fainter sources. The 2020 Decadal Survey of Astronomy
and Astrophysics highlighted the important role IceCube-Gen2 will
play in the growing multi-messenger approach to exploring the
universe. The recently released report of the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) and NSF-charged Particle Physics Project
Prioritization Panel (P5) ranked IceCube-Gen2 in the top five
priority projects for the next decade.
Recent Publications Include:
Observation of astrophysical tau neutrinos,
A new calculation of the number of astrophysical muon neutrinos,
A description of a Citizen Science project to characterize IceCube
events,
An investigation of the in-situ properties of the ice crystal properties
inside the IceCube array,
A search for neutrinos correlated with gravitational-wave events
detected by LIGO/Virgo (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory),
A search for neutrinos associated with gamma-ray bursts,
A search for neutrinos created by dark matter decay, and
annihilation.
Future Goals of IceCube, IceCube Upgrade, and IceCube-Gen2
Continue operation of the IceCube Neutrino Observatory, including
providing real-time alerts to the astronomy and astrophysics
community within a minute of the observation.
Improve performance of IceCube analyses using machine learning
to enhance event selection and reconstruction.
Deploy seven more closely spaced, more densely instrumented
strings in the 2025-2026 austral summer field season to improve the
low-energy performance, better characterize the optical properties
of the ice, and develop and test new light sensors.
Publish the IceCube-Gen2 Technical Design Report, which details
the science case, the detector design, and the drilling, installation,
and logistics needs of the project.
Figure 1 – Different views of the Milky Way galaxy: from an optical
telescope, from a high-energy gamma ray telescope, a model
prediction neutrino production from theory, the expected neutrino
emission based on the capability of IceCube, and the result of
IceCube’s Galactic plane analysis.
Figure 2 – Major events in the development of neutrino astronomy
in Antarctica.
