Theoretical and practical training for the crews of the Chilean Bases
covered by the Antarctic Defence Operators
Theoretical and practical training for the crews of the Chilean Bases
covered by the Antarctic Defence Operators.
Summary
The purpose of this document is to present the theoretical and
practical training that is provided to the personnel of the Chilean
national defence crews before their deployment to the permanent
and summer bases in Antarctica, a task that has been developed
jointly in the last 10 years, uninterruptedly, by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Chile and the Joint Chiefs of Staff (EMCO),
reporting to the Ministry of National Defence.
Introduction
Every year, between the months of June and July, the EMCO, which
by law exercises operational and logistical coordination between
the Antarctic Defence Operators (OAD from its initials in Spanish)
made up of the Chilean Army, Navy and Air Force, in its annual
planning of the Antarctic Campaign generates a directive that
considers the theoretical and practical training of its Antarctic
crews in its “Preparation" phase. To this end, it coordinates with the
defence institutions, as well as with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the participation of professionals and experts who can instruct and
train the crews in technical and elementary matters for their
permanence and performance at the different bases. In addition,
this training includes the delivery of legal knowledge contemplated
in the Antarctic Treaty System.
Theoretical and practical training of OAD staff
The OAD have maintained a permanent presence on the Antarctic
continent since 1947, operating to date in 5 permanent bases (Prat,
O'Higgins, Presidente Frei, Teniente Rodolfo Marsh Airfield and
Maritime Government of the Chilean Antarctica/Captaincy of
Puerto Fildes) and at 3 summer bases: Gabriel González Videla
(Bahia Paraíso Port Captaincy), Carvajal Base and the Union Glacier
Joint Scientific Polar Station (EPCCGU). The deployment of
personnel from the different defence institutions in each of the
bases is no small task, requiring a series of processes to select the
best men and women, capable and willing to face the challenge of
living in Antarctica.
Each year during the preparation of the Annual Directive on
Antarctic Operational Coordination and Logistics, the EMCO plans
and coordinates the activities that need to be developed by the
crews that will be deployed in the Chilean permanent and summer
bases covered by the OADs, involving joint theoretical and practical
training, one of the essential tasks that must be completed prior to
moving to the white continent.
Training is considered to be the delivery of theoretical knowledge
in the classroom, of different subjects related to the Antarctic Treaty
and its System, as well as aspects of a national and international
historical nature, the above with the purpose of knowing and
complying with all the provisions and agreements adopted by the
international community that participates in various Antarctic
activities, keeping in mind the sacrifices made by the first
expedition members and with a strong attachment to the care and
protection of the environment and fauna.
In turn, “practical training" is considered the standardisation of
practical knowledge in the field or simulators, in terms of
techniques and procedures that must be used by the different OADs
in their daily performance or in the event of emergencies that may
occur during their stay in the different bases, this with the purpose
of carrying out its activities with the highest safety standards, since
as a maxim the safety of the personnel will always take precedence
over any consideration.
Regarding the personnel that will make up the staff that will work
at the EPCCGU, as this is a “Joint Scientific" station that by law
includes scientific personnel belonging to the Chilean Antarctic
Institute (INACH), the EMCO in its capacity as responsible for
coordination operational and logistics of the station, provides in its
Operation Directive for the execution of theoretical and practical
training for all its members, which is undertaken prior to
deployment at the station.
For the above, the EMCO coordinates every year with the different
branches of the Armed Forces, in accordance with their
competencies, for its professionals to instruct the men and women
who will be deployed in the national bases of the OADs, also
convening the Ministry of Foreign Affairs through its Antarctic
Division so that, through national experts, personnel are trained in
legal, environmental, scientific and historical issues, thereby
contributing to compliance with the precepts derived from the
Antarctic Treaty System aimed at peace and science.
Along with the theoretical and practical training coordinated by the
EMCO, the teaching and training that each OAD carries out for its
own personnel must be added to operate in its different bases. This
theoretical and practical training allows them to operate safely in
tasks such as: Water Work, Operation and Maintenance of Boilers,
Operation of Cars and Motorcycles, Waste Management, Operation
and Maintenance of Grey Water Plants, etc.
Among the topics addressed in the theoretical training it is possible
to highlight Meteorological Observation; Gender equality in
Antarctica; Protection of the Antarctic Environment and standards
of behaviour in Antarctica; Antarctic Tourism; Turquoise Foreign
Policy/Marine Protected Areas; National Antarctic Policy /
Objectives of the NAP / Antarctic Strategic Plan / Vision to 2035 /
Antarctic Annual Report / Non-governmental activities; Antarctic
Inspections, among others.
Regarding the practical training sessions that EMCO carries out,
areas such as settings in snowy terrain stand out, together with
crevasse rescue; fire control; training in management of Pre-
Hospital Trauma Life Support (PHTLS), among others.
As a result, during the years that the joint theoretical and practical
training plans have been developed, it has been demonstrated that
these have been fundamental tools for the crews that must face
daily life in Antarctica in a safe and responsible manner, with full
adherence to the rules that govern the activities that can be carried
out in Antarctica. This has been evident in the results obtained
during the Antarctic inspections carried out by inspectors
representing Antarctic Treaty countries and, above all, in the face of
unfortunate emergencies that occurred at national bases (fires,
medical evacuations, COVID-19, etc.) to which professional
responses has been given with knowledge and expeditiously without
having to regret loss of human life.
The good results that the theoretical and practical training courses
have yielded demonstrate the need to continue counting on the
development of this type of activities in the future, providing
national defence personnel with the necessary tools for the correct
fulfilment of the tasks entrusted in Antarctica.
Photo No. 1: Joint Course for the Antarctic Crews of the Armed
Forces 2023.
Photo No. 2: Joint Course for the Antarctic Crews of the Armed
Forces 2023.
Photo No. 3: Theoretical and practical training in Snowy Terrains.
