Understanding Future Sea-level Change Around Antarctica
Update on ATCM XLV (2023) IP095
Understanding Future Sea-level Change Around Antarctica
Update on ATCM XLV (2023) IP095
Summary
This paper updates key information presented in ATCM XLV IP095
Understanding Future Sea-Level Change Around Antarctica and
reiterates COMNAP, SCAR and WMO advice for consideration by
the ATCM and CEP on the importance of closing knowledge gaps in
support of development of robust management and policy-making
decisions into the future as outlined in the SCAR Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment (ACCE) Decadal Synopsis Report
(Chown et al., 2022). This work is also directly relevant to the CEP
Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP).
For Antarctica, studies show the rates and patterns of sea level
change will be complex, and their accurate prediction for specific
locations is challenging. Lack of data and information on climate
change impacts in general, and sea-level rise specifically, is
concerning. We therefore advise that Parties should support their
National Antarctic Programmes to:
extend the current critical observational infrastructure – especially
the network of long-term continuous geodetic observations (GPS)
and tide gauges that provide location-specific time-series of changes
in land elevation and sea level;
facilitate research to improve projections of Antarctic ice mass loss
and its regional variability;
monitor local sea-level and land elevation near identified coastal
hazards;
identify risk and to adapt with urgency to impacts that are now
unavoidable; and
adopt a dynamic decision-making approach that provides resilience
in response to those unavoidable impacts and that can be updated
and modified as new information evolves. This dynamic approach is
key because sea-level projections are uncertain, especially beyond
2060–2070.
Background information
Rising sea levels are already impacting coastal infrastructure,
communities and environments around the world and will continue
to do so at increasing frequency. Studies that examine the impacts
and risks of sea level rise and the development of adaptation
planning and policy action to mitigate these risks has been a focus
across our planet’s populated regions.
In addition to global consequences related to future sea level
change, there will be changes to sea level around the Antarctic
continent.
For Antarctica, such studies are limited, but they show the rates and
patterns of sea level change will be complex, and their accurate
prediction for specific locations is challenging. This lack of data and
information on climate change impacts in general, and sea-level rise
specifically, is concerning as the Antarctic coastline supports critical
infrastructure that enables national Antarctic programme activities,
and is home to unique coastal habitats and ecosystems, including
the large majority of breeding seabird colonies. Efforts to anticipate
and adapt to locked in unavoidable, as well as projected change
(future climate scenarios), should be encouraged and these efforts
require a sound scientific evidence base.
Addressing knowledge gaps
There are no robust and spatially comprehensive projections of sea
level change for Antarctica. Addressing this knowledge gap through
research undertaken under the auspices of the SCAR INStabilities &
Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) Scientific Research
Programme (https://www.scar-instant.org) is continuing and an
update will be provided to the ATCM in 2025 in the form of a
Working Paper with recommendations and an accompanying
Information Paper summarising a scientific paper on the sea-level
projections, implications and impacts for the entire Antarctic
coastline.
The impact of sea level change around Antarctica
Sea level change around Antarctica has the potential to impact,
inter alia, infrastructure, HSMs, ASPAs, ASMAs, flora, fauna and
coastal bioregions. The assumption that sea level change will be
uniform around the Antarctic coastline creates the potential for
maladaptation as the impact depends on the rate and magnitude of
change and whether sea-level rises or falls. For example, sea level is
‘likely’ to rise between 21 and 62 cm near Prydz Bay and fall by as
much as 80 cm along the Marie Byrd Land Coast by 2100 (IPCC
AR6, Fox-Kemper et al., 2021) if global greenhouse gas emissions
follow a middle-of-the-road pathway (SSP2-4.5) (Meinshausen et
al., 2020). It is also essential to consider ice sheet projections
beyond the 21st century, as global sea-level will continue to rise
under all scenarios, and instability processes have the potential to
rapidly destabilize up to one third of Antarctica’s ice sheets, and
several regions may reach tipping points, potentially leading to
much larger sea level contributions (IPCC AR6, Fox-Kemper et al.,
2021; ACCE, Chown et al., 2022).
Changes in ice sheet mass from a specific ice sheet sector induce
vertical motion of the land beneath the ice sheet in a distinct
pattern, with maximum uplift typically centred where the largest
ice mass loss occurs. This vertical land motion (VLM) in coastal
regions strongly influences local relative sea level, either lowering
(uplifting coast) or amplifying (subsiding coast) the amount of sea
level rise ‘driven’ by climate change (Figure 1). The methodology
applied in IPCC AR6 sea level projections (Kopp et al., 2023) relied
on the availability of multi-decadal tide gauge data to characterize
local vertical land motion.
Figure 1. Vertical motion of the bedrock land surface measured
using GNSS [GPS] instruments. Upward motion is denoted by red
arrows, downward motion by blue arrows, and the annual rate of
vertical motion is shown by the vector length, with 2 mm/yr scale
shown. Velocity solution from Ohio State University; data
compilation from the SCAR-GIANT REGAIN analysis; site selection
based on proximity (50-100 km) to coastal location of interest and
quality and duration of GNSS measurement time series.
Deployment and operation of tide gauges in Antarctica is
challenging due to sea ice interfering with conventional tide gauge
operations. Due to this challenge, only two sea level time series
data from two tide gauges in Antarctica (both in the northern
Antarctic Peninsula region) were used to estimate the local
influence of VLM for the entire Antarctic coastline. This lack of
spatial coverage limits the accuracy of sea level projections along
most of Antarctica’s coastal margin. An alternative means to
quantify vertical land motion employs GNSS [GPS] measurements
(e.g., Barletta et al., 2018; King et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2018; Nield
et al., 2014). Recent progress in GNSS instrument deployment and
data sharing yields the direction and magnitude of vertical land
motion at ~35 sites within 50-100 km distance of sites where
infrastructure, heritage structures, ASPAs or penguin rookeries exist
(Figure 1). Rapid uplift is taking place where ice mass is being lost
near the Amundsen Embayment and the Antarctic Peninsula. Due to
complexities in Earth structure and tectonic influences, some
coastal sectors in these regions are moving downward. Similar
variation in vertical land motions occur around the coast of East
Antarctica, but at lower rates. A much greater number of sea-level
projections for Antarctic coastal locations that are constrained by
local observations can be produced by including GNSS-derived
vertical land motion in the projection methodology (Kopp et al.,
2023: Naish et al., 2024).
Regions where sea-level rises will experience (Figure 2):
more frequent coastal inundation during storm or tsunami events
causing nuisance flooding that will become chronic flooding;
landward shifts in land to sea-ice transition zones;
the potential rise ground water causing surface flooding, especially
as warming continues:
salinisation of coastal groundwater systems.
Regions where sea-level falls may face the following consequences
(Figure 2):
more difficult, or blocked access to wharves and harbours as coastal
waterways shallow, as is anecdotally occurring in Greenland due to
ice melting;
possible changes to tidal resonances, especially in enclosed shallow
harbours;
greater distances (horizontally and vertically) from existing
infrastructure to the coast, requiring corrective works to
infrastructure;
ocean-ward shifts in the inter-tidal zone, shallowing of the photic
zone, and consequent effects on coastal ecosystems;
emergence of new islands.
In either case, there is need to update maritime charts to ensure
ongoing safe navigation in shallow waters and open waters
previously covered by sea ice.
Figure 2. Conceptual diagram showing spatial variability in sea
level due to changing ice mass and its effect on gravitational
attraction and load on the solid Earth. A large ice sheet depresses
the crust on which it sits and attracts water close to its margin – the
sea floor rises in response to mantle flow away from the large ice
mass forming a forebulge that causes a local decrease in relative sea
level. Sea level falls next to a melting/retreating ice sheet (area A –
Nunatak/Island) as the gravitational attraction decreases, despite
land uplift due to isostatic rebound. Sea level rise occurs in areas
where the forebulge subsides (area B – Antarctic Island) and in
regions far from the ice sheet margin (area C – for example, a
Subantarctic island) due to meltwater flux to the ocean and
negligible gravitational attraction.
Uncertainties in sea-level projections are primarily due to the
evolving understanding of ice sheet processes and local factors such
as vertical land movement. Management decisions that affect global
carbon emissions pathways, require a flexible ‘dynamic’ approach to
coastal adaptation (Haasnoot et al., 2021; Lawrence et al., 2018;
Toimil et al., 2021; van Alphen et al., 2022). These flexible
approaches avoid adaptation solutions that lock-in coastal plans and
designs that may create a false sense of security or ultimately prove
unnecessary. A similar approach could benefit Antarctica.
As an example of the potential risk of sea-level change impacting on
Antarctic biodiversity and human activity, Figure 3 illustrates that if
sea-level rises by 2 m, up to 68% of breeding penguin colonies, 60%
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, 58% of Important Bird
Areas, 40% of research infrastructure, and 74% of tourist landing
sites would be at risk of partial or complete inundation. A 1 m sea-
level fall could see nearly 7,500 km2 of new land exposed, and
biodiversity and human activity sites an average of 58 m further
away from the coast (Lee 2019; Lee et al. in prep). Simultaneous
impacts on biodiversity and human activity could compel both
humans and terrestrial species to move, intensifying area-mediated
interactions with potentially significant risks to biodiversity. High-
risk sites urgently need careful planning to minimise human-
biodiversity conflict as sea-level change progresses.
Figure 3. Antarctic features at risk of inundation by sea-level rise; a)
Science facilities; b) Adélie penguin colonies; c) Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (ASPAs). Continental maps display features at risk
(red) and safe (green) under 2 m sea-level rise, with North Antarctic
Peninsula inset. Bars represent total number of features at risk per
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR). ACBRs
without features at risk do not have a bar. Symbols on the ASPA
bars depict the primary reason ASPAs were designated: extensive
vegetation communities, important seabird habitat, known
invertebrate hotspots and historic sites respectively (Lee 2019; Lee
et al. in prep).
Update on progress and challenges
A substantial step toward robust sea-level location-specific sea-level
projections along the Antarctic coastline is now possible through
use of these continuous GPS vertical land motion data and their
uncertainties that augment decadal tide gauge data (Naish et al.,
2024). These additional estimates of local land deformation can be
incorporated into the methodology of Kopp et al. (2023) and Naish
et al. (2024), which provides location-specific, climate scenario-
based, sea-level projections for more accurate anticipation of
related impacts, assessment of risk, and development of effective
and appropriate adaptation measures.
Figure 4 illustrates the challenges of predicting the influence of
vertical land movements to obtain accurate location specific sea-
level projections. It is included in this paper as an example of
progress to date and the ongoing work required to reconcile the
limited number continuous GPS observations with ice sheet model
output. The panels show that the predictions sometimes match and
sometimes disagree with observed land motion derived from
continuous GPS measurements over their common period. Any
disagreement highlights the need for improved representation of ice
and solid Earth processes for sea level projections and highlights
that projections may not cover the full range of plausible future sea
levels. The GPS observations highlight the importance of continuous
monitoring of vertical land motion at locations of importance or
that are particularly sensitive to sea level change.
 
Figure 4. Predicted and observed vertical land motion at a selection
of Antarctic coastal sites. Each panel reflects vertical land motion at
a representative location around the Antarctic coastline. The
predictions colours are based on a model of ice-sheet evolution and
a representation of the Earth’s three-dimensional properties that
together induce vertical land motion. The model was forced by two
different climate scenarios, representing a low (RCP2.6) high
(RCP8.5) emissions warming. A 10% uncertainty is included with
each projection to reflect unmodelled processes related to sea-level
change associated with ice melt. The predictions were chosen to
reflect lower and upper trajectories of the Antarctic Ice Sheet based
on the work of Gomez et al. (in review). The ‘high end’ ice sheet
projections include ice-shelf breakup processes that lead to more
rapid ice mass loss, but known with lower confidence (IPCC AR6,
Fox-Kemper et al., 2021). The GPS time series (black) reflect
measured vertical land motion at each location (Blewitt et al.
2018). There is no public, continuous long-term GPS record on King
George Island where Great Wall Station is located.
Conclusions
As the Antarctic Ice Sheet melts, coastlines near to melting ice may
see overall sea-level fall or rise. This will depend on the distribution
and rate of future ice loss in Antarctica and globally and the
properties of the solid Earth, especially beneath Antarctica. New
observational constraints on vertical land motion and modified
methods in producing sea-level projections
utilizing GNSS-derived vertical land motion estimates are required
for robust and comprehensive projections of sea level for sites of
interest along the Antarctic coastline. Understanding this is
important to, inter alia, understand affects to built infrastructure in
the Antarctic Treaty area and will enable development of robust
policy to support EIA processes.
Advice
As proposed in ATCM XLV (2023) IP095, we reiterate our advice to
the ATCM, that Parties should support their National Antarctic
Programmes to:
extend the current critical observational infrastructure – especially
the network of long-term continuous geodetic observations (GPS)
and tide gauges that provide location-specific time-series of changes
in land elevation and sea level;
facilitate research to improve projections of Antarctic ice mass loss
and its regional variability;
monitor local sea-level and land elevation near identified coastal
hazards;
identify risk and to adapt with urgency to impacts that are now
unavoidable; and
adopt a dynamic decision-making approach that provides resilience
in response to those unavoidable impacts and that can be updated
and modified as new information evolves. This dynamic approach is
key because sea-level projections are uncertain, especially beyond
2060–2070.
Acknowledgements
COMNAP, SCAR and WMO wish to acknowledge the work as
presented in IP095 (2023) and this paper of Matt King (The
Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic Science/ University of
Tasmania) Matt.King@utas.edu.au; Richard Levy (SCAR INSTANT
Theme 3 Co-Leader, GNS Science and Victoria University of
Wellington) r.levy@gns.cri.nz; Natalya Gomez
natalya.gomez@mcgill.ca; Jasmine Lee (SCAR Ant-ICON SC
member, British Antarctic Survey) jaslee45@bas.ac.uk; Terry
Wilson (Ohio State University) wilson.43osu@gmail.com ; Fraser
Morgan (Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research)
MorganF@landcareresearch.co.nz ; and Tim Naish (SCAR INSTANT
Co-Chair, SC-ATS member) Victoria University of Wellington)
timothy.naish@vuw.ac.nz.
References
Barletta, V. R., Bevis, M., Smith, B. E., Wilson, T., Brown, A.,
Bordoni, A., et al. (2018). Observed rapid bedrock uplift in
Amundsen Sea Embayment promotes ice-sheet stability. Science,
360(6395), 1335-1339.
Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P.,
Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II &
Grant, S.M. (Eds). 2022. Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action.
SCAR, Cambridge, U.K .https://scar.org/library/scar-publications/
occasional-publications/5758-acce-decadal-synopsis/file.
Fox-Kemper, B., Hewitt, H. T., Xiao, C., Aðalgeirsdóttir, G.,
Drijfhout, S. S., Edwards, T. L., et al. (2021). Ocean, Cryosphere and
Sea Level Change. In V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L.
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I.
Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K.
Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (Ed.),
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Haasnoot, M., Winter, G., Brown, S., Dawson, R. J., Ward, P. J., &
Eilander, D. (2021). Long-term sea-level rise necessitates a
commitment to adaptation: A first order assessment. Climate Risk
Management, 34, 100355.
King, M. A., Watson, C. S., & White, D. (2022). GPS rates of vertical
bedrock motion suggest Late Holocene Ice‐Sheet readvance in a
critical sector of East Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters,
49(4), e2021GL097232.
Kopp, R. E., Garner, G. G., Hermans, T. H. J., Jha, S., Kumar, P.,
Slangen, A. B. A., et al. (2023). The Framework for Assessing
Changes To Sea-level (FACTS) v1.0-rc: A platform for characterizing
parametric and structural uncertainty in future global, relative, and
extreme sea-level change. EGUsphere, 2023, 1-34.
Kopp, R. E., Hay, C. C., Little, C. M., & Mitrovica, J. X. (2015).
Geographic Variability of Sea-Level Change. Current Climate
Change Reports, 1(3), 192-204.
Lawrence, J., Bell, R., Blackett, P., Stephens, S., & Allan, S. (2018).
National guidance for adapting to coastal hazards and sea-level rise:
Anticipating change, when and how to change pathway.
Environmental Science & Policy, 82, 100-107. https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901117306068
Lee J., 2019. Conserving Antarctic biodiversity in the
Anthropocene. PhD Thesis. Brisbane, Australia: University of
Queensland. https://doi.org/10.14264/uql.2019.163 (also Lee, J.,
Chown., S., Fuller, R., Watson, J., Teruads, A. in prep. 21st Century
sea-level change impacts on Antarctica)
Liu, B., King, M., & Dai, W. (2018). Common mode error in
Antarctic GPS coordinate time-series on its effect on bedrock-uplift
estimates. Geophysical Journal International, 214(3), 1652-1664.
Meinshausen, M., Nicholls, Z. R. J., Lewis, J., Gidden, M. J., Vogel,
E., Freund, M., et al. (2020). The shared socio-economic pathway
(SSP) greenhouse gas concentrations and their extensions to 2500.
Geosci. Model Dev., 13(8), 3571-3605.
Naish T., Levy, R., Hamling I., Hreinsdottir, S., Kumar P., Garner,
G., Kopp E., Golledge N., Bell R. et al. (2024) . The significance of
vertical land movements at a convergent plate boundary for
probabilistic sea-level projections for AR6 scenarios: The New
Zealand case. Earth’s Future. In press.
Nield, G. A., Barletta, V. R., Bordoni, A., King, M. A., Whitehouse,
P. L., Clarke, P. J., et al. (2014). Rapid bedrock uplift in the
Antarctic Peninsula explained by viscoelastic response to recent ice
unloading. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 397, 32-41.
Stammer, D., Cazenave, A., Ponte, R. M., & Tamisiea, M. E. (2013).
Causes for Contemporary Regional Sea Level Changes. Annual
Review of Marine Science, 5(1), 21-46.
Toimil, A., Losada, I. J., Hinkel, J., & Nicholls, R. J. (2021). Using
quantitative dynamic adaptive policy pathways to manage climate
change-induced coastal erosion. Climate Risk Management, 33,
100342.
van Alphen, J., Haasnoot, M., & Diermanse, F. (2022). Uncertain
Accelerated Sea-Level Rise, Potential Consequences, and Adaptive
Strategies in The Netherlands. Water, 14(10), 1527.
