Annual Report of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Annual Report of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
The World Meteorological Organization www.wmo.int (WMO) is a
specialized agency of the United Nations (UN) and is the UN
system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the
Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it
produces and the resulting distribution of water resources.
WMO’s purpose as documented by its Convention, covers a range of
activities of relevance to the Antarctic Treaty System, including
Antarctic Science via the World Climate Research Programme Co-
sponsored by WMO, the International Science Council (ISC) and the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO
and World Weather Research Programme; Antarctic Observations
and Infrastructure, through the facilitation of worldwide
cooperation in the establishment of networks of observations,
standardization, the rapid exchange of meteorological and related
information, which includes the Global Cryosphere Watch; and
Antarctic Services via, for example, the initiation of a Antarctic
Regional Climate Centre network.
WMO would like to reaffirm its commitment to working in
partnership with the Antarctic Treaty System, for example
recognising the value of Resolution 2, ATCM XXXVII on
“Cooperation, Facilitation, and Exchange of Meteorological and
Related Oceanographic and Cryospheric Environmental
Information.”
Antarctic Science activities of the World Climate and World
Weather Research Programmes
Through the World Climate Research Programme2 (WCRP), WMO
carries out several research and modelling activities in which the
climate of the Antarctic region is a key aspect. Its activities are
often conducted in partnership with other organisations, such as the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
WCRP’s Climate and Cryosphere Core Project (CliC)
WCRP’s CliC project, with an international office hosted by the
University of Massachusetts Amherst in the United States, focusses
on the cryosphere component of the climate system. CliC is a
connector and integrator of cryosphere research worldwide,
coordinating research and modelling activities (often in partnership
with SCAR) on ice sheet mass balance and sea level, ice shelves and
alpine glaciers, sea ice, and permafrost. Key activities with
relevance to Antarctica include SCAR/IASC/CliC Ice Sheet Mass
Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS), SOLAS/CliC/IASC/SCAR
Biogeochemical Exchanges Processes at Sea Ice Interfaces (BEPSII)
and SCAR/CliC Antarctic Sea Ice Processes & Climate (ASPeCt).
With a vision of cultivating future leaders in cryospheric research,
CliC provided four early career researchers with research grants in
2023.
WCRP coordinates several modelling activities of relevance to
Treaty Parties, including
Antarctic CORDEX https://cordex.org/domains/region-10-
antarctica (the Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment, with
an office at the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute),
and CMIP (the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, with a
project office hosted by the European Space Agency in the United
Kingdom) that generates the scenario runs that are integral to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). https://
www.wcrp-climate.org/wgcm-cmip assessment reports. CliC
coordinates a number of Model Intercomparison Projects (MIPs),
including the Ice Sheet MIP (ISMIP), Marine Ice Sheet Ocean MIP
(MISOMIP), Sea Ice MIP (SIMIP), and Glacier MIP.
Antarctic CORDEX
Antarctic CORDEX https://climate-cryosphere.org/antarctic-cordex
was initiated by WCRP to develop regional climate downscaling of
Antarctica to provide an accurate description of regional-to-local
scale climate phenomena and their variability and changes. This
project strengthens cooperation and knowledge exchange between
polar climate modelling groups throughout the world, for the
delivery of these simulations. A coordinated set of simulations
enables regional model inter-comparison studies, which are
required to characterise uncertainties. Output from the project also
contributes to studies assessing the impact of climate change on
Antarctica and the development of adaptation and mitigation
strategies, which are required by a diverse range of stakeholders, in
particular by the cryosphere community in order to produce an
improved understanding of how ice sheets, glaciers, ice shelves, and
sea ice respond to climate change.
WWRP’s Polar Coupled Analysis and Prediction for Services Project
The Polar Coupled Analysis and Prediction for Services (PCAPS)
project, spanning 2024-2028 under the World Weather Research
Programme (WWRP), is dedicated to enhancing environmental
forecasting in the Arctic and Antarctic regions for human and
environmental well-being. PCAPS recognizes the complexity of
interactions in polar socio-ecological systems and aims to enhance
environmental forecasting services with diverse user contexts in
mind by facilitating the provision of more accurate, reliable, and
usable prediction services. Guided by user needs and service
provision capabilities, PCAPS involves work to improve models,
particularly in predicting small-scale processes essential for accurate
forecasts in the context of improving overall service provision.
Emphasizing integration of social and natural scientific endeavours,
along with transdisciplinary engagement, PCAPS aims to facilitate
the exchange of knowledge at the science-policy-service-user
interface to improve the fidelity, actionability and impact of
environmental forecasting services. PCAPS will also follow the
recommendations of the successful WWRP’s Polar Prediction
Project. https://www.polarprediction.net For further details about
PCAPS and PPP, see the accompanying IP.
Antarctic Observations and Infrastructure
WMO has adopted a new Unified Data Policy that is necessary for
the global efforts to monitor, understand and then predict weather
and climate, as well as the Global Basic Observing Network
(GBON). GBON paves the way for a radical overhaul of the
international exchange of observational data, which underpin all
weather, climate and water services and products. The updates to
the technical aspects of GBON, with reference to the Antarctic are
included in the Information Paper submitted by WMO together with
Norway and India, on “Recommendations on updating the role of
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) on the coordination
of meteorological
programmes in Antarctica, as operated by WMO Members to
support the evolving global needs”.
The increased frequency of extreme temperatures seen in Antarctica
recently emphasises the need for systematic observations of
demonstrated quality. There are significant challenges to obtaining
continuous quality measurements over the ice sheet surface of the
Antarctic, e.g., due to the impact of the snow albedo and of the
extreme operating conditions. For that reason, WMO is committed
to continue bringing together the international community of
experts engaged in maintaining observing stations in Antarctica as
part of its Global Cryosphere Watch, https://
globalcryospherewatch.org to address specific observations,
instrumentation, challenges, such as measurements of snow depth,
air temperature, and fast ice.
Antarctic Climate Services
WMO, with partners, continued efforts to establish the Antarctic
Polar Regional Climate Centre (AntRCC) Network, building on
lessons learned from the establishment of the Arctic Regional
Climate Centre Network. AntRCC aims at producing coherent and
harmonized climate products and services over the Antarctic
domain and establishing a dialogue platform between stakeholders
and users of climate information. WMO Member States (also
signatories to the Antarctic Treaty) that earlier expressed an interest
in contributing to the AntRCC-Network are finalizing the AntRCC-
Network structure, agreeing on technical and organizational
arrangements, developing mechanisms for engaging with partners,
and developing a roadmap towards the AntRCC-Network
implementation, including the initiation of the demonstration
phase. WMO will continue providing updates and engaging with
Treaty Parties as relevant.
Antarctic Maritime Safety Services
Providing maritime safety services for vessels in the Antarctic is
crucial. For this, WMO plays a key role in supporting the National
Meteorological and Hydrological Services responsible for provision
of meteorological maritime safety information as required under the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) International
Convention for Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS). Supporting these
efforts, the International Ice Charting Working Group (IICWG),
comprising the world’s national ice services, promotes maritime
safety by coordinating all aspects of operational sea ice and iceberg
information services. Task teams of the IICWG are presently focused
on aligning key Southern Ocean sea ice and iceberg products with
those of the North Atlantic, improving sea ice and iceberg detection
using multi-spectral Synthetic Aperture Radar, developing new ice
hazard risk products to augment traditional ice charts and support
the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO's) Polar Code
requirement for voyage-specific risk assessments, and working with
maritime training institutes to provide better tools for teaching
mariners about sea ice and icebergs. The WMO and IMO are jointly
hosting an International Symposium on Extreme Maritime Weather
in London at IMO Headquarters, 23-26 September 2024. The event
aims to bring the metocean, shipping and other relevant
stakeholders together, to discuss and progress ways to improve the
safety of life and property at sea during extreme hazardous weather
conditions. Polar matters, inclusive of the Antarctic waters, will be
discussed. The Symposium coincides with International Maritime
Day; is contributing to Early Warning for All; and is an endorsed
event of the UN Ocean Decade of Science for Sustainable
Development.
International Year of Glaciers’ Preservation 2025 and the World
Glaciers Day
In December 2022, the UN General Assembly adopted resolution A/
RES/77/158 to declare 2025 as the International Year of Glaciers’
Preservation (IYGP 2025), accompanied by the proclamation that
March 21st of each year will be the “World Day for Glaciers”,
starting in 2025. WMO and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) were invited to
facilitate the implementation of the International Year and
observance of the World Day. The planning efforts are currently
ongoing with regular meetings of the Advisory Board and the Task
Forces. There will be contributions to relevant publications (e.g.,
UN World Water Development Report – “Water Towers: Mountains
and Glaciers”) and UN events (e.g., the High-Level Political Forum,
July 2024; the UN General Assembly, September 2024; COP29,
November 2024).
High-level Publications of Interest
WMO produces several Antarctic and climate related science
publications. Just to highlight three high-profile publications:
WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate
Each year WMO produces a high-level “Statement on the State of
the Global Climate” with key partners, including SCAR. These
statements are presented at the Conference of Parties (COP)
meetings and other fora and are available in English, Spanish,
Russian, French, Chinese and Arabic. Copies of the 2023 report can
be downloaded from: https://wmo.int/publication-series/state-of-
global-climate-2023
United in Science
The United in Science report is a multi-organization high-level
compilation that presents the very latest scientific data and findings
related to climate change, to inform policy and decision-makers.
See: https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/united_in_science
10 New Insights in Climate Science
WCRP co-produces the “10 New Insights in Climate Science” with
Future Earth and the Earth League. For further details see:
https://10insightsclimate.science.
WMO continues to look forward to a positive, mutually beneficial
engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate
observations, services and research. For further queries please
contact Mike Sparrow (msparrow@wmo.int) in the first instance.
