Education & Outreach Activities of Türkiye in 2023-2024
Education & Outreach Activities of Türkiye in 2023-2024
Information Paper Submitted by Türkiye
Summary
Education and outreach activities have been carried out by
TÜBİTAK Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar Research Institute
(PRI), as the coordination and contact point for national polar
activities, to raise awareness on polar regions for young
generations, to provide the sustainability of polar research in
Türkiye and to motivate young people as the future polar
researchers. This paper presents a summary of education and
outreach activities of Türkiye carried out in the 2023-2024 period.
Polar Festival
Polar Festivals have been organized since 2020 to create awareness
on polar regions and global climate change and engage young
people with polar experts. The third Polar Festival was organized by
TÜBİTAK MAM PRI was held in İstanbul on 5 December 2023 and
was hosted by Yıldız Technical University. Approximately 5000
people visited the festival, which featured popular science seminars,
Turkish polar documentary screenings, polar photography
exhibitions, hands-on experiments, and presentations by high school
students.
Polar Research Project Contest for High School Students
To foster interest in polar sciences among students, TÜBİTAK
organized the third “Polar Research Projects Competition for High
School Students” in 2023. The competition received 631
submissions across four main disciplines, with 64 projects
qualifying for the finals. The winning project team were awarded a
trip to Antarctica within the 8th Turkish Antarctic Expedition to test
their projects on the field. The finalists also showcased their
projects at the 7th Turkish Polar Science Symposium in December
2023.
Polar Encyclopedia
In order to create unity in polar terms in the Turkish language and
to provide awareness about polar regions, an encyclopedia project
supported by TUBITAK Science and Society Department and
TUBITAK MAM PRI was initiated. The encyclopedia, covering Life
Sciences, Physical Sciences, Geosciences, and Social Sciences &
Humanities includes more than 500 articles and is accessible online
(https://ansiklopedi.tubitak.gov.tr/kutup/) in Turkish. The
encyclopedia is designed to involve a dynamic structure that can be
continuously developed and updated in the digital environment.
TEKNOFEST 2023
TUBITAK MAM PRI opened a booth at TEKNOFEST 2023, the
biggest aerospace and technology festival in Türkiye, which hosted
more than 4.5 million visitors. During the festival held in three
different cities of Türkiye, TÜBİTAK MAM PRI carried out
educational and outreach activities related to polar research.
Organized exhibitions, documentary screenings, and the polar-
themed painting competition aimed to raise awareness of polar
sciences among the public, particularly youth.
Polar Themed Painting Contest
In line with the aim of raising awareness about the polar regions,
TÜBİTAK MAM Polar Research Institute and TÜBİTAK Directorate
of Science and Society organized a nationwide painting contest with
the theme "Science at the Polar Regions in the 100th Year of
Turkish Republic". A total of 3,367 submissions were received from
all provinces of Türkiye to the contest. As a result of the
preliminary evaluation carried out by the Selection Committee
Members, 99 works qualified for the finals. The first, second and
third prize winners were determined for each of the primary,
secondary and high school categories. The winners were awarded
by the Minister of Industry and Technology at the 3rd Polar
Festival.
Participation of BilimGenç in the 8th Turkish Antarctic Expedition
TÜBİTAK's digital popular science publication, BilimGenç, provides
interactive learning opportunities, including broadcasts from
Antarctica as part of the 8th Turkish Antarctic Expedition. This
initiative facilitated direct knowledge transfer between scientists
and young audiences on polar research.
During the expedition, a science communicator from BilimGenç
made interviews and captured video logs which were shared
through social media to reach a wide audience. Through the camera
of BilimGenç, the public and young generation are connected with
researchers thousands of kilometres away, embarking on a virtual
expedition and providing a better understanding of the polar
research and harsh conditions of the White Continent.
Participation of Anadolu Ajansı in the 8th Turkish Antarctic
Expedition
Anadolu Ajansı (AA), as the official news agency of Türkiye, has
been participating in Turkish Polar Expeditions since the early
expeditions. Through these participations, AA aims to contribute to
public outreach by conducting interviews with researchers during
polar expeditions and preparing news articles which further
enhance awareness of polar research and global climate change in
the public.
Through its extensive network of journalists and correspondents,
AA facilitates dialogue and engagement with leading experts in the
field of polar research. By conducting in-depth discussions and
interviews with scientists amidst the frozen landscapes of the Arctic
and Antarctic, the agency brings the groundbreaking work being
conducted in these remote regions to the forefront of public
awareness. These insightful conversations not only shed light on the
complexities of polar ecosystems but also highlight the profound
significance of scientific research in addressing global challenges
such as climate change. By disseminating timely and accurate
information, AA helps bridge the gap between polar research and
public understanding, fostering a sense of collective responsibility
in addressing environmental challenges.
Conclusion
Since the early initiatives related to polar regions, Türkiye attaches
great importance to education and awareness-raising activities for
polar research and global climate change to be better understood
and adopted by society. For this reason, it organises activities in
various cities of Türkiye to appeal to different audiences. Türkiye
also believes that education and awareness are the key to
developing the relations between polar research, polar regions,
global climate change and society. In addition, these activities are
also important in terms of creating future human resources by
increasing the interest and motivation of young people in polar
research. Through TÜBİTAK MAM PRI, Türkiye remains committed
to intensifying its efforts in the future.
