Marine Spatial Planning for a sustainable and climate-resilient
Antarctic Ocean
Marine Spatial Planning for a sustainable and climate-resilient
Antarctic Ocean
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Canada, France, Italy,
IUCN
Summary
The benefits of developing marine spatial planning are globally
recognized, as it is a vital instrument to support sustainable ocean
management and governance. This paper provides information on
how marine spatial planning can be a valuable tool for Parties to
facilitate the development of policies and decision-making in
Antarctic Treaty waters — particularly under climate change —
through analyzing and allocating the spatial and temporal
distribution of human activities (e.g. tourism, fisheries, scientific
operations, ocean management) in the Southern Ocean. Portugal,
with other interested parties/experts/observers, aim to use marine
spatial planning in the future to accelerate and improve policies
related to the Antarctic Treaty System.
Background
Changes in Antarctic and Southern Ocean environments are known
to influence climate-related drivers of impacts around the world,
with greenhouse gases concentrations being unequivocally
attributable to human activities (ATCMXLV/WP42, ATCMXLV/
IP47, ATCMXLV/IP97) (Chown et al. 2022). With a rapidly
changing Antarctic region, it is essential to have the tools to provide
the best available scientific information to support effective policy
decisions.
The ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan together with the CEP
Five-year Work Plan have emphasized the need for scientific
information to improve existing tools for environmental protection,
and develop new ones, such as ecosystem-based management plans,
environmental monitoring programmes, and marine spatial
protection initiatives (ATCM XLV Final Report, Environment
Protocol, art. 3.2). ATCM Parties have recognized that the
monitoring the impacts of human activities in Antarctica is essential
to advance the development of policies for environmental
protection under a changing climate (e.g., ATCM XLV/WP17,
ATCMXLV/WP41, ATCMXLIV/WP22, ATCMXLV/IP61, ATCMXLV/
IP62). The Scientific Committee of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)
provides the best available science to advance policy-making in a
range of elements relevant to Southern Ocean management,
including spatial management, climate change, conservation of
marine resources (e.g. fish and krill fisheries), biodiversity and
ecosystem monitoring (E.g. ATCMXLIII/IP3, ATCMXLIV/IP14,
ATCMXLV/IP6). During the last annual CCAMLR meeting, several
examples of extreme events were discussed including the low sea
ice extent record in 2023, breeding failure of emperor penguins due
to large temperature anomalies in the Antarctic Peninsula region
and reduced sea ice coverage, and breeding failure of seabirds in
Dronning Maud Land due to snowstorms. The urgent need to
develop adaptive management approaches to address the effects of
climate change on marine living resources was acknowledged. The
CCAMLR also noted the need for measures dynamic and flexible
enough to be adjusted when nature and conservation needs change
as the Southern Ocean continues to warm, stressing the importance
of enhancing the efforts in scientific research and monitoring, and
that a variety of management tools and concrete actions are to be
put in place to adapt and mitigate the effects of climate. In addition,
many CCAMLR members supported the identification of climate
change refugia and protecting sites of special interest as useful tools
to address the impact of climate change, and noted that MPAs are
relevant management tools to protect vulnerable species and
ecosystems against climate change and human induced pressures.
Additionally, establishing an international monitoring framework to
gain a better understanding of cumulative impacts can
properly inform planning and implementation of Antarctic activities
that can be sustained long into the future (ATCM XLV/WP17).
This paper provides introductory information on sustainable
“climate-smart” marine spatial planning (Frazão Santos et al. 2020,
Frazão Santos et al. 2024). The objective of such MSP is to identify
pathways to incorporate climate change into comprehensive spatial
planning in Antarctic Treaty waters, in order to facilitate decision-
making processes that lead to sustainability.
Concept of Marine Spatial Planning
Marine spatial planning is an ecosystem-based process for balancing
multiple human demands with the ecological requirements for a
healthy ocean that delivers multiple ecosystem services (Frazão
Santos et al. 2019, Ehler 2021). This planning leads to the spatial
and temporal allocation of human uses in the ocean, with the goal
of minimizing conflicts and fostering compatibility among such uses
as well as between human uses and the environment, in order to
achieve ecological, economic and social objectives specified through
a political process (Frazão Santos et al. 2020). Marine spatial
planning has gained momentum globally, and marine spatial plans
are currently under development in over 100 countries (two-thirds
of the 150 countries of the world with marine waters), from high to
low latitudes and across all ocean basins — except for the Southern
Ocean (Frazão Santos et al. 2020). It has become the planning
process of choice to determine what, where, and when human
activities should take place in the ocean (Ehler 2021).
“Climate-smart” Marine Spatial Planning in Antarctic Treaty waters
Effective ocean management and governance must acknowledge
that many marine species move in response to shifting climate,
changing their distribution in time and space. As marine spatial
planning operates in a changing ocean, properly addressing and
integrating climate effects is vital to keep plans viable, relevant and
useful in the long-term (Frazão Santos et al. 2020). Ten key
components have been identified to support the development of
sustainable climate-smart marine spatial planning (i.e., planning
that fully incorporates climate considerations and supports climate
adaptation and mitigation). Such components include, among
others, prioritizing ecosystem health as a primary strategy for
marine spatial planning decision-making, aligning policies for
marine spatial planning and climate change, and building common
narratives with policymakers and other stakeholders to change
perceptions of ocean sustainability and climate change (Figure 1).
The Southern Ocean provides a unique opportunity to pioneer
climate-smart marine spatial planning in international waters and
can serve as a groundbreaking model for the novel integration of
climate change into comprehensive marine spatial planning, both
within and beyond national jurisdictions, inspiring nations
worldwide. This is particularly relevant as climate change is known
to be significantly affecting the Antarctic region, as stated in the
Helsinki Declaration on Climate Change and the Antarctic (ATCM
XLV/WP38), accentuating other pressures from human activities
(e.g. commercial fisheries, tourism, scientific operations). This
reinforces the need to understand cumulative effects in Antarctic
social-ecological systems by taking a holistic and integrated
“systems” perspective.
Portugal, Canada, France, Italy and IUCN encourage Parties to note
the relevance of climate-smart marine spatial planning as a tool to
support sustainable ocean use and conservation of Antarctic Treaty
waters, keeping in mind the ten key components established in
Figure 1, below. Planning in a climate-smart way and implementing
such plans is the best hope for the long term resilience of
Antarctica’s vital ecosystems. Additionally, Portugal and interested
Parties, Observers and Experts aims to use marine spatial planning
in the future as a tool to provide scientific evidence to advance
policies related to the Antarctic Treaty System issues.
Figure 1. Key components of sustainable climate-smart marine
spatial planning (Frazão Santos et al. 2024).
References
Chown SL, Leihy RI, Naish TR, Brooks CM, Convey P, Henley BJ,
Mackintosh AN, Phillips LM, Kennicutt MCI, Grant SM (2022)
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action. Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Ehler CN (2021) Two decades of progress in Marine Spatial
Planning. Marine Policy 132:104134
Frazão Santos C, Agardy T, Andrade F, Calado H, Crowder LB, Ehler
CN, García-Morales S,
Gissi E, Halpern BS, Orbach MK, Pörtner H-O, Rosa R (2020)
Integrating climate change in
ocean planning. Nature Sustainability 3:505-516
Frazão Santos C, Agardy T, Crowder LB, Day JC, Pinsky ML, Himes-
Cornell A, Reimer JM,
García-Morales S, Bennett NJ, Lombard AT, Calado H, Scherer M,
Flannery W, Wedding LM,
Gissi E (2024) Key components of sustainable climate-smart ocean
planning. npj Ocean
Sustainability 3:10
Frazão Santos C, Ehler CN, Agardy T, Andrade F, Orbach MK,
Crowder LB (2019) Chapter 30
- Marine Spatial Planning. In: Sheppard C (ed) World Seas: An
Environmental Evaluation
(Second Edition). Academic Press
