Operations and Scientific use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica: a review
Operations and Scientific use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica: a review
Information Paper submitted by United Kingdom
Summary
The use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) has increased
since their first introduction in the mid-2000’s with the type and
range of platforms in use becoming increasingly complex and
diverse. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has experience of using
a range of RPAS systems including the routine use of quadcopters
and small RPAS flying in visual line of sight (VLOS), in segregated
airspace. More recently, BAS has trialled operations of larger, more
capable, RPAS platforms that are integrated into crewed aviation
airspace, and operate beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS). This
paper describes BAS experience, the protocols developed, lessons
learnt and observations on fuel efficiencies.
Introduction
Quadcopters and small RPAS are used regularly and routinely fly in
visual line of sight (VLOS) operations, in segregated, controlled and
well managed airspace. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) operate
more than 20 small RPAS on stations, vessels and at field locations
as described below. In recent years, operations of larger, more
capable RPAS have started to be integrated into crewed aviation
airspace, operating beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS).
BAS has around 20 years’ experience in the use of small RPAS in
visual line of sight. To enable responsible flying, and mitigate any
potential environmental impacts of RPAS, BAS has created a RPAS
Regulation manual which is updated regularly to include UK Civil
Aviation Authority (CAA) guidance and rules.
Further development of concept of operations (CONOPs) for
emerging larger, more complicated RPAS and BVLOS operations are
now required to effectively manage Antarctic airspace. Similarly,
COMNAP, SCAR, ATCM and other interested parties in Antarctica
have continued to create guidance for RPAS use in Antarctic
operations and mitigate environmental impacts.
BAS recent utilisation of RPAS use in Antarctica
Vessels
Common RPAS quadcopter use includes, supporting vessel
navigation through ice, surveying iceshelf conditions for
deployment of cargo, and initial surveys of icebergs such as the
recent observations of A23a. Also, science observations of marine
wildlife have routinely been undertaken.
Stations
On station RPAS quadcopters now routinely conduct inspections of
masts and buildings. They aid the production of Computer Aided
Design (CAD) models, the production of routine mapping of stations
and monitor snow accumulation. More
recently, they have provided runway pilot orientation photos, and
aid the safe distance monitoring of propagating cracks/crevasses in
areas of frequent travel.
Field Locations
At field locations most of the flying is for science activities as shown
in Figure 1. This is carried out by quadcopters and eBee X RPAS.
The routine operations RPAS quadcopters flying that does occur is
to establish safe routes for tractor traverses or for local area travel
on foot.
Highlighted examples
Over the last three seasons the Mapping and Geographic
Information Centre (MAGIC) at BAS has used the eBee X to
complete much of BAS wildlife census and local area mapping (see
figure 2). Use of the eBee X, including BVLOS operation, is now
well established (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Image showing fixed-wing eBee X RPAS in flight while
conducting a minimum snow cover survey over Rothera Research
Station, Antarctica.
Figure 2: Map showing RPAS flying locations (red dots) around
Antarctica.
During the 2022/23 season BAS undertook flight trials with UAVE
Prion3 (Figure 3) to progress BAS understanding of larger RPAS,
this activity has been ongoing since 2018 with the training of BAS
staff as pilots.
Figure 3: Image showing UAVE Prion3 RPAS at Rothera.
During the recent 2023/24 Antarctic season BAS trialled a 10-metre
wingspan twin engine RPAS. The Windracers Ultra (Figure 4) was
operated from the Rothera runway to demonstrate the ability to
routinely collect science data. The delivered case studies include
magnetics and gravity for geology, visual and hyperspectral
imagery for mapping, environmental monitoring and marine krill
detection, and a turbulence probe providing meteorology. A
package delivering 2978 km of flying. Details of the flying can be
seen in Figure 5.
Figure 4: Windracers Ultra UAV on Rothera Runway.
Figure 5: Extent of Windracers Ultra UAV flying in Antarctic
2023/24 season.
RPAS CONOPs and regulations
From the early use of RPAS BAS developed CONOPs and regulations
based on the experience of its Air Unit and current UK Civil
Aviation Authority regulations. By following principles of aviation
shown in Figure 6 with an RPAS context the BAS RPAS manual
manages smaller quadcopters and fixed wing, as well as the large
complicated and BVLOS RPAS. With larger BVLOS RPAS being
flown BAS has created further CONOPs. The RPAS manual is under
constant review to include latest best practice and guidance from
the UK CAA.
The RPAS manual details i) environmental impact assessment, ii)
due diligence, iii) health and safety, iv) NOTAMs, v) airworthiness,
vi) pilot requirements, vii) location requirements, viii) CONOPs, ix)
use on vessels, x) use from runways/skiways, xi) weather
limitations, xii) RF spectrum management, xiii) reporting, xiv)
battery charging, xv) lithium battery transportation, xvi) use
activity, and xvii) risk management.
Figure 6: RPAS aviation principles.
BAS has introduced audits for the emerging BVLOS and large RPAS,
during this process BAS verifies aircraft, pilot, CONOPs,
maintenance, documentation, and reporting.
Observations of fuel economy
The use of appropriately sized and configured RPAS aircraft has the
potential to make significant (circa 70%) fuel savings in some
science mission profiles. On the other hand, in high payload mission
profiles (100s kg+) then current manned aircraft may be up to
twice as fuel efficient as current RPAS options. In all cases, it will
be necessary to properly understand and account for the logistics
overhead of deploying and operating RPAS aircraft to Antarctica.
Lessons learned
Effective planning and permitting systems are key to making sure
pilot and aircraft are suitable.
Complete understanding of RPAS performance is required to
operate RPAS within the Antarctic environment.
Accurate real-world description of aircraft capabilities i.e., what is
the actual range that can be flown with actual payload and
available fuel.
Large complicated RPAS require a skilled experienced pilot.
Integrated satcom on RPAS will vastly increase operability and
awareness of RPAS location, in 2024 the Ultra demonstrated
effective flight over Starlink (refer to UK IP Report on Low Earth
Orbit communication systems trials for further information on
Starlink).
Modern quadcopters provide robust and simple RPAS capability for
local areas in VLOS.
Self-build RPAS don’t provide the reliability or airworthiness to
deliver safe and responsible BVLOS RPAS flying.
Due diligence prior to deployment such as testing, and audits are
key to mitigating potential incidents. Successful flying is more likely
to occur after communication with crewed aircraft pilots and those
responsible for airspace management.
Good CONOPs and checklists are required to reliably operate RPAS.
Effective airspace monitoring, aircraft tracking and relaying of
information by the Rothera tower was key to enabling the
Windracers Ultra flying.
Operation in integrated airspace for large RPAS suitable CONOPs
are required, BAS began in 2024 with the Ultra flying, work is still
required to fully operate in integrated airspace.
Identifying safe location for charging lithium batteries is key to
mitigating potential fire and loss of infrastructure.
To maximise fuel efficiency it is necessary to properly understand
and account for the logistics overhead of deploying and operating
RPAS aircraft to Antarctica. The most credible Antarctic operating
models necessitate a well-considered synergy between RPAS and
manned aviation to achieve the desired science and environmental
benefits. The RPAS situation is nuanced but has great potential. At
this point accurate and balanced analysis is vital to inform strategy.
Challenges
Detection and mitigation of icing on RPAS. With light weight ice
detection sensors, the confidence to fly in wider weather conditions
would be realised. Including a de-icing capability would achieve
further improvements.
Various conspicuity and platform tracking systems would
complement the situational awareness of all involved in aircraft
operations. These systems include ADSB, Mode S transponders and
integration into air traffic portals such as Flightradar24 and AFF,
plus NOTAMs.
Management and integration of RPAS into existing crewed airspace.
Suitable fully tested, CONOPs are required to allow the full
utilisation of RPAS, currently time or spatial segregation are used,
this limits the effectiveness of RPAS. Ultra flying at Rothera started
the integration of RPAS and crewed flight operations. Through
engagement with COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group best
practice and knowledge can be shared to arrive at well thought out
and proven CONOPs that will allow the effective utilisation of
RPAS.
