Report on the work carried out at the “Swedish Hut” on Snow Hill
Island (HMS No. 38)
English version provided by the author
Report on the work carried out at the “Swedish Hut” on Snow Hill
Island (HSM No. 38)
Information Document presented by Argentina
Summary
The “Swedish Hut” (SMH No. 38) was built on Snow Hill Island by
the Swedish Antarctic Expedition of Doctor Otto Nordenskjöld in
February 1903, and was used as a winter station until November
1903 when they were rescued by the corvette “ARA Uruguay” of
the Argentine Navy. This document summarizes the work carried
out in the last Antarctic campaign by the scientific team of the
Argentine Antarctic Program to conduct maintenance activities,
with the objective of ensuring the conservation and preservation of
the heritage of the “Swedish Hut” and lay plans for future work.
Introduction
The Swedish Hut is located on Snow Hill Island, where Nordensköld
wintered along with four other Swedish expedition members and
then second lieutenant of the Argentine Navy, José María Sobral. In
1953, upon the fiftieth anniversary of the rescue, the Argentine
Republic took possession of the refuge and in 1980 the National
Directorate for the Antarctic of Argentina (DNA) and the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (IAA) began the recovery tasks, including
archeology and conservation work.
The Swedish Hut is protected by the Antarctic Treaty System as the
Historic Site and Monument No. 38, as well as by Argentine
legislation that designates it as a “National Historic Site.” It is one
of the few Antarctic refuges from the "heroic era" which original
structure still remains, being central for the study and exploration
of Antarctica. Therefore, as administrators of the SMH, ensuring its
conservation for future generations is a unique responsibility.
Work carried out during the 2023-2024 Antarctic Summer
Campaign
Continuing with the work that Argentina has been carrying out in
recent years, and with the objective of ensuring the conservation
and preservation of the heritage of the Swedish Hut, members of
the Historical Heritage Project of the Argentine Antarctic Program,
under the leadership of the Coordination of Social Sciences,
Communication and Outreach of the IAA, set up camp during the
2023-24 summer campaign to conduct the activities planned in the
Antarctic Annual Plan.
The surveying work continued and resulting data were subjected to
comparative analysis with the data collected from previous
campaigns, in order to evaluate the progress of erosion and resume
the work of shoring up the land with greater precision.
Measurements were taken with a laser level to examine the
inclination of the house on the outside and also in each room, so as
to calculate the possible increase in deformation of its structure.
With the collaboration of Dr. María Angélica Guerriere, Curator of
Cultural Assets (Historical Archeology Team, HiTePAC Institute),
studies were carried out to describe the state of conservation of the
timber of the historic house and identify degradations that could
compromise this cultural asset in the future. Control of the
archaeological objects registered in the institutional inventory was
developed, which involved documenting the topographic location of
each of them.
The IAA team also downloaded data from the weather station and
permafrost sensors. In relation to tourist activities, data was
collected from the visitor book present at the Swedish Hut, thus
being able to identify the boats that made ashore there, the number
of tourists and their nationalities.
Likewise, specialists from the National Institute of Industrial
Technology (INTI) and the Argentine Mining Geological Service
(SEGEMAR) were part of the campaign. SEGEMAR personnel
carried out tasks related to the geomorphological survey of the area
near the Swedish Hut, surveying and sampling of the coast between
the sector immediately north of the refuge, and the sector linked to
the south. They took sedimentological samples of the different
geomorphological features along a profile made between the Hut
and the beach and located them with GPS. They also made a tour of
the island's plateau, and sampled the basaltic dams present to carry
out lithological and structural mapping. The objective of these
activities is to contribute to maintaining a structural diagnosis of
the house and its geological environment, as well as to provide new
alternatives and projects for the preservation of the site.
Future plans
Based on the data and analysis collected, biodeterioration analyses
will be carried out in the coming months by the Microbiology
Group of the Argentine Antarctic Institute, in order to determine the
consolidation of timber that present structural weakening. In
addition, studies will be developed to determine the composition of
the timber and textiles found in the Hut. A non-aggressive, dry
cleaning plan will also be established, with periodic maintenance.
The IAA plans to begin with a specific preventive conservation plan
for the Hut using the data collected and recommendations that
range from maintenance tasks for the insulation of structures to the
monitoring and execution of the preventive conservation plans
already implemented according to the progress obtained from work
from previous years, as well as the analysis of possible amendments
to the “Guideline for visitors to the Hut” so as to avoid, among
other aspects, the deformation of the floor as a result of the
pressure exerted by the flow of people.
The Historical Heritage team of the Argentine Antarctic Program
will continue to advance these activities during the next campaigns
for the conservation and preservation of HSM No. 38.
References
Busso, AS, & Yermolin, Y. Geological-geotechnical characteristics
and proposals for the preservation of Historical Site and Monument
No. 38, Nordenskjöld Hut, Antarctica.
ATCM XXVI - CEP VI Madrid (2003) IP057 CEP 4(g) Activities
associated with Historical Site and Monument No. 38: Snow Hill
Hut.
ATCM XXXIII - CEP XIII Punta del Este (2010) IP021 CEP 7b
Activities carried out to enhance HMS No. 38 “Snow Hill”.
ATCM XXXIV – CEO XIV Buenos Aires (2011). IP130 CEP 7b Update
on the activities carried out to enhance SMH No. 38 “Snow Hill”.
ATCM XLII - CEP XXII Prague (2019) WP063 CEP 9c Modification
of site guidelines for visitors to the Snow Hill hut.
ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV Berlin (2022) Current situation of the
impact of climate change on the Sweden Refuge on Snow Hill Island
(SMH No. 38)
