Canada’s Support for Polar Science and Research
Canada’s Support for Polar Science and Research
Summary
This Information Paper (IP) provides an overview of the Canadian
Antarctic scientific research environment. This environment
includes many federal government departments and agencies and
the Canadian university research community. Both academic and
Government of Canada polar research activities drive significant
elements of Canada’s scientific interests in the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean. This IP describes 1) how Canada delivers Antarctic
funding to Canadian researchers through universities, 2) the
ongoing Antarctic research supporting and enabling activities from
federal government departments and agencies, and 3) Canada’s
commitment to the Antarctic Treaty System through our active
participation in, and support for, its various subsidiary bodies.
Introduction
Canada invests in its strengths of talent, research, and setting
standards in polar regions, including the Antarctic. A research
funding landscape with this focus is an asset to partners who have
large fixed and logistical expenditures dedicated to Antarctic and
Southern Ocean research. Canada will continue to champion polar
science, investing in its strengths, supporting extensive research in
the Canadian Arctic, in collaboration with the territories and
Indigenous governance, which generate important insights for
similar and interconnected phenomena in the Antarctic. Domestic
relationships provide an important foundation for Canada’s
engagement with international partners in polar regions,
particularly where this engagement involves Indigenous lands,
water, wildlife, and communities.
Research at Canadian universities
Antarctic and Southern Ocean research is carried out in many
Canadian universities. Researchers are supported by government
funding through various mechanisms that are aligned with research
questions of national and international interest.
For example, Canada funds research at Canadian universities
through three primary funding agencies known as the Tri-agencies,
administered by two federal departments, as well as other sources.
The Tri-agencies include the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC), the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), and the Canadian Institutes for Health
Research (CIHR).
NSERC is the primary funder of Antarctic and Southern Ocean
research at Canadian universities. From 2017-2022, NSERC
provided over $5.5M (CAD) to university researchers for southern
polar research, on topics ranging from subglacial hydrology and ice
dynamics to high latitude air-sea-ice dynamics and interactions, and
remote sensing missions to global ecosystem responses to climate
change and ocean acidification in polar regions.
As it concerns scientific research infrastructure, the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation (CFI), a non-profit organization that
receives its programming budget from the Ministry of Innovation,
Science and Economic Development (ISED), supports the funding
and development of research infrastructure and invests in the
ongoing operation and maintenance of the scientific tools and
facilities at universities that are of national importance, including
for Antarctic and Southern Ocean research.
Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) is an ocean observing facility hosted
and owned by the University of Victoria, and managed and
operated by the ONC Society, a not-for-profit established in 2007.
ONC delivers ocean data from its cabled, mobile, and community-
based observing networks and operates with funding provided by
CFI, Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO) and other Canadian
funding sources. Support to ONC enables the development of new
technologies and the capacity to partner with international
collaborators. Recently, ONC partnered with the Spanish Antarctic
program to install a cabled ocean observatory at King Juan Carlos
station. This partnership resulted in the deployment of two of ONC’s
deep Argo floats with oxygen sensors in the Southern Ocean.
Canadian graduate students are eligible for Antarctic research
scholarships from Polar Knowledge Canada (POLAR). POLAR
advances Canada’s knowledge of the Arctic, strengthens Canadian
leadership in polar science and technology, promotes the
development and distribution of knowledge in the polar regions,
including the Antarctic. Past scholarship holders align with the
Canadian Antarctic Research Program (CARP) framework themes,
as referenced in IP 012 from ATCM XLV in Helsinki, Finland.
Graduate students partner with international programs and
contribute to international meetings that support the Antarctic
Treaty System.
Research and enabling Canadian federal government support
On the federal side, the Canadian scientific research environment
spans several departments and agencies. Here, scientific research is
undertaken and/or supported to address government of Canada
priorities, including in the polar regions. Concerning Antarctica,
POLAR convenes a senior-level interdepartmental committee whose
objectives are to advance Canada’s scientific interests and build
Canada’s national Antarctic program. Below is a description of the
supporting and enabling Antarctic research activities being
undertaken by the Government of Canada.
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) carries out
significant southern polar climate modelling research. This research
includes modelling and analysis of Southern Ocean through a
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) initiative on the
response of the Southern Ocean to freshwater input; simulation and
analysis of changes in Antarctic ozone, which support regular World
Meteorological Organization assessments; seasonal predictions of
Antarctic sea ice; and, simulations of global climate change,
including Southern Ocean and Antarctica, to the World Climate
Research Programme Coupled Model Intercomparison Project.
DFO conducts Arctic scientific research and monitoring, including
projects related to Arctic marine species and ecosystem and geared
towards understanding the impacts of a changing climate. DFO
cooperates with international partners on science projects focused
on sea ice and sea ice interactions with the ocean and atmosphere.
Knowledge and best practices garnered from work on polar matters
in an Arctic marine context stand to be dually of value in an
Antarctic context to support marine conservation measures at
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (CCAMLR).
Transport Canada (TC) provides funding to support the World
Maritime University Canadian chair in marine environmental
protection. The Canadian chair works in several subject areas,
including International Maritime Organization (IMO) treaty
instruments, marine resource management, sustainability, and
economics, and safety and security aspects of marine environmental
protection. The Polar Code implementation is a priority for Canada
and, through an agreement between Canada and the IMO in
November 2017, TC provided funding to support the Integrated
Technical Cooperation Programme to deliver training programmes
for seafarers operating in polar waters.
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) carries out research in global
sea-level change, including from Antarctica. Further, NRCan is
responsible for the Polar Continental Shelf Program
(PCSP), which is mandated to provide logistics and related support
for the purposes of advancing scientific knowledge of the Arctic
region and contributing to the exercise of Canada’s sovereignty in
that region and its adjacent waters. The PCSP includes the Canadian
Arctic-Antarctic Exchange Program, which was established to foster
international collaboration among Canadian researchers working in
the Arctic and international researchers working primarily in the
Antarctic. For approved projects, the international researchers are
eligible for the same type of logistics support that Canadian
scientists receive in the Canadian Arctic. In return, logistics support
is provided for the Canadian partners when they undertake
Antarctic field work.
POLAR operates and manages the Canadian High Arctic Research
Station, in Cambridge Bay Nunavut, facilitating north-south polar
research connections and exchanges with international partners. As
such, POLAR staff undertake research that investigates Antarctic
ecosystems with international partners like New Zealand and the
USA. As Canada’s adhering body to SCAR and the Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), POLAR
supports the participation of Canadian delegates to annual meetings
organized by these forums.
The Canadian Space Agency (CSA) designs, builds, and operates
satellites and space-borne instruments for remote sensing and
atmospheric monitoring of polar regions, including Antarctica.
Canadian satellites, such as the Radarsat Constellation Mission and
SCISAT, have provided the international scientific community with
a rich source of atmospheric and glaciological expertise and
knowledge that has documented environmental changes, enabled
space science, and advanced the understanding of Antarctica.
Global Affairs Canada (GAC) supports polar research through its
commitment to strengthening the rules-based international order in
the circumpolar Arctic and Antarctic, and the enduring value of
circumpolar cooperation to advance common social, environmental,
and economic priorities with the shared leadership of Arctic,
Northern, and Indigenous peoples.
As such, the Global Arctic Leadership Initiative supports Northern
and Arctic Canadians in enhancing their engagement globally,
which may include issues of relevance to Antarctica. GAC will
advance and coordinate longer-term Antarctic foreign policy
objectives for Canada.
Conclusion
Canada is committed to the Antarctic Treaty as evidenced by its
active participation in the Committee for the Environmental
Protocol (CEP), SCAR, COMNAP, and CCAMLR by various federal
organizations.
In, on, around and above Antarctica, Canada’s strength is its
committed and dedicated scientists and researchers, and their
capacity to partner with other national programs. Partnering with
Canada means tapping into expertise relevant to the Antarctic
research community, including ice-ocean interactions and solid
earth ice-sheet interactions, and scientific observations gleaned
from several Canadian observing infrastructure and sources,
including Canada's atmospheric measurement and remote-sensing
capabilities.
The model for Antarctic research in Canada is bottom-up,
collaborative, and versatile. This approach to supporting Antarctic
research and science allows for both seasoned and early career
researchers to self-direct their research interests in pursuit of both
nationally and internationally established key areas of scientific
value, work with international partners who best support their
research questions and utilize Canadian research enabling
equipment and databases that have advanced our understanding of
the polar regions for decades.
