Microplastic Pollution in the Weddell Sea and Dronning Maud Land
Region
Microplastic Pollution in the Weddell Sea and Dronning Maud Land
Region
Information Paper submitted by Switzerland
Summary
This paper summarizes the recent research activities on pollution
with microplastics (MPs) in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica, in
specific in the Weddell Sea and Dronning Maud Land region
(WSDML).
Background
MPs pose an emerging threat to the global environment. Wherever
one searches, MPs are found, including remote habitats and the
polar regions, albeit at varying concentrations and constitutions.
Scientists at the University of Basel study the occurrence,
distribution and pathway of MPs, as well as the biofouling of
plastics, in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica.
Research Project
This research project addresses the questions of occurrence,
distribution, abundance and composition of MPs found in the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica, in surface and sub-surface water, in
snow, sediments, sea ice, five selected fish species, in Weddell seals
and Emperor penguins.
The study focuses on the WSDML, a region with particularly low
human activity and which has been under-investigated in terms of
MPs pollution. Most previous work was focusing on the region of
the Antarctic Peninsular and Scotia Sea as well as the Ross Sea.
The aim is to find out to what extend MPs are already distributed in
such remote regions and aim to evaluate putative sources (e.g.
tourism, shipping, research stations or northern regions), by
analyzing particle characteristics including polymer composition,
shape and size, using state-of-the-art analytical methods. By filling
knowledge gaps on the occurrence of even the smallest MP
particles, down to 11µm in size, and in particularly remote regions
of the Southern Ocean, the aim is to provide valuable and
comprehensive insights that will inform future research and
conservation efforts in the region and contribute to a broader
understanding of MP pollution within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
The project was started in 2017 and is a cooperation project of
several research institutes: in the project participated the Alfred-
Wegener Institute (G. Gerdts, S. Primpke, F. Mark), the Royal
Netherlands Institute for Sea Research NIOZ (L. Amaral-Zettler),
and the Utrecht University (E. van Sebille). On expedition PS129 in
2022 the project was performed as a collaboration project of EWOS
I (Pilot study for an Eastern Weddell Sea Observation System- PI:
Felix Mark, AWI). On expedition PS124 sediment samples were
provided by the “BENTHIC FAUNA” project (PI: Claudio Richter,
AWI) and sediment trap samples by the project “SOUTHERN
OCEAN CARBON CYCLING” (PI: Clara Flintrop, AWI). Additionally,
seal scats were collected in cooperation with the SEAROSE Project
(PI: Mia Wege). Emperor penguin stomachs from the Atka bay
colony were studied in a cooperation with the MARGEO project (PI:
Olaf Eisen, AWI; ANT – Land 2018/19).
Results and Conclusion
The research project provides first systematic data on (1) pollution
with large (500 µm - 5 mm) and small MPs (11 µm – 500 µm ) in
the Southern Ocean, in particular the WSDML region, and (2) in
selected Antarctic and Southern Ocean animal species.
The most important result is the considerable higher concentration
of small MPs in the study region compared to large MPs. Large MPs
were rarely found in seawater samples in our study (mean, 0.01
MPs m-3 in surface and 0.04 MPs m-3 in subsurface water samples),
similar to other previous studies. By including small MPs, over 98%
of particles were < 300µm in size. This is a significant increase of
the MP concentration to an average of 43.5 MPs m-3, reaching
concentrations as high as 267.2 MPs m-3. This is comparable to
concentrations found e.g. off the Norwegian and Chinese coast.
MP ingestion by Antarctic wildlife revealed that MP ingestion was
evidenced in 20% of all analyzed fish (all detected MPs were < 500
µm in size). No large MPs were found to be ingested by the Emperor
penguin chicks, while the small MPs have yet to be analyzed.
These results emphasize the need to investigate small MPs in the
Antarctic Treaty Area to avoid underestimation of the problem and
to gain a more comprehensive understanding of MP contamination
and its potential ecological impacts. Particularly as it is suggested
that the smaller the plastic particles, the more toxic they are to
marine biota.
Distribution patterns of MPs found in our water samples could
possibly be influenced by several factors such as local currents and
sea ice conditions, but further investigation is needed in this regard.
Future research should take a multidisciplinary approach to (i) fully
understand how MPs interact with environmental forces like ocean
currents, eddies, and atmospheric factors as well as sea ice and (ii)
identify sources and pathways to develop robust mitigation
measures and conservation strategies which can be put into action.
