IAATO Observer and Compliance Programs
IAATO Observer and Compliance Programs
Information Paper Submitted by IAATO
Summary
At its 2019 Annual Meeting in Cape Town, South Africa, IAATO
Operators voted unanimously to implement a mandatory
observation program for all member operators (Also reference
ATCM XLII (2019) IP138 IAATO Mandatory Observer Scheme.)
Previously, observations were required only for Provisional
Operators and were done on a voluntary basis for existing members.
This paper discusses the results from observations performed during
the last two seasons.
Additionally, this paper discusses the Compliance & Dispute
Resolution (CDR) process that IAATO has had in place since 2013,
which was further enhanced during IAATO’s 2024 Annual Meeting.
The CDR process is a mechanism for IAATO to address potential
issues that arise during the observations or reporting made to
IAATO during the year.
Background
In-field observations of companies have been conducted as part of
the membership application process for most of IAATO’s history.
Companies applying to join IAATO are required to:
file all necessary forms with their Competent Authority (copying the
forms to IAATO),
make a public presentation at the IAATO Annual Meeting,
answer questions from Operators prior to operating, and
carry an IAATO-approved observer during their first season of
operation in Antarctica.
The company will not be considered by IAATO Operators for a
membership status change from Provisional Operator to Operator
until the successful completion of an observation. Change in status
to Operator provides the company with voting rights and the ability
to nominate representatives to all IAATO Committees.
IAATO introduced a voluntary Enhanced Observer Scheme for the
2010-11 season. The Membership recognized the value of these in-
field observations as it provided individual Operators with an
outside perspective of their operations and it provided the
Membership with the ability to identify opportunities to further
enhance guidance based upon best practices. The program became
mandatory in 2019-20 and requires IAATO Operators to be
observed during its first year of operation and thereafter be
observed at least once every five years, subsequently. This applies
to vessels, yachts, air and deep field operations. Vessel operators
who have more than one vessel must have each vessel observed
once every five seasons.
Observer Program
Prior to the Antarctic season, the IAATO Secretariat coordinates
with Operators requiring observations and potential observers to
make assignments based upon skillset and availability. Observers
are identified by IAATO through recommendations from the wider
Antarctic community and include members of the IAATO
Secretariat, scientists, prior field staff and government officials
(both current and prior). Two Competent Authorities, France and
Germany, have coordinated with IAATO to have their own
representatives conduct IAATO observations for companies they
permit/authorize. Observers will discuss expectations with the
IAATO Secretariat then later with the respective company,
facilitated by IAATO, to ensure that there is a consistent
understanding regarding the role and the requirements of the
observation.
During the observation, the observers complete an IAATO checklist,
which is specific to the operations of the company. There are
currently four checklists (Yacht – Dockside, Cruise Only, Deep Field
and Ship with Landing) based upon the operation they are
observing. The IAATO Secretariat is available to the observers
before, during and after the observation to assist with any questions
that arise. Once complete and agreed to by the Operator, the
checklist is reviewed by the IAATO Secretariat and the IAATO
Membership Committee.
The IAATO Membership Committee will aggregate any trends
identified and work with the IAATO Secretariat and other IAATO
committees to determine if additional guidance is needed or if there
is an opportunity to further enhance current guidelines and/or
protocols. At the IAATO Annual Meeting, the Membership
Committee will share these findings and next steps with the
membership. Overall, this process has allowed for greater
understanding and learning for IAATO and its members.
Additionally, it has resulted in more discussions between individual
operators and their Competent Authorities to further clarify the
understanding of certain activities and strengthen operator
documentation.
If an item is identified that needs additional investigation, the
IAATO Membership Committee will refer it to the IAATO
Secretariat.
Compliance & Dispute Resolution Mechanism
Items can be brought to the IAATO Secretariat’s attention for
further investigation both during and outside the season. These
items can be referred to IAATO through a variety of ways including
its Care & Concern process, company reporting (both self-reporting
and experience with another operator) and through the Observation
Program.
For each situation, the IAATO Secretariat reviews the information
received, communicates with the individual that brought the
information forward, as well as the company, and assesses the item.
Level One – if the IAATO Secretariat determines that the item is a
relatively minor or unintentional violation of IAATO policies, then
next steps will be discussed and agreed upon with the company in
question.
Remedies have included the company acknowledging the issue to
others, enhancing their policy and procedures, discussing with their
Competent Authority and presenting lessons learned to fellow
IAATO members.
Level Two – if the IAATO Secretariat (1) determines that the item is
a serious, intentional and/or a repeated violation of IAATO policies;
(2) cannot agree to it being minor or unintentional; or (3) has a
conflict of interest; then the item is referred to IAATO’s Compliance
& Dispute Resolution Committee. This Committee will begin an in-
depth review of the item in question, which may include further
enquiries of witnesses, the company and evidence gathering.
Ultimately based upon the Committee's review, it may be
determined that the item is dismissed or will be presented to the
Operators to vote upon next steps related to the violation.
Level Two sanctions available range from reprimand to probation –
which can constitute the need for certain actions by the company,
including having additional observations successfully completed
and a change in status from Member in Good Standing to Member
Not in Good Standing – to expulsion from IAATO. It is IAATO’s
practice to notify the Operator’s Competent Authority when the
sanction is determined.
Results from the 2022-23 and 2023-24 Seasons
Due to the impact of the global pandemic, the Mandatory Observer
Program did not come into full force until the 2022-23 Antarctic
season. As a result of the delay, the last two seasons have had a
significant number of observations performed, with at least 40% of
the companies being observed each year.
2022-23
2023-24
Provisional Operator
11
6
Mandatory
14
21
Total Observations
25
27
Trends identified have included opportunities to:
Further enhance Operator documentation including EIAs, policies
and procedures
Add more detail to existing and enhanced biosecurity measures
Reaffirm which individuals are required to take the IAATO
mandatory online assessment
Enhance IAATO guidelines and operational procedures
Create further documentation for Cruise Only Operators to further
enhance standard operating procedures and onboard guest
programs.
No items were identified by the Observer Program during both
seasons that triggered a CDR review.
With Thanks
IAATO would like to thank France and Germany for their
collaboration on supplying observers as well as other Antarctic
Treaty Parties, ASOC and other Antarctic stakeholders who have
recommended observers for IAATO’s Observer Program.
Additionally, IAATO appreciates the continued support and
feedback received and welcomes further collaboration with Treaty
Parties regarding the identification of appropriate observers, as we
continually enhance the Observer Program which allows us to
support our commitment to safe and environmentally responsible
travel to Antarctica.
