Using Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Support Decision Making in
Marine Operations to Reduce Carbon Emissions
Using Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Support Decision Making in
Marine Operations to Reduce Carbon Emissions
Summary
The AI Lab at the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is developing a
fully automated system for planning the annual logistics and science
itineraries for a fleet of research vessels. Given a collection of
science requests, including science surveys to be done at particular
locations within particular time windows, this shore-based system
will plan how to task the ships in the fleet with the different
requests so as to minimise the overall carbon emissions involved in
a field season. The system can look ahead over a horizon of three or
more years, planning how best to schedule tasks to maximise
science delivery, as efficiently as possible, within each field season.
Introduction
AI is revolutionising a wide range of industries across the world
with major advances in the fields of language processing and image
generation making the news on a regular basis. At the same time,
the need for industries to decarbonise has never been more pressing
with the effects of climate change particularly evident in the polar
regions. A question that then arises is whether the power of AI can
be harnessed to help organisations meet their decarbonisation
targets.
One area where BAS has been making progress is in using AI
techniques for the optimisation of marine operations, including
routing, scheduling and risk-aware navigation.
BAS has a comprehensive Net Zero Carbon programme that aims to
fully decarbonise the operations of the organisation by 2040. This
will be achieved by a variety of innovative approaches including
introduction of alternative fuel types such as Hydrotreated
Vegetable Oil (HVO) (see WP035 - Use of Alternative Fuels in
Antarctic Operations to Reduce Carbon Emissions). Other
approaches include the automation of operations that currently
require human intervention, upgrades to infrastructure, and
deployment of AI to allow us to make better use of existing
resources.
A selection of AI based decision support tools are being developed
at BAS that aim to make the decision-making process faster and
more efficient. These packages will allow experts to quickly
consider a wide range of possible scenarios in different domains,
drawing on all the relevant data from sources including remote-
sensing, telemetry, and environmental forecast models.
Environmental Marine Navigational Route Planning – PolarRoute
The Autonomous Marine Operations Planning group (AMOP) at BAS
has been developing an optimal marine routing tool for the polar
regions known as PolarRoute. This decision support package is
designed to aid navigation officers onboard a vessel operating in
polar waters but also to aid planning of ship (and other vessel)
operations in these areas. PolarRoute provides route suggestions
from a start location to a destination, in a way analogous to how an
in-car satellite navigation system is used. This system takes into
account the characteristics of a given vessel such as its maximum
speed, its dimensions, and its polar class, as well as the effects of
environmental features such as weather conditions and sea ice.
PolarRoute can generate the fastest routes or the most fuel-efficient
routes between points and then offer these options for selection by
a navigator. An understanding of how different environmental
conditions affect different vessels allows these routes to be tailored
to each specific case and provide the maximum benefit for efficient
operations. PolarRoute is different from many route-planning
systems because it has been designed for routing through ice-
covered waters, and it takes into account the curvature of the earth.
Route-planning is done in a non-uniform mesh where the mesh is
most refined in the areas of highest complexity (for example, in
coastal areas, the ice edge, areas of high winds and currents, and so
on).
PolarRoute has already been tested onboard the BAS polar research
ship RRS Sir David Attenborough (SDA) and we are now
generalising the system so that it can be used for routing other ships
and other marine vehicles such as ocean gliders and powered
marine autonomous platforms.
The BAS research and supply vessel RRS Sir David Attenborough
Risk Aware In-Ice Navigation – IceRouter
Whilst PolarRoute optimises routing over long distances, additional
reasoning is needed to navigate safely in the highly dynamic
conditions of ice-covered waters. BAS is developing an automated
In-Ice Navigation system, IceRouter that finds minimal-risk passages
through these uncertain conditions. Operations in ice carry a wide
range of risks including delays, incurring higher fuel expenditure,
and serious damage to the vessel. Accurate sea ice information and
a good understanding of the uncertainties associated with this data
are essential for a complete understanding of the risk incurred. New
satellite observation platforms and machine-learned forecasts are
becoming available and are being used to provide a better picture
of sea ice conditions and their evolution over time.
In contrast to PolarRoute the in-ice navigation system operates at
close-quarters on a much smaller geographical scale. It is responsive
to locally changing conditions and hence similar to methods used
for control of autonomous cars. The two systems are being
integrated to provide full routing functionality in polar regions.
Marine Logistics and Science Planning – VOLT
The conventional planning of marine science tasks across multiple
field seasons requires a detailed knowledge of the science
requirements (for example the location, any seasonal restrictions
and required equipment). The logistics of these tasks are manually
planned into a timeline that reduces the total time and carbon
footprint of the current and future field seasons. However, the
manual process takes weeks and requires replanning on short
timescales if exceptional circumstances occur. This approach cannot
scale to operational planning across large fleets of vessels.
In order to minimise the time spent by operational planning
experts, and effectively sample multiple timelines of possibilities,
BAS is building an AI marine logistics planner. The Vehicle
Optimisation for Logistics and Transportation (VOLT) planner has
been developed for use by human operators to quickly determine a
timeline of tasks minimising the time and carbon expenditure of the
fleet. This planner will make use of PolarRoute for efficient routing
between tasks.
The AI marine logistics planner will be able to replan in minutes
rather than weeks and will generate informed carbon budgets ahead
of undertaking the plans.
Conclusion
The tools described provide decision support both on-board
(PolarRoute and IceRouter) and shoreside (VOLT). These systems
will help operators to select the best strategies for minimising fuel
use and carbon production over individual journeys and field
seasons. One of the clear advantages of our methods is that they can
be used to generate “what if” scenarios very quickly, allowing
different environmental conditions, ship properties and science
requirements to be considered. This provides the ability for field
season operations to be highly responsive to changing conditions
and unforeseen events and to take advantage of opportunistic goals
and events when these arise.
References
British Antarctic Survey, Autonomous Marine Operations Planning,
https://www.bas.ac.uk/project/autonomous-marine-operations-
planning
