Initiation of review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) No. 169 Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen
Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica
Initiation of review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially
Protected Area No. 169
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia and
China have initiated a five-yearly review of the Management Plans
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 169 Amanda Bay,
Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica.
The review is being conducted with reference to Annex V and the
Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2
(2011). This paper briefly describes the Area, and how the review is
progressing. Australia and China intend to present the results of the
review for consideration at CEP 27 (2025).
Background
Amanda Bay is situated on the Ingrid Christensen Coast, East
Antarctica. ASPA 169 Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast,
Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica was originally designated
under Measure 3 (2008) following a proposal made by Australia
and China. A revised Management Plan was adopted under Measure
10 (2014). Following a five-yearly review conducted by Australia
and China, CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing Management Plan
would remain in force with the next review to be initiated in 2024.
The Area is primarily designated to protect the breeding colony of
emperor penguins. The colony possesses intrinsic and scientific
values. The collection of long-term population monitoring data in
the Area is valuable for comparative studies with other emperor
penguin colonies in East Antarctica.
Progress with review of Management Plan
Australia and China have initiated a review of the Management
Plan for ASPA 169, including consultation with subject matter
experts and personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past
five years. To date, the following matters have been identified for
further consideration and possible revisions to the Management
Plan:
updates to the description of the area and values to reflect research
and monitoring of the emperor penguin colony
updates to the description of structures within the Area
editorial changes for consistency with other ASPA Management
Plans and the Guide
Australia and China intend to further consider the findings of recent
research and monitoring in the Area, to inform the review.
Next steps
Australia and China will continue the review of this Management
Plan over the next 12 months, and intend to present the outcomes
for consideration at CEP 27 (2025).
