Vagrant and visitor bird species in the Fildes Region, King George
Island, between 1980 and 2023
Vagrant and visitor bird species in the Fildes Region, King George
Island, between 1980 and 2023
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
With this paper, we present a recent study about a long-term
monitoring of vagrant and visitor bird species recorded in the Fildes
Region (King George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctic) (Braun et
al., 2024). It might be relevant for the evaluation of environmental
changes that are already occurring as a result of current climate
change, e.g., changes in sea ice cover or food web structures.
Introduction
The term vagrancy as a natural phenomenon is used in birds to
describe individuals sighted outside their usual breeding, wintering,
and migration areas. Vagrancy is usually observed in migratory
species, due to their high mobility, but it also applies to all other
species that are outside their home range or distribution area. There
are diverse reasons for vagrancy in birds. These reasons include
normal long-distance dispersal, drift due to strong winds,
overshooting during migration movements, reversed-direction
migration, and the consequences of environmental change. Unlike
vagrants, visitors are also rarely observed birds that occur outside
their range but within their typical habitat. Long-term records of
visitors and vagrants could indicate a potential expansion of the
breeding range of individual species.
Abstract
Information on vagrant and visitor bird species recorded in the
Fildes Region (King George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctic) was
provided by the long-term bird monitoring programme between the
1979‒1980 and 2022‒2023 seasons. The total ice-free territory
covers approximately 35 km2, making it one of the largest ice-free
areas in the Western Antarctic Peninsula region. In addition to 13
breeding and one potentially breeding bird species, 28 non-breeding
bird species have been recorded. Of these non-breeding bird
species, 18 have been considered as vagrants and 10 as visitors. The
vagrant and visitor bird species recorded were representatives of
the families Spheniscidae, Diomedeidae, Procellariidae,
Pelecanoididae, Laridae, Ardeidae, Scolopacidae, and Anatidae.
Furthermore, information on the frequency of observations of bird
species that do not breed in the study area has been included. The
most frequently observed bird species are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Most frequently observed bird species
Name
Scientific Name
Emperor penguin
Aptenodytes forsteri
King penguin
Aptenodytes patagonicus
Macaroni penguin
Eudyptes chrysolophus
Cattle egret
Bubulcus ibis
White-rumped sandpiper
Calidris fuscicollis
These data contribute to knowledge of rare birds in the Antarctic.
Together with similar studies, this information may provide
valuable clues to unusual environmental conditions that allow
vagrants to reach regions beyond their usual distribution range.
Furthermore, long-term data on rare bird sightings can indicate a
potential expansion of the breeding range of individual species.
Such studies may be relevant for the evaluation of environmental
changes that are already
occurring as a result of current climate change, e.g., changes in sea
ice cover or food web structures. Finally, the great variety of
recorded species underlines the high importance of local long-term
monitoring programs.
References
Braun, C., H. Grämer, H.-U. Peter (2024): Records of vagrant and
visitor bird species in the Fildes Region, King George Island,
Maritime Antarctic, between 1980 and 2023, Ukrainian Antarctic
Journal, 21(2), 210-229. https://
doi.org/10.33275/1727-7485.2.2023.718
