Discharge of wastewater by ships in polar regions - Scope, impact &
regulatory options
Discharge of wastewater by ships in polar regions – Scope, impact
and regulatory options
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Increasing shipping traffic on the world's oceans and in the polar
regions in particular is associated with higher risks of pollution
from various sources of shipping operations, which can have
negative consequences, especially on sensitive marine and coastal
ecosystems in the Arctic and Antarctic that are particularly worthy
of protection. In addition to the risks posed by oil spills, underwater
noise and ballast water, other marine pollutants and contaminants
also pose risks to sensitive ecosystems. These include pollution from
air pollutants, ship waste or ship wastewater, such as black and
grey water.
In 2022, the German Environment Agency (UBA) initiated a
research project to collect data and information on the occurrence
of black and grey water on board ships operating in polar waters to
better assess the impact on the marine environment. The results of
this research project, which is being carried out by an
interdisciplinary team, will support the preparation of regulatory
proposals for the discharge of wastewater for further development
in the context of the International Convention for the Prevention of
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) and the Protocol on Environmental
Protection.
Background
The polar regions are considered to be particularly sensitive
ecosystems due to their unique environments and living conditions,
which represent a high degree of specialization for the animal and
plant species occurring there. For many years, both polar regions
have been subject to steadily increasing pressure of human use, e.g.
due to an increase in resource exploitation (Arctic), shipping,
tourism and scientific research.
The increasing number of ships on the world's oceans and in the
polar regions is accompanied by a higher volume of wastewater
discharges. The volume of wastewater on ships varies greatly.
Cruise ships produce larger quantities of grey water than black
water. In addition, many cruise ships and yachts generally use the
same routes, which means that wastewater can be particularly
concentrated in some regions along these routes. The low
temperature and light conditions in polar regions can lead to an
increased environmental impact of wastewater discharges.
Especially at low temperatures, nutrients remain in the water for
longer because they decompose more slowly. Polar waters are also
much more sensitive to changes in the nutrient status of the water
column or the seabed than other marine environments. Even by
treating the wastewater in the ship sewage treatment plants, these
issues are not eliminated: The majority of these plants do not meet
the internationally applicable performance standard in real use. As
most wastewater treatment plants do not fully retain
micropollutants, e.g. from pharmaceuticals, pesticides, detergents
and cleaning agents used on board of ships, these contaminants can
enter the aquatic environment via waste water discharges and pose
a risk for the sensitive ecosystems of polar regions.
Aims and scope of the project
The aim of the research project is to evaluate the scope and impact
of the discharge of grey and black water by ships in the polar
regions and derive options for regulation.
The project addresses the following key areas:
Investigate black and grey water discharges from ships in polar
regions: Evaluation of existing data on the discharge of ship sewage
in the polar regions and survey of relevant shipping companies,
using a questionnaire on the handling of ship sewage on board. The
survey focuses on the handling of ship wastewater on board, for
example the quantities that are discharged into the sea and their
quality, so that a distinction can be made between treated
wastewater and untreated grey water and what measures are taken
on board for environmental protection. This includes the aspect of
the kind of technology that is used on board for wastewater
treatment and what type of wastewater systems are in operation on
the ships currently operating in the polar regions.
Sampling of ships sewage treatment plants on board ships operating
in the Arctic and Antarctic and analysis of samples: Wastewater
sampling has taken place on 11 vessels (research and cruise vessels)
operating in the polar regions. Samples were taken from the
influent and effluent of the ship’s sewage treatment plant. The
samples have been analyzed for relevant wastewater parameters,
such as conductivity, pH, temperature, turbidity, Ammonia,
chemical and biological oxygen demand (COD, BSB5), total
Nitrogen, total Phosphorous, free chlorine, total solids and fecal
coliforms. Further analysis has been performed for heavy metals,
such as iron, copper, cadmium, lead and zinc and an extensive
amount of micropollutants due to pharmaceutical residues.
Environmental and biological impact assessment: An investigation
of potential impacts of wastewater discharges on the marine
environment in the polar regions is currently performed using the
laboratory results in conjunction with an evaluation of the
wastewater records of discharges.
Analysis of the legal framework and regulatory proposals: A
detailed analysis of the applicable legal framework is performed for
both Arctic and Antarctic in order to derive appropriate options for
regulation.
Outlook
Based on the information gathered, a comprehensive overview of
ship wastewater in the polar regions, impacts and possible options
for action to promote environmental protection and reduce
environmental impact by ships wastewater will be produced.
The project will be completed and results published at the end of
2024 and will be presented at ATCM XLVII in 2025.
References
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Greywater
Discharges from Vessels, 2011
MEPC 71/INF.22
