Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values: an update on progress
Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values: an update on progress
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Australia
Summary
At CEP 24 New Zealand, Argentina, Norway and the United
Kingdom presented WP 26 Assessing the risk of climate change
impacts on Antarctic heritage values, which proposed a two year
work plan to progress the development of a climate change risk
assessment tool for Antarctic heritage (to deliver the action on
Antarctic heritage sites specified in the Climate Change Response
Work Programme (CCRWP)). At CEP 25 the working group
presented an update on progress (IP102, 2023). The Committee
continued to express full support for the initiative. This paper
provides an update on further progress, as well as an updated work
plan.
Background
The CCRWP issue ‘Climate change impacts to the built (human)
environment resulting in impacts on natural and heritage values’
contains the following gap/needs and actions that are directly
relevant to Antarctic heritage:
Gap/Need
Understanding how the abiotic terrestrial environment will change
and how this might impact/ result in impacts on environmental or
heritage values;
Understanding what conservation/remedial interventions might be
applicable to counteract these impacts.
Action
Assess the risk of changes in climate change to HSM/heritage ASPA.
In order to progress the Action to ‘Assess the risk of changes in
climate change to HSM/heritage ASPA’, ATCMXLIV/WP26
proposed the following work plan to work towards the development
of a climate change risk assessment tool:
Year
Steps
2023-2024
Continue the review of existing work
Develop a draft climate change risk assessment tool for Antarctic
heritage, to be presented at CEP in 2024
2024-2025
Consult on, and finalise the climate change risk assessment tool, to
be presented to CEP in 2025
The UK, working closely with the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust, and
together with Argentina, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and SCAR
agreed to lead the development of the draft climate change risk
assessment tool for presentation at the CEP in 2024.
The Committee expressed full support for the outlined work, and so
Members have been making progress during the 2023-2024
intersessional period.
Summary of year 2 progress
Building on the work to review relevant previous work and
compilation of available resources to inform, the UK engaged with
the International Polar Heritage Committee and connected with
an individual conducting a PhD thesis on assessing the risks of
climate change to Antarctic HSMs.
A review of the objectives and recent innovations in this area have
shown that there are two useful approaches to this:
The first, a desk-based risk assessment tool which can offer a basic
overview of climate change risk to heritage based upon
geographical and material factors which can help managers of
HSMs and heritage ASPA identify sites at risk and assist with
prioritization of work;
The second is a more in-depth approach requiring field-based data
capture which will result in a more detailed assessment of specific
risks to inform plans for management or adaptation This will be
useful for more complex and higher risk sites, such as artefact-rich
buildings or sites in precarious exposed locations.
Annex 1 is a paper which describes the desk-based risk assessment,
which will be presented to the intersessional working group
members for discussion in 2024, for presentation at CEP 27 in 2025.
The draft is presented here for any Parties to share their insights
and comments.
We continue to welcome any other Members or Observers who
would like to contribute to the work.
Updated work plan
Following the work during the 2023-2024 intersessional period, we
propose the following updated work plan for the next year:
Year
Steps
2024-2025
Consult on, and finalise the desk-based climate change risk
assessment tool, to be presented to CEP in 2025
Develop and field test the field-based risk assessment tool, consult
and present to the CEP in 2025.
We continue to encourage Members with an interest to add any
additional resources to the database of previous work, to test the
desk-based tool, and to contribute to the development of the field-
based climate change risk assessment tool.
