Report on Low Earth Orbit communication systems trials
Report on Low Earth Orbit communications systems trials
Summary
The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has been trialing two Low Earth
Orbit (LEO) satellite communication systems which can provide
high speed internet connections to locations in Antarctica. These
trials have demonstrated the large impact and potential these
communication systems can have on operations and science
capabilities in the Antarctic.
Introduction
Before March 2023 BAS’ primary internet connection to it’s three
Antarctic research stations (Rothera, Halley and Signy) and the RRS
Sir David Attenborough (SDA) was via Very Small Aperture
Terminal (VSAT) satellite links. Smaller camps and field parties
were supported by Iridium devices. Trials were started this year on
Starlink and OneWeb. Both of these have had a high immediate
impact on operations and welfare at all locations and demonstrate
the potential benefits to science and as a enabler to new ways of
working in support of carbon reduction.
Starlink
Starlink is a satellite communications system with over 6000 LEO
satellites at approximately 600km in altitude. The majority of the
Starlink constellation orbit at an inclination of 53 degrees and a
small number in a polar orbit, which Antarctic locations can use. In
March 2023, Starlink user terminals were initially introduced on the
SDA and at Rothera. These were added with only the addition of a
firewall and only for personal devices. The VSAT was retained for
operations purposes at Rothera and the SDA until second user
terminals were added in January 2024 and added to the business
system network. To use the advantages of Starlink’s higher speeds
whilst retaining the VSAT for redundancy, a simple failover system
was developed so that the VSAT would take over if the operations
Starlink user terminal lost connection.
Further user terminals were added across the UKs Antarctic and sub
Antarctic operations during the summer season but were not
integrated with the VSAT system.
Speed tests have shown an average download speed close to 150
Mbps and average upload speeds of approximately 15 Mbps.
The onsite power usage for each user terminal is approximately
80W with the heater off. When there is icing the heater will
increase this power usage to approximately 150W. This can be
compared with the Rothera VSAT system which uses approximately
3kW.
Figure 1. Starlink high performance user terminal installed at
Rothera.
Monthly data transfer amounts for Rothera are shown in figure 2
below. Initially introduced as a welfare network only for personal
devices. During the austral winter monthly transfer rates were fairly
low, however as the station population increased in October (and
Starlink terms and conditions changes, uncapping stationary user
terminals not deemed to be at sea) the demand increased
dramatically. Monthly data transfer of the 2nd user terminal for
work devices, fully configured with a Virtual Private Network
(VPN) back to BAS in Cambridge for operational purposes is also
shown in figure 2.
Figure 2. Monthly data transfers on Rothera Starlink user terminals.
OneWeb Talaria
OneWeb, now merged with Eutelsat has developed a scalable,
lightweight ground network, called Talaria, that operates outside
the normal OneWeb network but utilises the same LEO satellites.
OneWeb has a constellation of LEO satellites that are all polar
orbiting at an altitude of roughly 1200km. This should be better
suited to the polar regions. As the Talaria system works outside the
normal OneWeb network, it has the advantage of providing a
sovereign network, however the disadvantage is that a custom user
terminal is required.
In January 2024 a ground station consisting of three 2.4m dishes
was installed just outside Punta Arenas. The installation of this
ground station allows the OneWeb satellites continuous coverage of
the Antarctic peninsula. Two user terminals were installed at
Rothera and the system tested.
Initial tests showed download speeds up to 100 Mbps and upload
speeds of 20 Mbps. Testing of the system will continue with the
possibility of upgrading to allow coverage of all of BAS’ stations in
the future.
Each user terminal uses a maximum of 220W. Once again this is
much less than the VSAT system at Rothera.
Figure 3. OneWeb Talaria user terminal installed at Rothera. Note
the VSAT dome in the background.
Impact on VSAT at Rothera
Our VSAT system is very reliable and the infrastructure on the
stations is mature. All our stations and our research vessel use
bandwidth on the SES4 satellite. To utilize our bandwidth
allocation most efficiently each station has a minimum allocation
but can share any spare bandwidth that is not being used by
another station. Over the years as data transfer demand has
increased bandwidth availability has meant that the VSAT system
has been overloaded. An attempt to alleviate this has been to
purchase more bandwidth during the Antarctic summer season. By
introducing an alternative LEO connection at any station, this frees
up VSAT bandwidth for that station but also the other stations due
to the sharing ability. The impact on the VSAT connection at
Rothera of introducing the Starlink user terminals at Rothera can be
clearly seen in the figure below which shows the weekly data
transfer to and from the station.
Figure 4. Weekly data transfers to and from Rothera using the
VSAT. A Starlink unit was introduced for welfare use on the 20th of
April 2023. An additional Starlink unit was added for operational
purposes on the 10th of January 2024. Both additions demonstrate
the impact of LEO services on the VSAT system.
Opportunities enabled by LEO satellite systems
As is demonstrated in the plots above the use of LEO satellites
systems is already having an impact on the welfare and operational
areas at BAS stations and the SDA, however this has the potential
for fundamental change on the Science and the way that Science is
carried out enabled by these systems.
As connectivity becomes better, this allows new autonomous
platforms to be used for gathering scientific data. Continuous, low
latency, fast communications will enable safe operation of
autonomous systems. This connectively will also support live access
to data from science and operational systems when previously data
was recorded locally and manually collected and transferred back to
the UK for analysis.
Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS)
This has been most recently demonstrated by the Windracers
ULTRA that was flown off the Rothera runway (refer to UK IP
Operations and Scientific use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica: a review for further details). With a Starlink
terminal fitted the Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) was
able to be controlled and operated safely beyond visual line of
sight.
Marine Autonomy
With increasing use of marine gliders and other autonomous
underwater vessels (AUVs) as well as unmanned surface vessels
(USVs) and as LEO modems become lower power and smaller, the
advances in connectivity will enable much quicker widely spaced
oceanographic.
Terrestrial Instrumentation
Many of the remote instruments that are deployed by BAS over
Antarctica store all their data locally. This data collection
necessitates visits by engineers or scientists using the BAS aircraft.
In some cases, some data is already transferred using the Iridium
Satellite network, however for large data sets this is not economical.
New LEO systems have the potential to reduce the requirement to
visit these remote sites and reduce the carbon emissions to get all
the data.
Building Management Systems (BMS)
As the Antarctic infrastructure on stations is modernized, more
complex BMS systems are being installed. Due to the poor
connectivity these BMS systems have traditionally been monitored
by local personnel. With the introduction of LEO communications,
the BMS data can be transferred back to the UK, live, and
monitored by experts that can support technicians and engineers via
video link. This has the potential to allow better control of building
systems and reduce operational and environmental costs.
Safety and Wellbeing
Improved connectivity is already having a large impact on personal
communications home for deployed staff . This can be seen from the
data transfers on the Welfare Starlink in figure 2 at Rothera and has
been fed back anecdotally. This will help with BAS’ new Safety
Together culture (refer to IP ‘Safety together culture’ using a
holistic approach to expeditioner’s safety and wellbeing for further
details). Not only will better communications help with
telemedicine, with on-site medics able to access specialist support in
the UK via video link, but also with mental and social wellbeing.
Improved communications will reduce isolation and could improve
mental health.
Risks, Challenges and Lessons Learned
Although the previous relatively low data transfer rates on the
VSAT systems used by BAS did not allow the opportunities outlined
above, this same poor connectivity did mitigate some risks.
Cyber Security
As more complex systems are networked and with LEO services
providing better connectivity this could cause more cyber security
issues. For instance, a safety critical building system could be
networked, to protect this but allow legitimate access it might be
simply password protected. Automated password cracking
techniques would previously have been detected due to the slow
connection and shutdown may now require better prevention
measures.
Demand Management
New business computing systems are more data intensive and as
staff become used to good connectively the culture where demand
for data was minimized will change. Previously, efforts were made
to ensure all information required for a project was collected before
deploying to the Antarctic. LEO will change this leading to further
demand for data. This will be fine until either the links go down or
a cap in capability is reached.
