The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2024 to the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2024 to the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Summary
This paper presents the annual report of the Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting. The main features of the report are also presented as an
infographic (attachment 1).
Background 
SCAR’s mission is to advance Antarctic research, including
observations, and to promote scientific knowledge and education on
the Antarctic region. SCAR is charged with the facilitation and
coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to
global society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific
advice and information to the ATS and other bodies, and acts as the
main international exchange of information on Antarctic research
within the scientific community. Further information is available at
www.scar.org.  
Science Priorities – Scientific Research Programmes 
SCAR’s Scientific Research Programmes are its flagship activities
that address high priority topical scientific questions. There are
currently three programmes.  
INStabilities & Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) focuses on
quantifying Antarctica’s contributions to global sea level. Highlights
since ATCM XLV include activities at COP28, specifically
contributing to events at the cryosphere pavilion and other
activities organised by the International Cryosphere Climate
Initiative. INSTANT also contributed to the One Planet Polar
Summit (November 2023) and has further developed the Antarctic
sea level change projections and impacts project reported at ATCM
XLV; IP184 Understanding Future Sea-level Change Around
Antarctica provides an update on this work. INSTANT also held its
first major international conference in Italy in September 2023,
bringing together hundreds of cross-disciplinary researchers.
instant2023.org
scar.org/science/research-programmes/instant
AntClimNOW focuses on near term predictions of the Antarctic
Climate System (years to decades). Following workshops in 2022
and 2023, AntClimNOW developed a new Antarctic radiation
observations network and a platform for displaying basic
information about past and current state of the Antarctic Climate
System – Antarctic Climate Indicators scar.org/science/research-
programmes/antclimnow/climatic-indicators (presented in WP49
SCAR AntClimNow Antarctic Climate Indicators project).
AntClimNOW also continues to host monthly science talks. scar.org/
science/research-programmes/antclimnow#resources Under its
Dataset Stewardship and Development Scheme, a range of datasets,
from snow depth to meteorological measurements, have been
enhanced.
scar.org/science/research-programmes/antclimnow
Ant-ICON addresses science questions on the conservation and
management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. Since ATCM
XLV, a practical guide for researchers www.cambridge.org/core/
journals/antarctic-science/article/communicating-the-best-
available-science-to-inform-antarctic-policy-and-management-a-
practical-introduction-for-
researchers/066690EBF22AA56FB9A029D59A71394C was
published on communicating the best available science to inform
Antarctic policy and management. Ant-ICON is also continuing to
develop information for State of the Antarctic Environment
Reporting (presented in ATCM XLVI WP46 An example SCAR online
application to inform State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting
(SAER)). The Ant-ICON and Standing Committee on the Antarctic
Treaty System (SCATS) Fellowship is now in its second year.
scar.org/fellowships-awards/ant-icon-scats-fellowships The
Fellowship enables early to mid-career researchers to gain
experience at the science-policy interface. Fellows contribute to a
SCAR paper to the ATCM/CEP or SC-CAMLR meeting and
participate as members of the SCAR delegation. The 2024 Fellows
are Yousra Makanse (ATCM/CEP Fellow) and Noémie Friscourt (SC-
CAMLR Fellow).
scar.org/science/research-programmes/ant-icon
Group activities 
Selected highlights of SCAR group work are given below. Further
information about SCAR groups can be found on the SCAR website
www.scar.org.  
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) 
Over the past year, the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Network
(AWHN) (a working group of the SCAR Expert Group on Birds and
Marine Mammals, scar.org/science/life/eg-bamm) provided
Antarctic stakeholders with guidance to help them prepare for the
likely arrival of HPAI in Antarctica, including through risk
assessments and guidance documents, presentations at international
conferences (SCAR Biology, International Penguin Conference), and
through the development of the HPAI monitoring project, the SCAR
HPAI database and live map (ATCM XLVI WP47 Update on High
Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica, scar.org/library-data/
avian-flu).
scar.org/science/life/awhn  
RINGS Action Group 
The first RINGS survey was successfully carried out in Dronning
Maud Land (DML) and Enderby Land (EL) by the DML/EL RINGS
project, an international collective effort of 10 nations led by
Norway. In addition, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programs (COMNAP) developed the “COMNAP RINGS
Collaboration” project www.comnap.aq/comnap-rings-
collaboration-project to perform joint activities with RINGS. 
scar.org/science/cross/rings
SCAR Krill Expert Group (SKEG) 
A paper was published in Frontiers in Marine Science, which
identified the challenges of observing climate change impacts with
shifting sampling methods and suggested tractable solutions.
www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.2024.1307402/full
scar.org/science/life/skeg
Antarctic Near-Shore and Terrestrial Observation System (ANTOS)
Expert Group 
A paper submitted to the September 2023 CCAMLR workshop on
climate change described risks to benthic ecosystems and the need
for coordinated long term observations.
scar.org/science/cross/antos
Astronomy & Astrophysics from Antarctica (AAA) Expert Group 
Highlights included a successful season by the IceCube Upgrade
project and internationally collaborative work on astronomy
projects at Dome A, San Martin, and Belgrano II stations. The 7th
SCAR AAA topical workshop took place in Svalbard, Norway in
September 2023. https://www.astronomy.scar.org/meetings/7th-
workshop-the-scar-aaa/ Further information on the group’s work
can be found in the AAA report to the SCAR Executive Committee
in 2023. https://scar.org/library-data/scar-delegates-and-excom-
meetings/scar-excom-2023-trieste-italy/ec23-10-aaa-report-002?
layout=default 
scar.org/science/excom/aaa
Plastics Action Group 
The SCAR Plastics Action Group is working with the International
Science Council to provide relevant information in relation to the
work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee to develop
an international legally binding instrument on plastic pollution,
including in the marine environment.
scar.org/science/life/plastic
New Groups 
In June 2023, the SCAR Executive Committee approved the
Antarctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AnMAP) as a
new co-sponsored group under SCAR (ATCM XLVI IP171
Incorporation of Antarctica into the Global Monitoring Plan for
Persistent Organic Pollutants through co-development of
harmonized frameworks between National Antarctic Programmes
and relevant national environmental agencies). The programme was
developed in recognition of the planetary chemical pollution crisis
and the unique value of the Earth’s polar regions as barometers of
planetary health. AnMAP is a UN Ocean Decade Project. https://
oceandecade.org/actions/the-antarctic-monitoring-and-assessment-
programme-anmap/
scar.org/science/co-sponsored/anmap
Other highlights  
Events 
Events held by SCAR groups included: 
The Antarctic for a Better World, SCAR Standing Committee on the
Humanities and Social Sciences Conference (June 2023, Portugal)
covered all disciplinary fields in the social sciences, humanities and
arts concerning the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic regions.
scarschass2023.ulusofona.pt
Southern Ocean in a Changing World, Southern Ocean Observing
System (SOOS) Symposium (August 2023, Tasmania) assessed
progress and challenges in delivering timely and accessible
information for the Southern Ocean.
soossymposium2023.au
SCAR held its 4 yearly Biology Symposium www.confer.co.nz/
scarbiology2023/ in July/August 2023 in New Zealand and its
biennial Executive Committee meeting scar.org/events/delegates-
excom-meetings/scar-excom-2023-trieste-italy in September 2023
in Italy.  
SCAR also supported the One Planet - Polar Summit
oneplanetsummit.fr/en/events-16/one-planet-polar-summit-284 in
France in November 2023 and the Polar Symposium: The cold is
getting hot www.thepolarinitiative.org in Monaco in February
2024.  
SCAR participation in other international events: 
SCAR participated in several events at COP28 (scar.org/scar-news/
cop28) including a United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) side event on sea level rise and
mountain freshwater losses and an event in the International
Climate and Cryosphere Initiative (ICCI) Cryosphere Pavilion, on
climate change threats to Antarctic and Southern Ocean
ecosystems. 
SCAR hosted a side event at the 58th session of the Subsidiary Body
for Scientific and Technological Advice on loss of mountain water
resources and sea level rise, in partnership with the ICCI and the
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.  
SCAR members participated in the CCAMLR Workshop on Climate
Change, in New-Zealand and the UK, in September 2023.
Participants discussed the expected effects and risks of climate
change on Antarctic marine living resources, spatial management
approaches to meet the objectives of the Convention, and
developing and integrating mechanisms to support management
decisions.  
Communications outputs 
In December 2023, SCAR launched its new, redesigned website
(www.scar.org).  
The Antarctic Environments Portal environments.aq (ATCM XLVI
IP119 Antarctic Environments Portal), hosted by SCAR, provides
impartial information based on the best available science to support
informed discussion on issues relevant to the ATCM/CEP and wider
stakeholders.  
Highlights of work with partners 
The Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO)
report zenodo.org/records/8359585 was jointly published by SCAR,
the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research and Integrated
Marine Biosphere Research in September 2023. The report's release
was timed to align with the international CCAMLR meeting in
Hobart. MEASO is a core activity of the SCAR co-sponsored
program Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the
Southern Ocean (ICED). scar.org/science/co-sponsored/iced 
Following the publication of the Southern Ocean Action Plan
usercontent.one/wp/www.sodecade.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/04/Southern-Ocean-Action-Plan_Final.pdf in April
2022, in June 2023 SCAR was approved to coordinate the Decade
Collaborative Centre for the Southern Ocean Region
oceandecade.org/actions/decade-collaborative-centre-for-the-
southern-ocean-region-dcc-sor/ (ATCM XLVI IP121 Update on the
Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development).
SCAR, in collaboration with the International Arctic Science
Committee (IASC), is involved in early discussions on planning for
the 5th International Polar Year from 2032-2033 (ATCM XLVI
IP122 Plans for a fifth International Polar Year 2032/33). 
The Polar Science, Technology, Archaeology, and Heritage
conference was held in April 2024 (polestah.com). The purpose of
the conference, which was a collaboration between the
International Polar Heritage Committee (IPHC), Gateway
Antarctica, the University of Canterbury, and UiT The Arctic
University of Norway, was to integrate science, technology,
archaeology, historical, and heritage studies to inform and enhance
Antarctic heritage management in the context of the rapidly
changing polar environment. IPHC is an International Scientific
Committee within the International Council on Monuments and
Sites, which has collaborative links to SCAR, and the conference
was part of their long-standing mission to provide science-based
expertise for Antarctic heritage management. 
Selected Forthcoming Meetings 
11th Open Science Conference (OSC) ‘Antarctic Science: Crossroads
for a New Hope': 2024, 19-23 August, Pucón, Chile. SCAR’s biennial
OSC enables scientists from a variety of disciplines and countries to
network, share science and get involved in SCAR science activities.
www.scar2024.org
SCAR Delegates Meeting: 2024, 26-28 August, Punta Arenas, Chile.
scar.org/events/delegates-excom-meetings 
