Harmonised implementation of the Polar Code and related shipping
issues
Harmonised implementation of the Polar Code and related shipping
issues
Summary
This paper provides an overview of the discussions and outcome of
the special session on the harmonised implementation of the Polar
Code hosted by Argentina and Finland during ATCM 45 in 2023
and draws attention to a submission from ASOC to ATCM 44 which
identified challenges and gaps in the implementation of the Polar
Code. It also provides information on two vessel fire incidents in the
Southern Ocean, highlighting lessons that might influence further
development or implementation of the Polar Code. It refers to the
development of new guidance on reducing underwater noise from
ships and makes recommendations urging Antarctic Treaty Parties
to share experience, best practice, and lessons, and to collaborate
where possible with Arctic initiatives, all aimed to achieve
harmonised implementation of the Polar Code.
Introduction
In 2009, the 32nd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM
XXXII) Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted Resolution 8 (2009)
Antarctic Treaty database - Resolution 8 (2009) - ATCM XXXII -
CEP XII, Baltimore (ats.aq) expressing the Parties’ wish that the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) develop a mandatory
shipping code for vessels operating in Antarctic waters. During the
45th ATCM in 2023, Argentina and Finland co-hosted a special
session on the Implementation of the IMO Polar Code. During the
session, the Polar Code was cited as a successful example of
multilateral decision-making and the first goal-based instrument
adopted by the IMO ATCM45_fr001_e.pdf (ats.aq). The importance
of harmonised implementation of the Polar Code, including
enhancement of the ability of flag administrations and coastal states
to enforce the Code, was strongly emphasised.
It was also recognised that, while the Code had provided clear rules
and guidance to seafarers in polar waters, there were some
shortcomings. The importance of promoting the Polar Code and its
implementation to ship owners and operators, vessel designers,
shipyards, and other stakeholders was highlighted extensively. It
was also acknowledged that work at the IMO on polar matters had
continued following the entry into force of the Polar Code,
including extending the provisions on navigation and voyage
planning to non-SOLAS vessels, such as fishing vessels and pleasure
yachts, which will take effect from January 2026 (see previous
ASOC papers ATCM XLV IP 119 and ATCM XLIV IP 92).
Harmonised implementation of the Polar Code
At last year’s meeting, Antarctic Treaty Parties considered a number
of presentations and papers on challenges and opportunities in
implementing the Polar Code. During one presentation, based on
the experience of designing a new polar logistics vessel, several
areas relevant to the implementation of the Polar Code were
highlighted including the importance of defining an “operational
envelope” during the early stages of work, and identifying the area,
conditions, duration, and functions of a ship’s operation. The
operational assessment was also identified as an important aspect of
dialogue between ship designers and operators, including
identifying whether risks should be mitigated through procedures or
equipment, and ensuring that decisions around risk could be traced
in a verifiable way between ship design and ship operation.
Verifying conformity to the Polar Code and ensuring consistency in
implementation was also highlighted. 
A Working Paper prepared by Argentina, Finland and Norway
ATCM45 WP046 Harmonised implementation of the IMO Polar
Code, submitted by Argentina, Finland and Norway. proposed
strengthening efforts to implement the Code in a harmonised
manner. A number of challenges were highlighted including:
the goal-based approach, which provides greater flexibility in
meeting the goals and functional requirements, but also requires a
higher level of knowledge and understanding of the risks to be
mitigated;  
the number of variables (area of operation, anticipated weather
conditions, time of year, presence of sea ice, temperature, latitude)
which impact the mandatory operational assessment, which in-turn
determines which functional requirements and regulations should
be applied to individual ships; and
interpretation of the requirements and variable levels of knowledge
and understanding of how and what to assess.   
 
The importance of cooperation and the exchange of best practices
to facilitate harmonised implementation was underlined, and the
value of the Arctic Shipping Best Practice Information Forum,
currently chaired by Norway, as a venue to share experiences was
highlighted. Antarctic flag states operating in polar areas were
encouraged to participate in future sessions of the Forum. The
Working Paper also recommended that the ATCM continue to
prioritise the harmonised implementation and effective enforcement
of the Polar Code in its Multi-year Strategic Work Plan.  
A number of papers were presented to the topical session by
Antarctic Treaty Parties as well as by non-governmental
organisations. Spain highlighted the need for all actors to share
their experiences and concerns in applying the Polar Code, to take
steps to develop common standards for evaluating risks involved in
polar navigation, and to actively cooperate in the promotion of the
Polar Code ATCM45 IP067 Implementación del Código Polar: Retos
y desafíos, Presented by Spain. 26 April 2023.. Chile drew attention
to the importance of Antarctic Parties supporting the drafting of the
Polar Waters Operational Manual (PWOM) ATCM IP069
Implementación Código Internacional para los buques que operen
en aguas polares en las naves de bandera nacional y su control en
aguas jursidiccionales de Chile. Presented by Chile. 14 April 2023..
Australia identified the challenges of search and rescue in remote
polar regions and the value of sharing experience, ATCM IP092
Australian experience with implementation of the International
Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code). Presented
by Australia. 28 April 2023. while the Russian Federation
highlighted the responsibility of competent authorities for
enforcement ATCM45 IP127 Presented by the Russian Federation.
28 April 2023.. 
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators’
(IAATO) paper noted a number of areas of the Polar Code where
implementation was relatively straightforward including
navigation, communications, and pollution prevention, but drew
particular attention to the importance of harmonising interpretation
and training requirements ATCM IP058 Implementation of the IMO
Polar Code: A practical perspective. Presented by IAATO. 9 May
2023.. Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP) noted that challenges persist around training and
experience for the certification of Bridge Officers. COMNAP also
presented the preliminary results of a suspended survey of
implementation of the Polar Code by National Antarctic Program
vessels ATCM45 IP 008 Preliminary Survey Responses Regarding
Implementation of IMO Polar Code – National Antarctic Programme
vessels. Presented by COMNAP. 12 April 2023.. Of the 14 responses,
the average age of vessels was over 20 years, with one vessel over
40 years old, and 78% of the vessels were covered by the
requirements of the Polar
Code. COMNAP reported that the survey had been resumed and
ASOC will be interested to review the results at a future ATCM. 
ASOC had previously provided information to the ATCM and urged
ATCPs to bring forward their experiences of the successes and
challenges in the implementation of the Polar Code. This included
the identification of gaps which are preventing the delivery of the
highest practical standards of maritime safety and security,
efficiency of navigation, and prevention and control of pollution
from ships in polar regions ATCM IP119 Improving safety and
environmental protection of shipping in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Presented by ASOC. 28 April 2023.. 
During discussion in the topical session, a number of challenges
were highlighted, including search and rescue operations in the
Antarctic and the value of vessels of opportunity in responding to
incidents and ensuring adequate emergency response time. The
final report of ATCM 45 recognised the need to continue to
prioritise the harmonised implementation and effective enforcement
of the IMO Polar Code in its Multi-year Strategic Work Plan and
advised Parties to keep promoting the Polar Code and its
implementation to shipowners and operators. 
ATCM Strategic Work Plan
Decision 5 (2023) adopting the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan for
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting includes as a priority
“Contribute to strengthening the consistent implementation of the
Polar Code.” The activities identified in the work plan include that
in 2024, Parties should: 
continue sharing documents on national experiences of
implementing the Polar Code;
submit papers on how they promote implementation of the Polar
Code to different stakeholders in their national maritime clusters;
and
discuss possible ways to cooperate with the Arctic Council States
and other major Flag States for sharing information and best
practices in implementing the Polar Code. 
An assessment of progress is due to be undertaken at the 47th
session of the ATCM in 2025.
In this respect, ASOC would like to draw attention to ATCM XLIV IP
92, in which ASOC provided information on a report, launched by
ASOC member World Wildlife Fund (WWF) five years after the
Polar Code came into effect, that identified challenges and gaps in
implementing the Polar Code Review of Perceived Gaps and
Challenges in the Implementation of the Polar Code. WWF Arctic
Programme. March 2022. Review of Perceived Gaps and Challenges
in the Implementation of the Polar Code | WWF Arctic
(arcticwwf.org). This report provides a summary of commentary
from a variety of sources on the implementation of the Polar Code
and makes substantive recommendations with respect to the
implementation and potential review of the Polar Code. The report
refers particularly to a submission from Spain to ATCM XLIII
ATCM43_IP057 Implementation of the IMO Polar Code in Spain:
Certification of the Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa.
Presented by Spain., which identifies a range of challenges
including difficulty with the use of goal-based standards, problems
with identifying polar service temperature, difficulties in carrying
out risk assessments, and the challenges in the provision of life-
saving equipment.
Further lessons from recent incidents in Antarctic waters 
Since the publication of the WWF report, there have been further
incidents from which pertinent lessons can be drawn. In a
submission to the 45th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
ATCM45 BP023 Fire Incident on the Research Vessel Akademik
Federov and the Conclusions Drawn. Presented by the Russian
Federation, 28 April 2023. , the
Russian Federation reported on a fire incident that occurred on the
research vessel RV Akademik Fedorov on 5th February 2023, during
the 68th Russian Antarctic expedition. The incident occurred after
midnight (local time) and the fire alarm was cancelled before
5.00am. There were no casualties. The cause of the fire was
determined to be fuel leakage from a fuel supply hose attached to
the boiler nozzle. The contact of the fuel with the hot surface of the
boiler resulted in a fire, which was extinguished using a stationary
liquid fire extinguishing system. A set of preventative measures is
being developed to prevent similar accidents in the future. ASOC
believes that it would be valuable to consider whether these
preventative measures include any aspects that will be relevant in
terms of Chapter 7 on Fire Safety / Protection of Part IA of the
Polar Code. 
In another incident on 5th April 2021, a fire broke out following a
routine fuel transfer operation, which overflowed into the port
engine room exhaust ventilation casing and port engine room of the
Bahamas-registered multi-purpose vessel MPV Everest, while
operating in the Southern Ocean on route from Mawson Station in
Antarctica to Hobart, Australia Engine room fire on board MPV
Everest, Southern Ocean on 5 April 2021 (atsb.gov.au).. It was
extinguished after 2.5 hours by the ship’s crew using the engine
room water mist fixed fire-extinguishing system. There were no
casualties and no pollution of the sea, however there was extensive
damage to the port engine room, including power generation
equipment and machinery. Watercraft and associated equipment on
the deck were also destroyed. The subsequent Australian Transport
Safety Bureau (ASTB) investigation identified a number of
shortcomings, including (among others):
a lack of engine room fire drills; 
a lack of compliance with international regulations and
classification society rules;
a lack of preparation for the challenges of operations in the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica; 
the ship’s safety management system was not effectively
implemented, nor was it sufficiently mature for operations in the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica; 
ineffective pre-charter due diligence.
The report acknowledges that the COVID-19 pandemic had “posed
significant and unprecedented challenges to the maritime industry
in general and to seafarers in particular”; however, the report also
acknowledges that if the vessel had been abandoned, a successful
outcome was far from assured due to factors such as distance,
weather, and availability of suitable search and rescue options.
Once again, it would be valuable to consider if the short-comings
that contributed to this incident are relevant in terms of Chapter 7
on Fire Safety / Protection of Part IA or other chapters of the Polar
Code. 
New IMO guidance on the reduction of underwater noise from
shipping
Since the Polar Code took effect in January 2017, there have been a
number of new developments which require the Polar Code to be
updated. These include some developments specific to the
protection of the Arctic, but also important developments including
the adoption by the IMO of the Revised Guidelines for the reduction
of underwater noise from shipping (MEPC.1/Circ.906) - relevant to
reducing underwater noise from ships in all oceans, including the
Antarctic. In order to address barriers to the uptake of the Revised
Guidelines, an Action Plan has been prepared and endorsed and will
be discussed in further detail later in 2024 by the IMO’s Marine
Environment Protection Committee. It includes a proposal that a
reference to the Revised Guidelines on underwater noise be added
to the Polar Code Part IIB. The Action Plan also notes the relevance
of these Revised Guidelines to the polar regions and recommends
that polar operators take them into consideration and implement
them, as appropriate.
Recommendations
ASOC welcomes the inclusion of work related to implementation of
the Polar Code in the ATCM’s Strategic Work Plan and looks
forward to reviewing the shared experiences of implementing the
Polar Code. ASOC also recognises the importance of sharing
information and best practices in cooperation with Arctic States in
implementing the Polar Code.
Work on the harmonised implementation of the Polar Code
continues at the IMO and within the Arctic Council framework.
ASOC believes that it is important that Antarctic Treaty Parties are
also proactive in driving forward future work on harmonised
implementation of the Polar Code, including the review of elements
of the Code, and possible additional work on strengthening of the
Polar Code requirements.
With this in mind, ASOC urges ATPs to:
bring forward the Southern Ocean shared experience, best practice
and lessons learnt to the 2025 ATCM, future ATCMs, and to future
sessions of the IMO Maritime Safety Committee, and
contribute to Arctic Council projects aimed at achieving harmonised
implementation of the Polar Code where possible, including:
participating in the Arctic Shipping Best Practice Information
Forum;
providing their analysis of the interpretation of the Polar Code; and
building experience based on the use of the Polar Operational
Limitation Assessment Risk Indexing System (POLARIS) used for
assessing ice operational risk.
