ASOC perspectives on the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and non-governmental
activities
ASOC perspectives on the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and non-governmental
activities
Summary
A number of ATCPs have submitted working papers to ATCM 46
under Agenda Item 18 – Development of a Tourism Framework that
contain useful suggestions relevant to the planned discussions at
ATCM 46. ASOC supports many of these suggestions, including in
the areas of the structure and content of the framework, the general
principles that guide the framework as a whole, the management of
visitors, growth and diversification, monitoring, and interim
measures. Above all, ASOC encourages the development of a
framework that is based on the precautionary approach and
prioritizes environmental protection; that creates a system that is
effective at multiple scales (from individual sites to regions) and for
multiple modes of tourism; and that institutes a robust monitoring
program for activities and their environmental impacts.
Introduction
A number of ATCPs have submitted working papers to ATCM 46
under Agenda Item 18 – Development of a Tourism Framework that
are relevant to the planned discussions at ATCM 46 (Table 1). ASOC
thanks all of the proponents of these papers for providing useful
documents to guide these critical discussions. In this paper, ASOC
seeks to present some initial responses on selected aspects of these
papers. These responses are not intended to be exhaustive and do
not highlight every issue of importance. These discussions are only
just beginning, and ASOC looks forward to further, more detailed
exchanges on the elements that should be included in the
comprehensive framework.
Structure and content of the framework
WP003 Suggestions for a framework structure To achieve both
brevity and clarity, we will refer to papers by their number and an
abbreviated form of their titles. provides initial draft text for a
possible framework structure, but remains open as to the “final
agreed legal status or form of a Tourism Framework.” WP060
Considerations on…ATCM WG3 suggests that the framework should
not be a separate Convention and recommends instead that new
Measures be adopted on the basis of recommendations from
WG003. This kind of flexibility is necessary in these early stages of
discussion, and ASOC encourages ATCPs to remain open to different
options. The final structure, however, should include significant
legally-binding elements to ensure its effectiveness and
enforceability.
Additionally, although negotiating definitions can often be time-
consuming, ASOC supports the suggestion of WP004 Suggestions for
additional elements, that definitions of key terms such as
“competent authority shopping,” “other non-governmental
activities,” and “tourism activities” would be helpful to include as
these terms will be critical to how the framework will be
implemented in practice, and it is essential for all ATCPs to share a
common interpretation.
The consideration of specific tourism topics, as outlined in WP058
Beginning the development…could be useful to underscore certain
matters that need special attention, however this thematic approach
should complement and not substitute a more comprehensive
approach.
General principles
Several of the working papers submitted under this agenda item
contain useful suggestions for general principles that should guide
discussions on the framework and the contents of the framework.
Both WP 004 Suggestions for additional elements and WP 024
Matters for consideration mention the need for a framework based
on precaution. In ASOC’s view, a precautionary approach is
extremely important and should guide all elements of the
comprehensive framework so that it can manage the environmental
impacts of existing tourism as well as prevent the development of
new impacts.
ASOC also supports the suggestion in WP004 Suggestions for
additional elements that ATCPs should consider establishing spatial
or temporal limits on the tourist season as a general principle. It
will be easier to manage tourism in the long run if there are clear
limits for the activity as a whole.
Finally, ASOC strongly agrees with the suggestion in WP 024
Matters for consideration that the “framework should ensure
commercial tourism activities are managed in a way that…is
consistent with the values for which Antarctica is protected.” A
focus on this kind of tourism may help prevent the development of
types and modes of tourism that have higher impacts and are more
difficult to manage.
Spatial management
Several of the working papers suggest that the framework should
consider how to manage visitor numbers and their possible impacts
at visitation sites. ASOC agrees that these are primary questions for
the framework to resolve. WP024 Matters for consideration suggests
that different regions may require different management
approaches. ASOC agrees with this, noting that while it is important
for the framework to address tourism throughout the whole
Antarctic region, most activities take place in the Antarctic
Peninsula region. Parties should pay special attention to the
management of this area on a regional scale, including through a
process of systematic conservation planning (SCP). For a recent SCP
analysis see: Lee, J. R., Shaw, J. D., Ropert-Coudert, Y., Terauds, A.,
& Chown, S. L. (2024). Conservation features of the terrestrial
Antarctic Peninsula. Ambio, 10.1007/s13280-024-02009-4.
Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13280-024-02009-4 At the same time, new vectors of tourism
growth may appear in other regions in the future, for instance
through air travel, and these developments will need a separate
approach. SCP should take into consideration not only the spatial
planning of human activities but also the “needs” of biodiversity
and the maintenance of wilderness integrity (see ASOC paper
submitted to this meeting).
In terms of managing individual sites, the suggestion in WP004
Suggestions for additional elements to include provisions applicable
to all landing sites, such the capping number of visits in a day, or
prohibiting landings at sites with no site regulations is very
constructive as well as practical. While ASOC agrees with the
suggestion in WP058 Beginning the development… that site
guidelines for the most visited sites should be updated, ASOC also
notes that there are hundreds of sites currently in use. Developing
overarching rules for sites can contribute to
environmental protection without requiring Parties to invest the
resources necessary to monitor and manage visitation at individual
sites.
In this vein, the suggestion of WP024 Matters for consideration…
that the framework should employ a diversity of measures,
including “regional arrangements, protection of inviolate areas, and
mechanisms to manage potential use of new sites” is also helpful. It
is likely that a combination of generally applicable rules plus more
specific restrictions will be required. Parties should be flexible in
creating a system that is effective at multiple scales – from
individual sites to entire regions. This could involve the creation of
new types of management areas as discussed in WP060
Considerations on …ATCM WG3. In general terms, site
management, (new) site recruitment, and area protection and
management are closely related, and should be part of the tourism
management framework.
Diversification
Diversification in the tourist industry also presents challenges in
terms of management, but in previous discussions, it has proved
difficult to reach consensus on how to categorize activities. The
suggestion in WP004 Suggestions for additional elements to develop
two lists of all activities that are allowed, one of which is subject to
more restrictions than the other, could be a way to resolve this issue
while ensuring that activities with a greater risk of impact are more
limited. Based on the inherent dynamism of tourism, we suggest
that those lists need to be illustrative/open ended rather than
comprehensive/closed, and that competent authorities should use
them as the basis of their assessment.
Additionally, Parties should consider how the framework can
encourage lower impact forms of tourism – including possibly slow
tourism modalities - and prevent types of tourism with a higher
environmental impact and footprint from developing, as highlighted
in WP024 Matters for consideration.
Monitoring
Monitoring is another key task mentioned by several papers (WP
004, WP 024, WP 058, WP 060). ASOC agrees that the institution of
a robust monitoring program – both for activities and potential
impacts - is an essential element if the framework is to be successful
in the long term. The ATCM should receive regular scientific
information and data on potential impacts from tourism, including
cumulative impacts, as highlighted in WP060 Considerations on…
ATCM WG3. Dedicated funding will be required to support effective
and consistent monitoring, and ASOC supports the suggestion in
WP004 Suggestions for additional elements and WP 060
Considerations on…ATCM WG3 that Parties should consider
including a mandatory fee for visitors in the framework.
Entry into force of outstanding tourism Measures and adoption of
additional urgent measures
ASOC agrees with WP 60 Considerations on…ATCM WG3 that it
would be beneficial for outstanding Measures to enter into force as
soon as possible, and before the comprehensive framework has been
adopted, so that these can be considered legally binding. Having
these important Measures finally in force would improve the
regulatory structure for tourism in the short term while longer-term
provisions are being discussed.
In parallel, the application of additional urgent measures (in the
same vein as ATCM Resolution 4, 2023) could be revisited by the
ATCM while a comprehensive framework is being considered.
Conclusions
ASOC is encouraged by the submission of several detailed and
constructive WPs to ATCM 46 that highlight important elements for
consideration in the comprehensive framework discussions. ASOC
looks forward to seeing these ideas developed further and
subsequently incorporated into the framework.
Table 1 - ATCM Agenda Item 18 Development of a Tourism
Framework: Overview of documents submitted to this agenda item.
NUMBER
TITLE
Shortened title
SUBMITTED BY
Comments
WP003
Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area - Suggestions for a Framework Structure
Suggestions for a framework…
Finland France Germany India Netherlands United Kingdom
Includes Attachment 1: Suggestions for a Framework Structure
WP004
Comprehensive and Consistent Framework for the Regulation of
Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic
Treaty area - Suggestions for Additional Elements to be Included in
a Tourism Framework
Suggestions for additional elements…
Finland France Germany India Netherlands United Kingdom
Includes Attachment 1: Additional elements for discussion
WP024
Matters for consideration in the development of a comprehensive
and consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and non-
governmental activities
Matters for consideration…
Australia
WP058
Proposal for Beginning the Development of a Framework for the
Regulation of Tourism and Other Non-Governmental Activities in
Antarctica
Beginning the development…
United States
WP060
Considerations on the Work of ATCM WG3
Considerations on … ATCM WG3
Argentina
Original in Spanish with English version provided by author.
WP063
Ключевые элементы всеобъемлющей единообразной системы
для антарктического туризма
n/a
Russian Federation
Original in Russian, no official English translation available at the
time of writing this IP and thus we have not been able to include it
in this analysis.
