Report by WMO on the implementation of the International Year of
Glaciers’ Preservation 2025 and the World Glaciers Day
Report by WMO on the implementation of the International Year of
Glaciers’ Preservation 2025 and the World Glaciers Day
Summary
Earth’s cryosphere is impacted both by a warming climate and
changing hydrological cycle. Particularly, retreating glaciers in
mountain regions pose a serious threat to freshwater availability
and trigger flooding and geohazards. In December 2022, the United
Nations (UN) General Assembly adopted resolution A/RES/77/158
to declare 2025 as the International Year of Glaciers’ Preservation
(IYGP 2025), accompanied by the proclamation that March 21st of
each year will be the “World Day for Glaciers”, starting in 2025.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) were invited to facilitate the implementation of the
International Year and observance of the World Day. This paper
provides an update on ongoing progress to date and on next steps.
Background
Climate change and an associated accelerating hydrological cycle is
transforming Earth’s cryosphere with impacts such as retreating
glaciers, melting ice sheets and thawing permafrost becoming more
and more visible. These cryospheric processes have substantial
environmental and societal consequences in snow-dominated and
glacier-fed river basins in the mountain and polar regions.
Freshwater availability and risk of geohazards (e.g., glacial lake
outburst floods and landslides) emerge as significant threats in
these fragile habitats. Hence, it is of utmost importance that
effective means of raising awareness and facilitating actionable and
sustainable measures be explored for preservation of glaciers. In
this respect, intergovernmental processes led by the United Nations
(UN) have a large role to play in creating coordinated momentum
to address the urgency of the matter.
In December 2022, the UN General Assembly (UNGA) adopted the
resolution A/RES/77/158 https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3998543?v=pdf to declare 2025 as the International Year
of Glaciers’ Preservation (IYGP 2025), accompanied by the
proclamation that March 21st of each year will be the World Day
for Glaciers, starting in 2025. The World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) were invited to facilitate the
implementation of the International Year and observance of the
World Day.
Progress update
For facilitating the implementation of the IYGP 2025, WMO and
UNESCO co-organized, in July 2023, a brainstorming session with
100+ partners from 16 countries from research organizations,
international and UN organizations, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders at the UNESCO headquarters
(Paris, France). A roadmap towards 2025 was co-developed (in the
form of a concept note) which covers identified key activities, their
expected outcomes, and a coordination mechanism. The latter
includes Task Forces to lead specific topics
and an Advisory Board to oversee the implementation of the
International Year and the World Day for Glaciers in 2025. Among
the documents drafted was the Terms of Reference for these two
bodies.
In 2023, WMO and UNESCO co-promoted the preservation of
glaciers through several international events and intergovernmental
conferences. During the One Planet-Polar Summit 2023 (Paris,
November 2023), which was the first international One Planet
Summit dedicated to glaciers and poles, early ideas of concept and
roadmap were discussed. The Cryosphere Pavilion at the UN
Climate Change Conference in Dubai (COP 28, December 2023)
hosted a session dedicated to the implementation of the IYGP and
the World Day for Glaciers in 2025. The discussions during the
Group of Friends of Glaciers meeting held along the sidelines of
COP 28 further supported stakeholder engagement and informed
IYGP 2025 planning.
The Advisory Board is co-led by WMO and UNESCO to provide
secretarial support. We are currently in the process of establishing
the full Advisory Board, which will include the Task Force leads
from partner organizations. Following the concept note and
identified activities and interests, a “Call for Expression of Interest
for the IYGP 2025 Task Forces” was launched in December 2023. A
kick-off meeting for the Task Forces was held online in January
2024 where the results of the call was presented and draft
workplans for the Task Forces were introduced to interested
organizations. Based on the expression of interest received the four
Task Forces have been established as follows:
TF-1: Global Campaign for International Year of Glaciers'
Preservation 2025 (Lead: FAO Mountain Partnership Secretariat)
TF-2: International Conference on Glaciers' Preservation, Regional
Workshops and Capacity Building (Lead: ICIMOD-International
Center for Integrated Mountain Development)
TF-3: Research and Monitoring Initiatives (Lead: University of
Saskatchewan)
TF-4: Policy Advocacy, Partnerships and Resource Mobilization
(Lead: ICCI- International Cryosphere Climate Initiative)
The open-ended call for Task Force members (via an online form)
remains active to welcome applications on a continuous basis.
Future steps
The planning efforts are currently ongoing with regular meetings of
the Advisory Board and the Task Forces which commenced in
spring 2024. The Advisory Board and the Task Forces are currently
working on design of next steps to support the implementation of
the International Year and observance of the World Day.
There will be contributions to relevant publications (e.g., UN World
Water Development Report – “Water Towers: Mountains and
Glaciers”) and UN events (e.g., the High-Level Political Forum, July
2024; the UN General Assembly, September 2024; COP29,
November 2024). Synergies will be developed with the UN-Water
Task Force on World Water Day 2025, co-coordinated by UNESCO
and WMO, to implement the 2025 World Water Day campaign
dedicated to glaciers, as well as with the Tajikistan delegation for
the Dushanbe Glacier Forum (June 2024) and the International
Conference on Glaciers’ Preservation 2025 (Dushanbe, Tajikistan).
WMO, through this paper, encourages members of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting to actively engage over the coming
months in the initiatives related to the UN IYGP 2025.
