Scientific production of the Brazilian Antarctic Program
(PROANTAR)
Scientific production of the Brazilian Antarctic Program
(PROANTAR)
Abstract
The Brazilian Antarctic Program aims to produce scientific
knowledge about Antarctica and its relations with the Earth system,
including the cryosphere, oceans, atmosphere, and biosphere.
Considering its 40 years of uninterrupted contribution to Antarctic
Science, the research analyzes the bibliometric indicators of
scientific production of scientists involved in research funded by the
Program and related to Antarctica. Data were collected from the
Lens, Web of Science, and Scopus databases. A set of 1,242
scientific documents was analyzed, showing that scientific
production has grown over the years. Biology is the main publishing
area. Most studies were published in the Polar Biology journals. The
institution with the most publications is the University of São Paulo.
Co-authorship between two or more authors is preferred by
scientists, revealing a high rate of scientific collaboration. The
strongest institutional collaboration is between the University of
São Paulo and the São Paulo State University Júlio de Mesquita
Filho, followed by the University of São Paulo and the Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul. Considering the connection
between countries, the highest number of collaborations is between
Brazil and the United States of America.
Introduction
The survey of PROANTAR's scientific production based on related
production indicators is presented using bibliometric techniques.
The data used were obtained from the Brazilian Navy Archive,
public data from the National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development, the Lattes Curriculum, ORCiD, and the
Global Research Identifier Database as data sources for identifying
program researchers, totaling 3660 names. The Lens, Scopus, and
Web of Science databases were used to collect data on identified
scientific production. The analysis presents a total of 1242 articles.
The year 2021 is the most significant, with a total of 146
publications. Biology is the most productive area with 401
publications in this analysis. The scientific journal Polar Biology,
from Germany, is the journal with the highest number of
publications, totaling 87. The University of São Paulo stands out
with a total of 374 publications. The most frequent first word is
Antarctic, with a frequency of 1410. The main collaboration
relationship occurs between Brazil and the United States with a
frequency of 185. The analysis revealed the solid and strategic
development of the program, its maturity, and the significant
contribution of Brazilian science to Antarctic research. The
indicators and their contextualization contribute to reflecting the
program's path towards consolidating scientific information
management to promote scientific policies.
General Description
The scientific production of the Brazilian Antarctic Program is
analyzed based on production indicators and related links, for
which an exploratory and bibliometric research is executed.
Production indicators of the 1242 publications identified as
resulting from research developed within PROANTAR are
presented. The analysis of the redistribution of publications by year
of publication reveals that the investments planned and
systematized through CNPq, since 1991, directly impact the growth
of scientific production, especially in scientific articles presenting
research from projects developed within PROANTAR. Furthermore,
the growth of investment value directly impacted the increase in
the program's scientific production. The distribution of publications
among the areas of knowledge developing Antarctic research
recognizes Biology as the most productive, followed by Geology and
thirdly Oceanography. PROANTAR funding data show that the
areas of Exact and Earth Sciences and Biological Sciences are the
two major areas that received the most investment between 2002
and 2018, which is reflected in the scientific production of projects
funded by the program.
Graph 1. Total of resources (capital and operational expenses)
committed by major area of knowledge between 2002 and 2018.
Source: Araujo, 2024
Graph 2. Total publications distributed among the 20 most
productive areas of knowledge. Source: Araujo, 2024
The most recurring sources of information are scientific journals,
and the source with the highest number of publications in the
corpus analyzed in this report is the scientific journal Polar Biology
(ISSN 1432-2056), followed by the scientific journal Antarctic
Science (ISSN 1365-2079).
The types of co-authorship established among the authors of
research funded by PROANTAR demonstrate significant scientific
collaboration through co-authorship practices among Antarctic
science researchers. There is also evidence of significant
international and inter-institutional collaboration in the context of
Brazilian research conducted in Antarctica.
The main collaboration relationship between countries occurs
between Brazil (BR) and the United States (US), followed by the
relationship between Brazil and Great Britain (GB) and between
Brazil and Chile (CH). It is also possible to visualize Brazil's
relationship with other countries such as France, Germany,
Australia, Argentina, Spain, Italy, and Portugal.
Graph 3. Collaboration network among the countries of origin of
the affiliation institutions of the authors of the publications
analyzed in the corpus. Source: Araujo, 2024
For the planning of scientific policies, it is relevant to identify and
systematize information on funding and scientific production to
support decision-making for the formulation of public policies.
Bibliographical References:
ARAÚJO, Paula Carina; PINHO, R. D. ; KALED, A. C. C. . Analysis of
the scientific production of the Brazilian Antarctic Program
(PROANTAR). EM QUESTÃO, v. 30, p. 129562-129562, 2024.
