Unravelling the Mysteries of Antarctic Lakes: International
Collaboration on Scientific Exploration (India - Japan - Belgium)
Unravelling the Mysteries of Antarctic Lakes: International
Collaboration on Scientific Exploration between India-Japan-
Belgium
Summary
In Antarctica, components of the cryosphere and terrestrial and
marine ecosystems are significantly impacted by climate change,
and these changes will influence climate impact drivers globally.
Paleoecological archives situated at the interface between the
continent and the Southern Ocean, such as lake and coastal marine
sediments, provide important information on past changes in
relative sea level, ice sheet dynamics, and climate, and their effect
on biota in ice-free ecosystems along the Antarctic coastline. This
information is critical to assess the extent and pace of natural
variability in the cryosphere and Antarctic ecosystems. However,
accessing ice-free regions along the Antarctic coastline comes with
logistical challenges. International collaboration is therefore
essential to retrieve samples from sedimentary archives such as
lakes and coastal shallow marine basins in these regions which are
used to comprehensively study paleoclimate and paleoecological
changes. As such, these collaborations further our scientific
knowledge, but also promote the sharing of resources and samples
and data exchange. Successful joint expeditions between nations
like India, Japan, and Belgium demonstrate the effectiveness of
these collaborative efforts for advancing Antarctic research and
preserving its scientific legacy.
Introduction
Global mean surface temperatures have risen over the last 50 years
due to human influence on the climate system (IPCC WGI 2021). In
Antarctica, surface warming trends have shown high spatial and
decadal variability, with some areas showing a warming trend, such
as the Western and Northern Antarctic Peninsula and West
Antarctica, while other areas experienced a warming or cooling
trend or no significant change in temperature at all (IPCC WGI
2021). While at present much of the warming in Antarctica is
absorbed by the Southern Ocean, models and ice core data suggest
that the temperature in the Antarctic will rise 2 to 3 times the
global average in response to present atmospheric greenhouse gas
(GHG) concentrations by 2100 (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2013; IPCC
WGI 2021). This will affect the stability of glaciers, ice shelves and
the ice sheets as already observed in the Antarctic Peninsula and
the West Antarctic during the past decades (Rignot et al. 2019;
Miles & Bingham 2024). Moreover, temperature increases are
already affecting terrestrial and marine ecosystems in some regions
and have resulted in range shifts, population declines or increases,
and species replacement (Chown et al. 2022). An accelerated
temperature increase is expected to increasingly affect Antarctic
terrestrial and marine ecosystems in the near future (Robinson
2022).
Lake and coastal marine sediments deposited in basins situated at
the Antarctic continental margin are excellent natural repositories
to study past changes in climate, relative sea level, ice sheet and
ice-shelf dynamics, and their effects on biota in these ecosystems
(Verleyen et al., 2011). Particularly, lacustrine systems have shown
their potential to provide information on past natural variability
because these often pristine and unique ecosystems act as “sentinels
of change” (Williamson et al., 2009) and “early warning systems”
(Hodgson & Smol, 2008), because of their thermal proximity to the
freezing point, which applies critical limits on environmental
responses, including ice extent, snow cover, light availability, and
albedo (Quayle et al., 2002; Mahesh et al., 2019). These responses
are subsequently preserved in the sediments deposited in these
lakes making them important natural archives for reconstructing
past-climate changes beyond 40 kyr. Combining these long-term
climate change reconstructions with fossil data on biological
communities may provide information on the response of these
often unique biota (e.g., Tytgat et al., 2023) to future climate and
environmental changes. Finally, the melting of parts of the
Antarctic Ice Sheets since the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) has
resulted in glacio-isostatic adjustment and the formation of lakes
which were previously marine sedimentary basins situated below
sea level (e.g., Verleyen et al. 2020). These shifts from marine to
lacustrine conditions, and vice versa, are preserved in the sediments
in these basins, and provide important geological constraints on
past changes in relative sea level and ice sheet dynamics (e.g.,
Watcham et al. 2011; Verleyen et al., 2017; Mahesh et al., 2021).
The recent collapse of several Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves has
been linked to rapid regional atmospheric warming during the
twentieth century (Miles & Bingham 2024). Interestingly, Holocene
ice-shelf behavior can be reconstructed from sedimentary records
preserved in epishelf lakes, which are systems bounded by the
continent or an island on one side and an ice shelf on the other
(Bentley et al., 2005).
These sedimentary archives are typically found in ice-free regions,
which are also called oases. There are more than 10 of such major
ice-free regions across the continental margin of East Antarctica,
including Schirmacher Oasis, Showa Oasis, Amery Oasis, Larsemann
Hills, Rauer Group, Vestfold Hills, Bunger Hills etc. It is logistically
an arduous task for any one country to access all these regions
which are separated by thousands of kilometers. For developing
relative sea level curves and reconstructing the regional
paleoclimate and deglaciation history, there is a need to have
records from all these ice-free regions. The only way this can be
achieved is through international collaboration between nations
working in Antarctica. An example of such an international
collaboration between India, Japan and Belgium is given below.
This joint initiative has played a pivotal role in exploring and
sampling these enigmatic Antarctic lakes, and fostering scientific
breakthroughs and cooperation.
International Collaboration on Scientific Exploration:
Scientific Collaboration: Cooperative efforts among nations
transcend geopolitical boundaries, fostering trust and cooperation
in Antarctica's politically neutral environment. The National Centre
for Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR) – a nodal agency to
promote, operate and execute India’s Antarctic national program -
has over decades fostered strong collaborations with international
partners. This has led to strengthening scientific collaboration,
capacity building and joint expeditions in Antarctica. Joint projects
were submitted by Ghent University – Belgium and NCPOR – India
to The Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) and the programme
“Belgian Research Action through Interdisciplinary Networks"
(BRAIN-be) of the Belgian Science Policy Office (BELSPO). This
collaboration has led to the initiation of joint studies carried out in
Antarctic lakes. Further, a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) was
signed on 29-October-2018 between the Director of NCPOR and the
Director General of the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR)
of Japan for cooperative research and exchange of personnel. Under
this agreement, a Letter of Intent was signed on 24-May-2019 as an
outcome of a meeting which was held at NCPOR. Scientists both
from NIPR and NCPOR participated and discussed the probable
outcomes from the MoC and committed to jointly develop a close
working relationship in order to achieve the following aims:
To cooperate in the study of polar sciences by coordinating and
sharing resources and data;
To coordinate and integrate mutual intellectual activities to enable
more efficient operations and better utilization of resources;
To explore opportunities for cooperation and possible collaboration
in polar activities related to logistics.
Shared Resources and Expertise: Pooling resources, technology, and
expertise allows us (India-Japan-Belgium) to overcome logistical
challenges and maximize research capabilities. We have currently
shared sediment coring equipment which can be operated under
different
environmental settings. We employ a suite of state-of-the-art in-situ
measurements such as an ROV (Remotely Operated Vehicle to map
coastal bathymetry to identify basins for retrieving sediment cores),
a sub-bottom profiler (to map lake bathymetry and sediment
deposits) etc. The opportunity to share our resources and expertise
has enabled this group to achieve significant success in field
campaigns.
Data Sharing and Open Access: Open exchange of data, samples and
findings promotes transparency and accelerates scientific progress,
which enabled us to contribute and benefit from Antarctic
exploration. We have recently published our basic research data in
the Polar Data Journal (Suganuma et al., 2024) and we will follow
this momentum in the future.
Outcomes of Collaborative Initiatives
Field Expedition 1 – Season 2019-20 at Schirmacher oasis, Central
Dronning Maud Land: Under the MoC between India and Japan, a
joint field expedition was successfully launched at Schirmacher
Oasis (East Antarctica) during the austral summer of 2019. A
sediment coring expedition SONIC “Schirmacher Oasis Nippon
(Japan) India Coring Expedition” was launched successfully during
2019 as part of the 39 Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica in
which 2 members from India (NCPOR & MAHE) and 3 members
from Japan (NIPR, Chiba University & Shimane University) took
part. The Indian Station Maitri was the base during our expedition
period. A suite of sediment cores was collected from 10 lakes along
with soil samples and rock samples/erratics. The primary focus was
to reconstruct the deglaciation history of Schirmacher Oasis, and, in
collaboration with Belgian scientists, to study the colonization and
succession dynamics of lake biota during the Holocene.
Field Expedition 2 - Season 2021-22 at Showa Oasis, Lutzow-Holm
Bay: A second field expedition to collect sediment cores was carried
out during the austral summer of 2022 at Showa Oasis, Sôya Coast,
with Syowa Station as our base camp for the expedition. We carried
out coring campaigns at different ice-free regions such as Ongul
Islands, Langhovde, Rundvagshetta and Strandnibba. Over 28 sites
were selected for coring, while a total of ~ 68 m of sediment cores
was retrieved collectively.
Field Expedition 3 – Planned for Season 2024-25 at Larsemann
Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land: Another major coring expedition is
currently proposed for the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Similar
to the earlier expedition, this would be a multi-national effort
between Indian-Japan-Belgium. The primary focus would be: (a)
Reconstructing glacial-interglacial climate variability from long
sediment cores, (b) Reconstruct the deglaciation history of the
Larsemann Hills from Surface Exposure Dating, (c) Developing
Relative Sea Level curves spanning the Late Pleistocene, and (d)
study the past response of lacustrine biota to long-term
paleoenvironmental and paleoclimate changes.
Field Expedition 4 - Proposed for the season 2026-27 at
Schirmacher Oasis and Untersee Oasis, Wohlthat Mountains. In
continuation of our successful expedition at Schirmacher Oasis
during the season of 2019, we revealed evidence of the presence of
longer records of sedimentary deposits in a few lakes, which could
provide information on past climate changes during previous
interglacials. Such records are very rare in Antarctica. Considering
these data gaps, it is important to retrieve long sediment cores
spanning multiple glacial-interglacial cycles which can provide
better insights into physical and biological responses of these ice-
free regions.
Challenges and Future Directions:
Logistical Hurdles: the remote location, harsh climate, and limited
infrastructure pose significant challenges to Antarctic exploration,
and require innovative solutions and sustained international
support. Our collaborative efforts have enabled us to pool resources
and technology to overcome new challenges during field
campaigns, achieve targeted sampling, and explore new ventures.
Environmental Concerns: Balancing scientific exploration with
environmental conservation is essential to minimize the impact of
human activities on Antarctica's fragile ecosystems. International
scientific collaboration, including the exchange of samples
retrieved, allows to limit the number of sampling activities, which
leads to a more limited environmental impact. In addition, all rules,
codes of conduct and guidelines laid down and recommended by
the ATCM are followed to keep human footprint to a minimum in
the campaign area (e.g., SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for
Geosciences Field Research Activities in Antarctica 2021).
Emerging Technologies: Advances in robotics, remote sensing, and
autonomous instrumentation offer new opportunities to explore
Antarctic lakes more efficiently and safely, driving future
collaborative research efforts.
Conclusions: Exploring Antarctic lakes is a testament to the power
of international collaboration for furthering scientific knowledge.
By uniting scientific expertise, resources, coordinated efforts, shared
knowledge, samples and technology, and international cooperation
efforts, nations around the world can continue to push the
boundaries of knowledge, and inspire next generations to come in
the pursuit of understanding and preserving Antarctica's invaluable
scientific legacy. Our effort is a good example for the achievements
that can be made through such collaborations. What we only could
achieve in decades can be done now in few years through such
collaborations. We invite any interested parties to contact us if they
are interested in working in these ice-free regions.
References:
Bentley, M. J., Hodgson, D. A., Sugden, D. E., Roberts, S. J., Smith,
J. A., Leng, M. J. & Bryant, C. 2005. Early Holocene Retreat of the
George VI Ice Shelf, Antarctic Peninsula. Geology 33, 173–176.
Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P.,
Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II &
Grant, S.M. (Eds.) (2022) Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
Hodgson, D.A. & Smol, J.P. 2008. High-latitude Paleolimnology. In:
Polar Lakes and Rivers. Limnology of Arctic and Antarctic Aquatic
Ecosystems. Ed. Vincent, W.F. and Laybourn-Parry, J. Oxford
University Press. pp. 43-65.
IPCC 2021. Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Eds. V. Masson-
Delmotte et al.) (IPCC, Geneva, 2021).
Mahesh, B.S., Warrier, A.K., Avadhani, A., Mohan, R. & Tiwari, M.
2019. Impact of Antarctic climate during the Late Quaternary:
Records from Zub Lake sedimentary archives from Schirmacher
Hills, East Antarctica. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 514, 398-406.
Mahesh, B.S., Nair, A., Ghadi, P, Warrier, A.K. & Mohan, R. 2021.
Holocene sedimentology in an isolation basin in the Larsemann
Hills, East Antarctica. Polar Science 30, 100729.
Masson-Delmotte, V., Schulz, M., et al. 2013. Information from
Paleoclimate Archives. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (Eds. T. F. Stocker et al.) (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).
Miles, B.W.J. & Bingham, R.G. 2024. Progressive unanchoring of
Antarctic ice shelves since 1973. Nature 626, 785–791.
Moss, B. 2012. Cogs in the endless machine: Lakes, climate change
and nutrient cycles: A review. Science of the Total Environment
434, 130-142.
Quayle, W.C., Peck, L.S., Peat, H., Ellis-Evans, J.C. & Harrigan, P.R.
2002. Extreme responses to climate change in Antarctic lakes.
Science 295, 645.
Rignot, E., Mouginot, J., Scheuchl, B., van den Broeke, M., van
Wessem, M.J. & Morlighem, M. 2019. Four decades of Antarctic Ice
Sheet mass balance from 1979-2017. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116,
1095-1103.
Robinson, S. 2022. Climate change and extreme events are
changing the biology of Polar Regions. Global Change Biology 28,
5861-6113.
SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field
Research Activities in Antarctica 2021. https://scar.org/
~documents/policy/codes-of-conduct/coc-geosciences?
layout=default
Suganuma, Y., Mahesh, BS., Katsuki, K., Warrier, A.K., Kaneda, H.,
Ishiwa, T., Ikehara, M. & Mohan, R. 2024. High resolution scanning
and lithological data of lake sedimentary cores from the
Schirmacher Oasis, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Polar
Data Journal 8, 1-9.
Tytgat, B., Verleyen, E., Sweetlove, M., Van den Berge, K., Pinseel,
E., Hodgson, D.A., Chown, S.L., Sabbe, K., Wilmotte, A., Willems,
A., members of the Polar lake Sampling Consortium & Vyverman,
W. 2023. Metabarcoding unveils distinct evolutionary histories of
polar lake microbiomes. Science Advances 9, 10.1126/
sciadv.ade7130.
Verleyen, E., Hodgson, D.A., Sabbe, K., Cremer, H., Emslie, S.D.,
Gibson, J., Hall, B., Imura, S., Kudoh, S., Marshall, G.J., McMinn,
A., Melles, M., Newman, L., Roberts, D., Roberts, S.J., Singh, S.M.,
Sterken, M., Tavernier, I., Verkulich, S., Van de Vyver, E.,
Nieuwenhuyze, W.V., Wagner, B. & Vyverman, W. 2011. Post-
glacial regional climate variability along the East Antarctic coastal
margin - Evidence from shallow marine and coastal terrestrial
records. Earth Science Reviews 104, 199-212.
Verleyen, E, Tavernier I, Hodgson D.A., Whitehouse P., Kudoh S,
Imura S., Heirman K., Bentley M.J., Roberts S.J., De Batist M.,
Sabbe K. & Vyverman W. 2017. Ice sheet retreat and glacio-isostatic
adjustment in Lützow-Holm Bay, East Antarctica. Quaternary
Science Reviews 169, 85-98.
Verleyen, E., Hodgson, D.A. & Vyverman, W. 2020. Glacio-isostatic
adjustment and relative sea level changes in Antarctica. In: Oliva,
M. and Fernandez, J. R. (eds), Past Antarctica. Elsevier, pp. 109–
124.
Watcham, E.P., Bentley, M.J., Hodgson, D.A., Roberts, S.J.,
Fretwell, P.T., Lloyd, J.M., Larter, R.D., Whitehouse, P.L., Leng,
M.J., Monien, P. & Moreton, S.G. 2011. A new Holocene relative sea
level curve for the South Shetland Islands. Antarctica. Quaternary
Science Reviews 30, 3152–3170.
Williamson, C.E., Saros, J.E. & Schindler, D.W. 2009. Sentinels of
change. Science. 323, 887-888.
