Understanding the rapid changes in the frozen parts of our planet
and the related global impacts - A knowledge base compiled at a
high-level event in Oslo, Norway
Understanding the rapid changes in the frozen parts of our planet
and the related global impacts - A knowledge base compiled at a
high-level event in Oslo, Norway
Summary
This IP presents key messages from a high-level event that brought
together cryosphere experts, politicians and decision makers in
Oslo, Norway. Following the theme “The cryosphere under climate
change - Advocating for the frozen surfaces of our planet”
participants exchanged the latest knowledge about the cryosphere.
Rapid and mostly irreversible changes in the cryosphere are
ongoing and every tenth of a degree matters for the future of the
cryosphere, with global impacts. This IP aims to share knowledge
from this important WMO event with the ATCM to raise awareness
about the ongoing changes and their significant, long-term impacts.
Background
In February 2024 Norway hosted the 2024 session of the World
Meteorological Organization’s (WMO) EC Panel on Polar and High
Mountains Observations, Research, and Services (PHORS) in Oslo,
Norway.
PHORS connects cryosphere-related activities within WMO to
external partners and stakeholders. A key responsibility of PHORS
entails to advocate for the cryosphere by raising awareness about
the changes within the cryosphere and the associated global
impacts. This paper summarizes the framing of the PHORS session
discussions and its outcomes (see programme of the event with
links to the presentations in appendix).
Changes in the cryosphere globally
The frozen parts of our planet – known as the cryosphere – are
significantly and irreversibly impacted by our warming climate.
Urgent action to mitigate climate change is needed to avoid the
most devastating outcomes. Every tenth of a degree of warming that
is avoided will enhance our ability to thrive with a changing
cryosphere.
While the cryosphere is primarily found in polar regions and high
mountains, the impacts of changes in the cryosphere are global.
Thawing permafrost, reduced snow cover, melting glaciers,
declining sea ice, and melting of polar ice sheets and ice shelves,
create risks for everyone on the planet. Of particular importance is
the melting of Antarctica’s inland ice, which directly contributes to
sea level rise. While further research is required to provide better
predictions of developments in Antarctica, the available knowledge
already provides a solid basis of understanding to act upon. It is
expected that the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets will be the
main contributor to sea level rise in future and their melting will
proceed for many generations. Effective collaboration is essential to
decrease knowledge gaps and thereby better understand risks,
threats and irreversible impacts of climate change. As the fifth
international polar year is approaching, the Norwegian research
facilities in Antarctica will receive an upgrade to enhance value for
research and international collaboration.
The year 2023 was the warmest year on record, with temperatures
being 1.45 +-0.12°C above the 1850-1900 average. Various new
records of temperatures, sea levels, sea ice and glacier melt, and
changes in water resources were observed in 2023 with severe
socio-economic impacts globally. With each new record being
observed, the world is moving closer to tipping points across the
earth system. Once a tipping point is reached, the changes in the
tipping
system become self-sustained. The Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets are large-scale tipping points that would lead to devastating
sea level rise, in case they are melting completely. Humanity may
approach tipping points sooner than expected, however, the
communication of a specific tipping threshold could give a false
sense of a temperature ‘safe zone’ at which the system is less
vulnerable. However, the effects of climate change in the
cryosphere are already happening rapidly, with implications for
ecosystems and societies, where committed changes will continue to
be relevant for centuries.
Climatic changes in the Arctic are specifically rapid. Over recent
decades the Arctic is warming three to four times faster than the
global average. The Barents area is the Arctic hotspot, the fastest
warming place on the planet. Measurements of permafrost
temperatures in 2023 from Svalbard showed the combined effect of
long-lasting warming and a specifically hot summer in 2023 - the
active layer above the permafrost had thawed down to about 5
metres below the surface. Operational permafrost monitoring
networks that provide real-time data are essential and may assist in
the early detection of permafrost related extremes.
For the glaciers in Svalbard, comparably long observation time
series are available showing that these glaciers are thinning,
retreating and calving more than before. Glaciers elsewhere are
similarly affected by climate change and even at 1.5°C warming, a
nearly complete loss of glaciers in some mid-latitude regions is
expected, with more than 50% of all glaciers to disappear by 2100.
At the current time, melting of glaciers has a comparable impact on
rising sea levels as melting of ice sheets in Antarctica and
Greenland. However, in the longer term, melting in Greenland and
Antarctica will be the larger contributor.
While the Antarctic has been warming slower than the Arctic, the
summer season of 2023 led to significantly lower sea ice extent than
observed before. This also raises the likelihood of a future with
significant ice-shelf melt, including impact on the sea level. Global
collaboration aimed at improving our knowledge and enhancing the
uptake of this knowledge in decision making to foster mitigation
and adaptation will become ever more important as we face further
impacts of changes in Antarctica and beyond.
Our knowledge about changes in the cryosphere is based on
observations collected over decades, but nevertheless polar and
high-mountain regions still lack good observational coverage.
Artificial intelligence may provide an emerging opportunity to
better exploit the satellite data from those regions, however, it also
relies on the availability of large amounts of data. Thus,
measurement providers operating in polar and high-mountain
regions are encouraged to make data openly available.
Global impacts of the changes in the cryosphere
The impacts of changes in the cryosphere are global. Sea level rise
is among the most prominent risks with devastating effects for
populations and entire cultures, specifically in Small Island
Developing States. Less obvious impacts of changes in the
cryosphere are water and food scarcity, geotechnical risks, and
threats to trade, economies and energy sources. Many populations
depend on water that originates from glaciers; a water source that
will become less reliable in future, requiring countries to prepare
and adapt, while also focusing on mitigation of climate change.
To provide an example of how the cryosphere affects low-lying
countries in the Tropics, the challenges faced by Guyana were
presented in a video, see here. A specific risk for Guyana is
associated with storm surges in combination with rising sea levels,
endangering the food supply from currently fertile regions. To
ensure that Guyana, and other low-lying nations remain
economically viable and thereby stable, we need to mitigate climate
change and invest in ongoing research targeting the vulnerabilities
of countries most affected by sea level rise.
Thus, what happens in the cryosphere has global impact. Some
further changes in the cryosphere are unavoidable, due to CO2 that
has already been emitted. However, decision makers have a choice
about the speed of change - for example while we cannot avoid all
sea level rise, decisions taken now will determine when we reach
one metre of sea level rise - in a high emission scenario we could
reach this by 2070, about when generation Z is retiring.
Given what is at stake, it is essential to embed considerations about
the future of the cryosphere in day-to-day decision making at all
levels. The Antarctic Treaty community can play an important role
by raising the profile of the cryosphere under climate change.
Recommendations from the 2024 WMO PHORS session
The 2024 WMO PHORS session highlighted the following
recommendations to the global community engaged in polar and
high-mountain policy, research and observations:(1) take note of
the latest scientific findings about the state of the cryosphere, (2)
work collaboratively on enhancing the knowledge about the
cryosphere, (3) adopt science-based policies for the polar and high-
mountain regions, (4) emphasise the urgency with which changes in
the cryosphere have to be addressed, (5) include cryosphere
concerns into decision making at all levels.
Appendix: Programme of the high-level event “The Cryosphere
under Climate Change - Advocating for the Frozen Surfaces of our
Planet” with links to the presentations and recordings.
Opening remarks (mp3, mp3)
State secretary Ragnhild Sjoner Syrstad, Norwegian Ministry of
Climate and Environment
Camilla Brekke, Norwegian Polar Institute
What does the WMO climate report tell us about the cryosphere?
(slides, mp3)
Chris Hewitt, World Meteorological Organization
Tipping points in the cryosphere (slides, mp3)
Andreas Kääb, University of Oslo
Changes in the Arctic and associated policy implications
Recent changes in the Arctic - examples from observations and
reanalysis in the Barents area  (slides, mp3)
Glaciers at Svalbard  (slides, mp3)
From science to policy (slides, mp3)
Morten Køltzow/Ketil Isaksen, Norwegian Meteorological Institute
Geir Moholdt, Norwegian Polar Institute
Marianne Kroglund, Arctic Monitoring And Assessment Programme
Artificial Intelligence - Developments for cryosphere observations,
research and services  (slides, mp3)
Andy Brown, European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts
Changes in Antarctica and associated policy implications
State of our scientific knowledge about Antarctica under climate
change  (slides, mp3)
Antarctica and our Future - Policy and Governance  (slides, mp3)
James Renwick, Victoria University of Wellington/Te Herenga
Waka, New Zealand
Thamban Meloth,  National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research,
Ministry of Earth Sciences, India 
Response of high mountain glaciers to climate change - Every
increase in temperature matters! (mp3)
Regine Hock, University of Oslo
Melting Cryosphere and Rising Seas: Impacts on Guyana (mp3)
Garvin Cummings, Hydrometeorological Service, Cooperative
Republic of Guyana
Cryosphere: From Science to Policy  (slides, mp3)
Pam Pearson, International Cryosphere Climate Initiative
