Contribution towards Study of Psychrophilic organisms in Antarctic
by India
Contribution towards Study of Psychrophilic organisms in Antarctic
by India
Summary
Despite the extremes of cold temperature, ultraviolet radiations and
long period of darkness, life exist in Antarctica as a consequence of
biochemical adaptations. The adaptation strategies in Antarctic life
forms produce useful compounds for their own survival, and may
provide an opportunity for development of products beneficial to
mankind. The Antarctic community has been discussing the issues
pertaining to biological prospecting in Antarctica since 20011 in
several ATCMs, including the active role by SCAR in producing
reviews and updates.2,3,4
The paper presents a summary of the work carried out by Indian
scientists in the field of study of psychrophilic organisms, mainly in
Antarctica, including filing of the patents.
Introduction
Psychrophilic organisms comprising algae, cyanobacteria, bacteria
and fungi have been shown to have great potential for
developments of products in pharmaceutical and allied industry due
to their capabilities of surviving in extreme environmental
conditions. Chances of discovering new micro-organisms in
unexplored and hostile cold environments5 have attracted attention
of many researchers leading to filing of several patents6. Apart from
Antarctica, deep marine source and lichens from cold desert of
Ladakh in Himalaya too have demonstrated antioxidant
capacities7,8. Biological Prospecting in Antarctica’ has been one of
the significant topics being discussed in ATCMs since 2001.
Notwithstanding legal and ethical issues associated with biological
prospecting researchers have studied cold active enzymes,
antifreeze proteins, antibacterial compounds, antifungal compounds
etc. while investigating the biological diversity of Antarctica.
Cold active enzymes may have immense application in food
processing and cold wash detergent industries and other
industries.9,10. Psychrophiles synthesise polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) very useful in cardiovascular disease. Pigment
producing abilities Antarctic species has potentials to be used in
cosmetics. Plant Growth promotion ability of a few Antarctic
bacteria may be useful in Agriculture. Enzymes of Psychrophiles are
best suited for biotechnological process at low temperature and lead
to saving in energy
A working definition of bioprospecting vide Resolution 6 (2013)
includes in its umbrella, “Any activity of search, identification,
description, collection, survey, monitoring, cultivation, replication,
or any other scientific investigation processes, performed on
indigenous biological species, carried on within the area defined in
Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty , with the initial intention to
consider potential industrial or commercial derived products or
applications, notably through the development of patentable
material or process” . As such, studies of Psychrophilic organisms in
Antarctic by India would fall under the broad domain pertaining to
bioprospecting.
Short account of studies on Psychrophilic organisms
Indian Scientists have focused on Antarctic biological studies since
inception of its national Antarctic Program. Their work is
essentially restricted to Schirmacher Oasis and Larsemann Hills of
east Antarctica.
Biotechnological potential of Antarctic Yeasts.
Cold-tolerant fungal strain Thelebolus microsporus was investigated
for its pigment and fatty acid production. The exopolysaccharide
(EPS) produced (1.94 g L−1) by the Thelebolus strain was isolated,
purified and characterized as glucan having an average molecular
mass of 5 × 105Da. NMR analysis indicated the presence of (1 →
3)-linked β-d-glucan backbone with (1 → 6)-linked branches of β-d-
glucopyranosyl units. Flow cytometry analysis and DNA
fragmentation studies revealed that the cytotoxicaction of the EPS
mediated apoptosis in cancer cells. This is the first ever report on
bioactive EPS thelebolan from Thelebolus sp11
Biotechnological potential of Antarctic Bacteria.
More than 1000 bacterial isolates were screened for their
biotechnological potential with respect to their ability to produce
cold active enzymes like proteases, amylases and lipases which
could be employed in food and detergent industry, for
biotransformation and for molecular biology processes at low
temperature etc. Cold Active Lipases (Cryptococcus sp. Y-32 and
Rhodococcus erythropolis N149, Rhodotorula sp. Y-23) and cold
Active Amylases have been characterised from yeast strains of Nella
Lake sediments, Antarctica12,13,14.
NF1001 (PM181108) is produced by a Streptomyces species
(Streptomyces radiopugnans) and is highly effective against various
bacteria including G+ve organisms such as Staphylococcous
aureus, different mycobacteria including Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycobacterium abscessus and Mycobacterium
avium to name a few. The molecule has been patented for various
infectious diseases caused by the above mentioned bacteria.
NF1001 is a potent protein synthesis inhibitor that binds to the 23S
rRNA in the 50S subunit of prokaryotic ribosomes and inhibits
ribosome-dependent GTPase activity of Elongation Factor G (EF-
G). NF1001 is highly potent and bactericidal against various
bacteria in planktonic and biofilm phases of growth 15.
c. Diversity and Fatty acids analyses of Antarctic Bacteria.
Antarctic soils from Schirmacher oasis and Maitri and ice cores
harbour a diverse group of bacteria. Polyphasic taxonomy identified
about 10000 bacteria up to the species level and included the
identification of 31 new species of bacteria from Antarctica. These
isolates could be categorized into 25 phylotypes belonging to phyla
Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. No
correlation was observed in the distribution of the isolates at the
various depths either at the phylum, genus or species level. These
bacteria were unique and possessed Iso-, anteiso-, unsaturated and
saturated fatty acids which constituted a significant proportion of
the total fatty acid composition. 16 Halo tolerant Streptomyces
radiopugnans have been isolated from Antarctica soil17 and Patents
have also been filed for bacterial strains Streptomyces radiopugnans
for antibacterial capacities18.
d. Identification of genes required for survival at cold temperatures
(i) Bacteria isolated from Antarctica were used as model systems to
understand the unique ability of bacteria to survive and divide at
cold temperatures. It was demonstrated that carotenoids and a new
desaturase gene (desC2) that was discovered in an Antarctic
cyanobacteria modulate membrane fluidity and are thus essential
for survival at low temperatures.
(ii) Two other genes, aspartate aminotransferase gene (AAT) and
tRNA modification GTPase were demonstrated to be absolutely
required for survival and growth of bacteria at cold temperatures.
There is need of systematic documentation/mapping of rare,
common and dominant species along latitudinal gradients of
Antarctica and devise a mechanism for arriving at consensus among
scientists and policy makers on using the produce of research in
microbiology for benefit of mankind with due cognisance of legal
and ethical issues.
References
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore 2003. Setting the Scene. In: ANTARCTIC
BIOPROSPECTING (ed. Alan D. Hemmings & Michelle Rogan-
Finnemore). Gateway Antarctica Special Publication Series
SCAR. 2019. Biological Prospecting in Antarctica: An update on the
review by SCAR (ATCM XLII- IP 53)
SCAR. 2021. Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of Member
Countries.(ATCM XLIII-WP 16)
SCAR. 2021. Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of Member
Countries.(ATCM XLIII-IP-12)
Banerjee, R., Halder, A., and Natta, A. 2016. Psychrophylic
microorganisms: Habitats and exploitation potentials. European
Journal of Biotechnology and Bioscience 4(3), 16-24.
Yarzabal, L.A., 2916. Antarctic Psychrophilic microorganisms and
biotechnology: history, current trends, applications, and challenges.
In: Microbial Models: From Environmental to Industrial
Sustainability (ed. Castro-Sowinski, S.) 83-118. Springer.
Shinde, P., Banerjee, P. & Mandhare, A. 2019. Marine natural
products as source of new drugs: a patent review (2015–2018).
Expert Opin Ther Patents 29(4): 283-309
Kumar, J., Dhar,P., Tayade, A. B., Gipta ,D., Chaurasia ,O.P., Upreti,
D.K., Arora, R., and Srivastava, R.B. 2014. Antioxidant Capacities,
Phenolic Profile and Cytotoxic Effects of Saxicolous Lichens from
Trans Himalayan Cold Desert of Ladakh. PLoS ONE 9(6):e98696
Ramteke, P., Bhatt, M.K. Cold active polysaccridases and their
potential industrial applications. Res. Signpost., 2007; 37: 661-73.
Maharana, A., Ray, P. A novel cold-active lipase from
psychrotolerantPseudomonas sp. AKM-L5 showed organic solvent
resistant and suitable for detergent formulation. J. Mol. Cata. B
Enzy.,2015; 120: 173-8.
Mukhopadhyaya SK, Chatterjeea S., Gauria S.S., Dasa S.S., Mishraa
A., Moumita Patraa M., Ghosha A.K., Dasa A.K., Singh S.M., Dey S.
(2014) Isolation and characterization of extracellular
polysaccharide Thelebolan produced by a newly isolated
psychrophilic Antarctic fungus Thelebolus. Carbohydrate Polymers
104: 204–212.
Maharana AK & Singh SM (2018) Cold Active Amylases Producing
Psychrotolerants isolated from Nella Lake, Antarctica. Biosciences
Biotechnology Research Asia, Vol. 15 (1): 05-16. ISSN 09731245
Maharana AK & Singh SM (2018) Cold Active Lipases Produced by
Cryptococcus sp. Y-32 and Rhodococcus erythropolis N149 Isolated
from Nella Lake, Antarctica. International Journal of Current
Microbiology and Applied Sciences 7 (3): 1910-1926.
ISSN:2319-7706
Bhave, S V, Shanbhag PV, Sonawane S K and Mahajan PGB 2013.
Isolation and characterization of halotolerant Streptomyces
radiopugnans from Antarctica soil. Lett Appl Microbiol 56(5):
348-355
Kaur, P.; Krishnamurthy, R.V.; Shandil, R.K.; Mohan, R.; Narayanan,
S. A Novel Inhibitor against the Biofilms of Non-Tuberculous
Mycobacteria. Pathogens2024,13,40. https:// doi.org/10.3390/
pathogens13010040
Shivaji S., Begum Z., Rao S.S.S.N., Reddy P.V.V.V, Manasa P.,
Sailaja B., Prathiba M. S., Thamban M., Krishnan K.P., Singh S. M.,
Srinivas T. N. R. (2012). Antarctic ice core sample: bacterial
diversity and bioprospecting for cold-active enzymes from
culturable bacteria. Research in Microbiology http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resmic.2012.09.001.
Mishra, P.B., and Mahajan, G.B. 2019. Antibiotic compounds.
Assignees: National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research AND
Foundation for Neglected Disease Research. US10501492B2. 2019
Dec 10.
Maharana AK & Singh SM (2018) A cold and organic solvent
tolerant lipase produced by Antarctic strain Rhodotorula sp. Y-23.
Journal of Basic Microbiology, DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201700638,
Wiley-Vch Verlag GmbH, ISSN1521-4028.
