Colombian Antarctic Science. Highlights of the last 10 years of
activities in Antarctica
Colombian Antarctic Science. Highlights of the last 10 years of
activities in Antarctica
Summary
In 2014 the Colombian Antarctic Program (PAC) was stablished.
From then, Colombia has successfully conducted 10 Expeditions,
developed 92 projects, and involved more than 150 researchers.
This paper presents a short highlight of the last ten years of
activities in Antarctica.
Highlights of the last 10 years of activities in Antarctica
The Colombian Antarctic Program (PAC) is responsible for
coordinating the scientific and related activities of Colombia in
Antarctica. The PAC was first stablished in 2014, ten (10) year ago,
as part of the Colombian Ocean Commission, intersectoral body
dependent of the Colombian Presidency Administrative Department.
The scientific research conducted by Colombia is guided by the
Antarctic Scientific Agenda 2014-2035, and subsequent updates are
based on Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research’s (SCAR)
Group of Sciences.
Since the inaugural Colombian Antarctic Expedition (1° CAE) the
PAC has successfully coordinated ninety-two (92) science projects
across a range of disciplines, with a particular focus on marine
biology, oceanography, hydrography, and meteorology. Female
researchers have comprised 52% of the projects. Since 2014, an
estimated of fifty-three (53) institutions have participated,
representing the academic community from both public and private
sectors.
The last 10 years of research, national studies have contributed to
each one of the SCAR thematic groups. The Colombian Antarctic
Program has demonstrated a preference for research in the Life
Sciences and Physical Sciences, although research on Geosciences
and Social Sciences and Humanities has also been conducted. A
review of research projects development has indicated a consistent
trend towards increasing the number of projects related to Physical
Sciences and Geosciences.
Graphic 1. Projects develop on each of SCAR's Groups of Sciences
Colombia is poised to enhance its national capacities in Antarctica,
with the development of maritime and air capabilities to support
national research. The ARC "Simón Bolívar" is a recently
constructed vessel with an Ice Class "1C" FS classification, enabling
navigation in light ice conditions. The Simón Bolívar is equipped to
support research in ocean sciences, encompassing biological,
physical, and chemical oceanography. Furthermore, the Hercules
C-130, in
conjunction with the Simon Bolívar, may be employed for the
transportation of cargo and personnel.
In the last years, the Colombian Antarctic Expeditions has
concentrated its efforts on the northern region of the Antarctic
Peninsula. In these areas, research projects have primarily focused
on the following areas:
Gerlache Strait: oceanography, hydrography, marine biology,
marine mammal observations and research in tourisms.
Bransfield Strait: marine bioacoustics and marine mammal
observations
South Shetlands/25 de Mayo Islands: cartography, biology,
planetary geology, meteorology, research in tourism and
humanities.
Marambio Island: Geology and Meteorology
Map 1. Areas where Colombian Antarctic Science has been
developed in the last years.
Map 1. Areas where Colombian Antarctic Science has been
developed in the last years.
Trinidad/Luis Felipe Peninsula: astronomy, and meteorology.
Climatology and meteorology
From 2015 to 2018, Colombia, through Colombian Navy, carried
out the research project focused on the hydrodynamics and water
masses of the South American Pacific and their connection with
Antarctic waters, which resulted in highlighting the complexity of
oceanic interactions in the South American Pacific and their critical
role in global climate dynamics. The identified water masses and
their movements not only influence local and regional climate
conditions, but also play a crucial role in the distribution of heat
and energy on the planet, confirming the importance of monitoring
and studying these regions to better understand climate changes on
a global scale.
In addition, during the southern summer of 2016/17, the project
"Analysis of sea level variation over Antarctica and the South
American Pacific coast from altimetry and in situ data" used
existing data since 1993 and identified significant patterns of sea
level variation. The study also compared in situ measurements with
tidal models and found that forecasts based on the AntPen model
were the most accurate for tidal correction in shallow water
hydrographic surveys. These results are fundamental to
understanding ocean dynamics and their impact on regional and
potentially global climate and contribute to planning and decision-
making in marine and environmental contexts.
Meteorological research projects “Understanding Sea Fog Variability
in King George Island/ 25 de Mayo Island, Antarctica using Special
Observations and Cloud-Resolving Simulations and Visibility” and
“Fog Synoptic and Mesoscale Variability over Marambio Base,
Antarctic Peninsula”. conducted by the Colombian Air Force has
focused on comprehending the generation of fog in the Antarctic
Peninsula, mainly the ones occurring western region, focusing on
King George Island/ 25 de Mayo Island, and the phenomena in the
eastern region, particularly around the Marambio Antarctic Base.
The first stage of the project has led to confirm that north-westerly
low-level flow prevails during fog days as rather extratropical short
wave low-pressure propagated over the Drake Channel. The warm
quadrant of the cyclonic system promoted warm air advection over
colder sea waters, leading to the fog formation. Further to this, WRF
simulations confirm the advective nature of
the fog episodes with the model performing relatively well by
adequately capturing the fog day-today variability and overall
vertical structure characteristic.
Secondly, the analysis of this phenomenon in the eastern region has
led to determine a tentative cycle that modulates visibility and fog:
(i) low visibility ahead of the synoptic trough bringing a deep
northerly moistening and warming dominating warm advection fog
on the northeastern side of the AP; (ii) an enhanced mid-level
inversion is formed by adiabatic warming due to westerly winds on
the lee side of the AP limiting mixing; (iii) visibility increases as
Foehn winds warm up and dry out the low-level atmosphere west of
the AP; (iii) a meso-low (heat-low) developed on the lee side of the
AP that later moved eastward with the synoptic trough, bringing
cooler southerly air masses that lower visibility and favoring cold
advection fog; finally (iv) cooling is maintained ahead of the
synoptic ridge sustaining cold advection fog.
Polar-WRF helped us diagnose the mechanistic nature of the fog
events, while providing intricate multiscale connections modulating
visibility in the region.
Oceanography and Hydrography
The project "Atlas of oceanographic data for the austral summer of
the Gerlache and Bransfield Straits 1979-2019" analyzes the
oceanographic dynamics in the Gerlache and Bransfield Straits
using temperature, salinity and pressure data collected between
2014 and 2019, complemented by historical records from the World
Ocean Database. Through detailed analysis, it was found that
variations in ocean density are more dependent on salinity than
temperature, in contrast to lower latitudes. This finding contributes
to a better understanding of ocean conditions in Antarctica over the
past 40 years.
Equally important, the Colombian Maritime Authority in the last
ten years has developed the program Marine Scientific Research for
Maritime Safety in Antarctica (ICEMAN), which aims to provide
concrete results in the construction of knowledge on Antarctic
issues such as global knowledge of climate change and phenomena
related to ocean-atmosphere interaction and the description of the
seabed at the service of comprehensive maritime safety in the area
of the Antarctic Treaty, trough 3 main disciplines, hydrography,
meteorology and oceanography.
Since 2014, ICEMAN's hydrology component has generated
bathymetric information in the Strait of Gerlache, both in the deep
channel and in some of its internal bays (Port Mikkelsen and Cierva
Cove Bay), which lead to the joint development of the nautical
charts INT 9103 (in collaboration with Chile) and INT 9166 (in
collaboration with the United Kingdom).
In terms of oceanography, ICEMAN has collected data on
conductivity, salinity, temperature, chlorophyll-a, fecal coliform,
phytoplankton and zooplankton, and dissolved oxygen to better
characterize the conditions within the water column in this
Gerlache Strait, with the information collected contributing to the
study of ocean currents (Molares, 2015; Torres-Parra, R, 2017), ice
drift modelling (Torres-Parra, R, 2017, Gutierrez, G 2018),
oceanographic features of the Gerlache Strait, the Drake Passage
and its connection with the Pacific Ocean (Torres-Parra, R, 2017).
Likewise, studies have been carried out on the quality of the water
and sediments of the fjords that make up large bays (Duarte,
Eckener, Frei (Recess), Wilhelmina (small central bay without a
name) and Paraíso (Paradise); (Rodrigo C, et al. 2021). As well as in
the identification of phytoplankton blooms in the Gerlache Strait
(Cañón-Páez & Santamaria 2021)
The last component of ICEMAN, meteorology, is currently
undertaken a joint project with the Antarctic and Oceanographic
Institute of Ecuador (INOCAR) The is “Determination of the
Contribution of Atmospheric Pressure to Sea Level Variations in
Antarctica in Austral Summer”. It is expected to be develop trough
five stages, currently stage two was finished. , which aims to
promote the knowledge in meteorology and ocean-atmosphere
interaction processes in the Antarctic territory, from the study of
the influence of atmospheric pressure on sea level on Greenwich
Island (South Shetland Island) and to further contribute in the
studies of climate change from the application of corrections within
sea level trends.
Colombian Antarctic Expedition (CAE)
Link
1° CAE 2014/15
https://dimar.maps.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?
appid=29816468cb60406fae3b20ecd9e93f87
3° CAE 2016/17
https://dimar.maps.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?
appid=29816468cb60406fae3b20ecd9e93f87
4° CAE 2017/18
https://dimar.maps.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?
appid=2ee72b1958324a2fa0975ce224b3698e
5° CAE 2018/19
https://dimar.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?
id=2876d20bd86d40e4886683477dbac52e
Table 1. Expeditions in which a geographical tool has been
provided to make the results visible.
Biodiversity and organisms in Antarctica
The characterization of the Antarctic fauna (zooplankton,
hydromedusae and siphonophores), their patterns of assembly
sectorization along and the variability of organism density per
sample was conducted from 2016 to 2019. The project expanded
understanding of biodiversity and ecological processes in extreme
Antarctic environments. It also facilitated ongoing monitoring
efforts in the Gerlache Strait, allowing assessment of ecosystem
health and responses to environmental change. (Dorado-Roncancio
& Cedeño-Posso, 2021). Contributions were made to the SCAR-
Marine Biodiversity Information Network (SCAR-MarBIN)
Since 2017, the project “Effect of acute thermic stress on the
diversity and functional characteristics of the microbiota associated
with Microspio moorei (Polychaeta; Spionidae) from King George
Island, Antarctic Peninsula” has collected samples of sea worms,
which were subsequently subjected to thermic stress with the
objective of identifying the differentially expressed proteins that
would enable an understanding of the organism's behavior under
climate change and ocean warming. Furthermore, the project has
resulted in the publication of a morphological redescription of the
species, which has led to a redefinition of its morphological limits
(Fonseca-González, I., Londoño-Mesa, M., & Delgado-Blas, V., 2022)
(Fonseca-González, I., Velasquez-Agudelo, E., Londoño-Mesa, M., &
Álvarez, J.,2024).
The research project “Assessment of the primary and secondary
production limit and its rate of change by alteration of physic-
chemical parameters" was carried out on board the ship ARA Puerto
Deseado during the southern summer 2015/16 and focused on
analyzing the primary and secondary biological communities and
physic-chemical parameters of Antarctic waters to assess the
potential impact of ice melt events. The findings revealed
significant changes in the distribution and composition of these
communities due to physic-chemical variations, indicating a
vulnerability to ice melt that could severely alter regional ecological
dynamics. This study underscores the urgency of continuing
detailed research to understand and mitigate the effects of climate
change on Antarctic biodiversity.
The project “Structural Composition of Planktonic Community
Associated with Water Masses from Colombian Pacific to Antarctic
Peninsula” conducted from 2016 to 2017 aimed to assess heavy
metal presence, particularly in the Gerlache Strait, using copepod
communities as bioindicators, indicating potential environmental
impacts from oceanic contamination. By establishing copepod
communities as reliable indicators, the project contributed valuable
insights into monitoring water column pollution in the region,
spanning from the Colombian Pacific Ocean to the Antarctic
Peninsula (Mójica-Lopez & Franco-Herrera, 2021).
The project Census, trophic ecology, mercury concentrations, and
genetics of pinnipeds in some understudied areas in the Gerlache
Strait, Antarctic Peninsula (mammals) conducted during the CAEs
2018-2024 aimed to investigate Southern Elephant Seal populations
in the Antarctic Peninsula, contributing to understanding pinniped
ecology through assessments of genetic diversity and mercury
concentrations. This research enhanced comprehension of pinniped
ecology and trophic interactions providing vital data for
conservation and population management initiatives (Barragan-
Barrera, D., et al, 2024) (Hernández, L., et al, 2021)
Social Sciences and Humanities.
The Colombian Antarctic Art Project (PCAA) was established in
2015 with the objective of fostering greater societal awareness of
Antarctica and its current challenges through cultural and artistic
initiatives. The PCAA has developed six stages which address
different concerns regarding the acknowledgement and mitigation
of the human impact in Antarctica. Also, the PCAA has been
cultivating perspectives concerning the potential effects of climate
change in Antarctica and the ways in which this polar region may
influence individual self-understanding, fostering empathy and
commitment towards the preservation of Antarctica.
Image 1. Activities conducted by the PCAA.
Image 1. Activities conducted by the PCAA.
Since the First Stage of the PCAA, five (5) Colombian and one (1)
Mexican artists have participated in the Colombian Antarctic
Expeditions, collaborating with the Korea Polar Research Institute
(KOPRI) and the Instituto Antártico Uruguayo (IAU). As a result, 24
art exhibitions have been presented in Colombia and Spain, in
addition to six (6) Workshops on the effective dissemination of
Antarctic issues to children, young people and educators.
Capacity development
Looking forward to strengthening national capacities for conducting
activities in Antarctica, Colombia decided to advance in the
designing and animation of virtual scenarios that aim to reproduce
the maritime and geographical conditions of Antarctic as
mechanism that allows crew member to train in a controlled space
with simulated realistic navigational challenges. Detailed models of
Cierva Cove and Port Mikkelsen bays, have been successfully
integrated into a 300° Full Mission bridge simulator, these
simulations were design based on the bathymetry and aerial
photography data that was collected during different Antarctic
expeditions.
Image 2. Full Mission bridge Simulator
References
Barragán-Barrera, D. C., Riet-Sapriza, F. G., Mojica-Moncada, D. F.,
Negrete, J., Curtosi, A., Bustamante, P., Caballero, S., & Luna-
Acosta, A. (2024). Sex‐specific mercury levels in skin samples of
southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) at Isla 25 de Mayo
(King George Island), Antarctic Peninsula. Marine Mammal Science,
40(1), 108–122. https://doi.org/10.1111/mms.13058
Dorado, E., & Cedeño, C. (2021). Copepods, hydromedusae and
siphonophores: Diversity and distribution in the Gerlache Strait,
Antarctic Peninsula. Boletín de investigaciones marinas y costeras,
50(SuplEsp), 169–186. https://doi.org/10.25268/
bimc.invemar.2021.50.suplesp.942
Fonseca-González, I., Londoño-Mesa, M. H., & Delgado-Blas, V. H.
(2022). Redescription of Microspio moorei (Gravier, 1911)
(Annelida: Spionidae) with inclusion of a taxonomic key for all the
species of the genus. Zootaxa, 5120(3), 334–344. https://
doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.5120.3.2
Fonseca-González, I., Velasquez-Agudelo, E., Londoño-Mesa, M. H.,
& Álvarez, J. C. (2024). De novo transcriptome sequencing and
annotation of the Antarctic polychaete Microspio moorei
(Spionidae) with its characterization of the heat stress-related
proteins (HSP, SOD & CAT). Marine Genomics, 73(101085),
101085. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.margen.2024.101085
Hernández, L., Barragán, D., Negrete, J., Poljak, S., Riet, F., &
Caballero, S. (2021). Insights into the genetic diversity of the
leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx), inferred from mitochondrial DNA
analysis, at Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula. Boletin de
investigaciones marinas y costeras, 50(SuplEsp), 227–238. https://
doi.org/10.25268/bimc.invemar.2021.50.suplesp.951
Mojica-López, L. H., & Franco-Herrera, A. (2019). Composición y
abundancia taxonómica del zooplancton desde el Pacífico Sur hasta
la Península Antártica 2016-2017. Boletin de Investigaciones
Marinas y Costeras, 48(2). https://doi.org/10.25268/
bimc.invemar.2019.48.2.769
Rodrigo, C., Varas, A., Grisales, C., Quintana, D., & Molares, R.
(2021). Glacimarine sediment flows in small bays on the Danco
Coast, Antarctic Peninsula. Boletin de investigaciones marinas y
costeras, 50(SuplEsp), 149–168. https://doi.org/10.25268/
bimc.invemar.2021.50.suplesp.950
Santamaría-del-Ángel, E., Cañon-Páez, M.-L., Sebastiá-Frasquet, M.-
T., González-Silvera, A., Gutierrez, A.-L., Aguilar-Maldonado, J.-A.,
López-Calderón, J., Camacho-Ibar, V., Franco-Herrera, A., &
Castillo-Ramírez, A. (2021). Interannual climate variability in the
West Antarctic Peninsula under austral summer conditions. Remote
Sensing, 13(6), 1122. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13061122
Torres Parra, R. R., Caicedo Laurido, A. L., & Iriarte Sánchez, J. D.
(2020). Hydrographic conditions during two austral summer
situations (2015 and 2017) in the Gerlache and Bismarck straits,
northern Antarctic Peninsula. Deep-Sea Research. Part I,
Oceanographic Research Papers, 161(103278), 103278. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr.2020.103278
