IAATO Operator Response to High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza
IAATO Operator Response to High Pathogenicity
Avian Influenza
Summary
Since 2021, High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza H5N1 (HPAI)
outbreaks around the world have resulted in the death of hundreds
of thousands of seabirds. Marine mammals, including seals and sea
lions, have also been affected. At ATCM XLV (2023), COMNAP,
IAATO and SCAR jointly alerted the CEP about the likely arrival of
this disease to Antarctica through natural wildlife migration, and
ongoing work to identify suspected cases and eliminate risk
associated with direct human activity (IP101). In this paper. IAATO
provides Parties with an update on specific information about
IAATO’s response to the evolving HPAI situation in Antarctica. It
includes details of enhanced biosecurity procedures, and an outline
of new and enhanced materials and tools that IAATO provided to its
members to assist in developing Operator specific Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) to help educate visitors and those in
the field alike. Also discussed is the HPAI Australis Expedition
2024, led by SCAR AWHN’s Dr. Meagan Dewar, focused on
surveying for HPAI in the Northern Weddell Sea and Trinity
Peninsula regions. Finally, IAATO will discuss the ongoing
collaboration with SCAR and COMNAP, as well as preliminary steps
for IAATO Operators in preparation for the 2024-25 season.
Introduction
At ATCM XLV (2023), COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR jointly
submitted IP101 Heightened Risk of Avian Influenza in the
Antarctic Treaty Area to alert the community to advice from the
SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Network (AWHN) that the risk of
HPAI arriving through natural wildlife migration remained high for
the 2023-24 and 2024-25 seasons. SCAR, IAATO and COMNAP also
notified the CEP about their ongoing work to identify suspected
cases and to eliminate risk associated with direct human impact.
This close collaboration between IAATO, SCAR and COMNAP
around HPAI started prior to the 2022-23 season and was further
enhanced with additional communications and protocols, prior to
and during the 2023-24 season (see ATCM XLVI (2024) WP047
Update on High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza in Antarctica).
This paper provides Parties with an update on specific information
about IAATO’s response to the evolving HPAI situation in
Antarctica, including ongoing collaboration with COMNAP and
SCAR to strengthen understanding and response to HPAI in
Antarctica.
IAATO Members are united in their commitment to operate in the
Antarctic safely and hold environmental responsibility at the heart
of all expeditions.
1. IAATO Reporting Procedures
1i. Coordinated Communication
In conjunction with the Expert Workshop convened by the SCAR
AWHN at the SCAR Biology Symposium 2023 (31 July–4 August,
Christchurch, New Zealand), and other discussions, it was noted:
The Antarctic Peninsula region would most likely be the first area
affected and,
It was important for clear and rapid communication to all Peninsula
Stakeholders following concerning reports.
To address this priority, IAATO administered a Peninsula
Stakeholder HPAI WhatsApp group, as a means to sharing
information on suspected cases, with Parties or National Antarctic
Programs that
wished to join the group. Additionally, IAATO instituted a new
HPAI Wildlife Assessment protocol with its membership to facilitate
the review of suspected cases in consultation with AWHN.
1ii. IAATO HPAI Wildlife Assessment Protocol
Reporting
IAATO Operator contacts the IAATO Secretariat about a concern
and shares evidence gathered which may include photographs,
video and written observations. This may have been gathered
during the initial scouting prior to landing or at a later time when
visiting the site. (Also See Section 2. Biosecurity Procedures).
IAATO Secretariat contacts AWHN immediately to discuss
information received.
Rapid Response
Where one or two suspicious individuals are reported, the site
remains open with caution with a request for further assessment as
soon as possible.
All IAATO Vessels are notified of the site of concern and increased
vigilance and reporting is requested.
Where three or more suspicious individuals are reported the site is
closed for landings for 48 hours (Temporary Closure) while
further assessment and information gathering continues. This is
enacted in the IAATO Ship Scheduler and communicated
immediately to IAATO Operators via email.
Assessment
AWHN shares the reported information from IAATO with their
internal experts, whether it be for mammals or birds. In some cases
other stakeholder experts familiar with the particular sites are
enlisted.
Depending on feedback from AWHN, Temporary Closures may be
lifted or sites may become closed longer until further assessment
can be performed through the collection of additional evidence or
testing by the scientific community.
2. IAATO Enhanced Biosecurity Procedures
In addition to IAATO’s robust biosecurity procedures already in
place to protect Antarctica from the introduction or spread of
pathogens and non-native species, IAATO continued working with
SCAR and COMNAP to enhance its HPAI protocols during the
2023-24 season.
These include:
Assessing visitor sites for signs of HPAI in wildlife colonies for at
least 30 minutes before commencing any landing.
Being prepared to cancel a visit or leave a site if any behavioural
signs of HPAI are detected.
A minimum distance of 5 metres/15 feet must be maintained from
Antarctic Wildlife.
If visitors are approached by wildlife, visitors must take appropriate
action to ensure the advised minimum distance of 5 metres/15 feet
is maintained where it can be safely done.
Not sitting, kneeling, crouching, or lying down on the ground or
snow, or leaving any equipment on the ground or snow, close to
animal activity such as nests or breeding adults, pathways, haul out
sites or fecal matter.
Between regions, full decontamination/biosecurity protocol must be
done for guests, staff, crew, daily use equipment, and any small
boats or auxiliary craft (kayaks, etc.).
These enhanced biosecurity measures were communicated to
Operators and Field Staff through our annually updated IAATO
Biosecurity Instructions and Avian Influenza Must Know
Information. Additionally, any updated protocols based on new
information were communicated through internal means during the
season.
3. IAATO Tools for Members
To assist Members in developing Operator specific SOPs, and to
help educate those in the field and visitors alike, IAATO provided
new and enhanced materials and tools to its members for the
2023-24 season.
3i. Town Halls and Webinars
Prior to the 2023-24 season, IAATO hosted a number of virtual
town hall meetings, and a series of webinars on the topic of avian
influenza for its members and their field staff and crew. These
internal virtual events, supported by virologists and HPAI experts
(Dr. Meagan Dewer and Dr. Michelle Willie), helped deliver
accurate and timely information about HPAI and gave the
opportunity for Members to ask questions. These sessions also
helped identify where more clarity of protocols was needed before
2023-24 operations, and the season could begin as unambiguously
as possible despite an evolving situation.
3ii. IAATO Considerations for Operators carrying authorized/
permitted scientists during high risk of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza outbreaks in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic.
This document contains important information and guidance for
IAATO Operators to consider before carrying scientists into the field
who intend to work near wildlife, including for HPAI sample
collection.
This document also included guidance for use of Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS), IAATO and Antarctic Wildlife Health
Network Guidelines for use of RPAS for Scientific Surveys During
Disease Outbreaks in Antarctica and sub-Antarctic regions. This
specifically addressed the use of Scientific RPAS for early
surveillance and detection of HPAI, and gathering of important
evidence. (See Attachment 1)
3iii. IAATO 2023-24 Avian Influenza Protocols
This publicly available information was created to assist in
managing guest expectations by providing some basic information
and context about protocols for the season. These could be
downloaded and shared with guests prior to their expedition, or
printed and displayed in common areas during voyages. IAATO also
prepared Avian Influenza FAQs to help answer any further
questions.
3iv. Avian Influenza Guidelines Poster
An infographic poster was created for easy visual understanding of
protocols, and could be displayed on vessels or in field camps and/
or sent as a PDF to guests prior to the expedition. (See Attachment
2).
3v. Avian Influenza Supplementary Briefing Video
To enhance the Mandatory Antarctic Briefing with HPAI specific
material, a video about the why and how of avian influenza
protocols was created.
3vi. iaato.org Resource Library
A library found in the Members Only Section of the IAATO website,
containing all the information mentioned above, as well as other
pertinent information from external agencies, was available for easy
access and download.
3vii. Short Overnight Stay Site List (Distributed in the Field
Operations Manual (FOM)
With HPAI in mind, to assist Operators in selecting sites for short
overnight stays, the IAATO Field Operations Committee created a
list which helped identify sites, with little to no wildlife, where
short overnight stays could be undertaken with less biosecurity risk.
3viii. Wildlife Landing or Cruising Sites (Distributed directly to
Vessels)
For further support in making decisions in the field, the Field
Operations Committee Chairs helped create a colour coded list of
Peninsula sites, suggesting what activities are best performed there.
The list identified:
Green Sites
Recommended sites for water activities
Yellow Sites
Wildlife heavy sites
Red Sites
Closed Stations or sites
White Sites
Minimal to Low wildlife sites
3ix. IAATO Observations
During the 27 observations performed during the 2023-24 season,
adherence to enhanced HPAI protocols were confirmed.
3x. 24/7 Coverage for Reporting
IAATO maintains an emergency line which is accessible by
Operators 24/7 throughout the season. Additionally, in season,
operationally specific email inboxes are monitored during working
hours seven days a week to address any questions or HPAI
concerns. Because of this consistent monitoring, reports concerning
HPAI were able to be communicated swiftly to Operators and those
in the field regardless of day or time.
HPAI Australis Expedition 2024
Led by Dr. Meagan Dewar, an international multidisciplinary team
of scientists, including biologists, wildlife veterinarians and
virologists, and a seasoned Antarctic sailing crew, left Ushuaia,
Argentina on March 13 aboard the support vessel Australis (AUS
authorisation) for a 22-day expedition.
The expedition, primarily funded by IAATO as well as the EU
Horizon Europe project Kappa-Flu, and the Spanish National
Research Council (CSIC), set out to investigate the region of the
Trinity Peninsula and the Northern Weddell Sea. Previous
surveillance efforts had been limited in this area, but the SCAR-
AWHN had received notifications from National Antarctic
Programs, ornithologists and IAATO Operators regarding potential
mortality events or symptomatic wildlife.
The team investigated the presence and impact of HPAI H5N1
infections on Antarctic wildlife and in doing so identified further
spread of the virus. The sites identified immediately identified with
positive cases of HPAI were: Devil Island, Paulet Island, and Beak
Island. Hope Bay, which had previous suspected cases, was also
tested and the samples confirmed positive cases. Additionally, a
high mortality event was found on Heroina Island, Danger Islands.
Although the carcasses on Heroina Island did not test positive,
samples from apparently healthy wildlife as well as an additional
set of samples from carcasses were also taken and will be tested
more thoroughly shortly. These data will help to understand how
the virus has spread over time and place.
Preparation for Antarctic season 2024-25
IAATO’s Antarctic season ended on April 5, 2024. As part of the
association’s regular season wrap up, IAATO looked at lessons
gleaned from the season, as well as how to best support Operators
to continue to execute safe and environmentally responsible
expeditions, particularly in light of HPAI.
The first steps taken in planning for the 2024-25 season began as
part of IAATO’s annual meeting (Annapolis, Maryland USA, April
22-25, 2024):
IAATO HPAI Town Hall for Members
A combination of both in-person and virtual speakers, IAATO
invited virologists and regional HPAI specialists to speak about how
the virus continues to spread and how it may affect operations
during the 2024-25 season. Dr. Meagan Dewar and two senior
expedition leaders also led in person discussions on best practices in
the field and shared suggestions on how to execute successful
expeditions while following HPAI protocols.
IAATO Plenary Session with Invited Guests: HPAI And Tourism:
Lessons Learnt, Role In Surveillance And Preparations For Next
Season
Dr. Meagan Dewar presented “the why” behind current protocols
and the lessons learned during the 2023-24 season, which may feed
into the 2024-25 protocols. An update on the HPAI Australis
Expedition 2024 was also given.
IAATO will continue close collaboration with SCAR and COMNAP
in advance of the season, as the Antarctic Community prepares for
the 2024-25 season.
For the Upcoming Season, the following actions are anticipated:
IAATO will continue to hone protocols and tools for the 2024-25
season, utilising IAATO Committees and Working Groups for review
and suggestions of new or enhanced tools.
IAATO will continue to host Town Halls and webinars, the latter of
which will be added to the iaato.org webinar library, available to
those not able to be present or for review.
IAATO will look to support meaningful science where appropriate,
in line with IAATO’s Five-Year Strategic Plan, particularly in
relation to further research around HPAI.
