Report on 20 Years of Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS)
Report on 20 Years of Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS)
Summary
The Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) is an international
organization established in 2004 to promote cooperation and
advancement in polar sciences among Asian countries. It serves as a
platform for information exchange, research collaboration, and
logistics cooperation among Asian polar science institutions. AFoPS
aims to encourage cooperative research activities, involve more
Asian countries in polar sciences, and share the achievements of
Asian countries with the international polar communities. Over the
past 20 years, AFoPS has made significant contributions to polar
research and collaboration, fostering scientific cooperation and
facilitating the exchange of expertise, data, and resources among its
members. 2024 marked the twentieth anniversary of AFoPS.
Short History
The Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS), an international
organization of national operators and research institutes in Asian
countries in the polar regions, was established in 2004 to encourage
and facilitate cooperation for the advancement of polar sciences
among countries in the Asian region. It has served as an important
medium of collective endeavors in human and information
exchange, research collaboration, and logistics cooperation among
Asian polar science institutions (Kim & Jeong, 2015). Since its
inception, the number of AFoPS member countries has grown from
three founding members (China, Japan, and Korea) to six (India and
Malaysia became members in 2007, Thailand in 2016). At present,
AFoPS consists of six members with more Asian countries as
observers. The AFoPS chairpersonship rotates among its members
every two years.
Purpose
The AFoPS is a non-governmental organization that has been
established to encourage and facilitate cooperation in the field of
polar sciences among countries in the Asian region. AFoPS member
countries aim to provide a foundation for cooperative research
activities among its members, encourage the involvement of more
Asian countries in polar sciences, and share research achievements
with international polar communities.
To achieve the above aims, AFoPS members seek to develop and
support joint science projects, encourage logistic cooperation in the
polar regions, and support personnel exchange programs between
institutes and for polar expeditions. Members are also encouraged
to seek opportunities for cooperation by convening joint symposia
and workshops to share scientific results, information, and
experiences including the AFoPS Joint Symposia and Working
Groups (WGs) Workshops. Furthermore, AFoPS endeavors to
support non-member Asian countries in developing their national
polar programs by inviting scientists to participate in field
expeditions, visiting fellowship programs, AFoPS meetings,
symposia, and workshops. AFoPS also presents major collaborative
work through joint publications on polar sciences on a regular
basis.
Inaugural AFoPS meeting in Jeju, Republic of Korea (2004)
20 Years of AFoPS: Major Achievements
Overview
Over the past 20 years, AFoPS has achieved significant milestones
in polar research and collaboration, playing a crucial role in
fostering scientific cooperation among Asian countries in the
Antarctic. Through collaborative research expeditions and shared
logistics, AFoPS has facilitated the exchange of expertise, data, and
resources, leading to various successes.
In the early years of AFoPS, members gave regular updates on their
national polar activities. Such robust information sharing enabled
the launch of logistics cooperation in Antarctic science between
AFoPS members.
In 2008, after a series of review of its activities, AFoPS members
agreed to focus on strengthening its Working Groups (Earth Science,
Life Science, Planetary Science, Glaciological Science, Ocean
Science, and Logistics and Outreach) to better coordinate science
projects among its members. Moreover, emphasis was placed on
outreach and educational campaigns. Support to encourage Asian
countries currently not involved in polar research was also
recommended, in the form of invitations to attend AFoPS members’
polar programs and symposiums, provision of field training
programs, and more. Enhancing AFoPS’ presence in the wider polar
community through active engagement under the name of AFoPS
was another focal point in the 2008 review. On its 10th anniversary
in 2014, another extensive review report, assembled by then Korean
secretariat, was delivered. It assessed the current status of the
organization and discussed a range of options for its future.
Arctic Ocean-going cruises were one of the best illustrations of
international research cooperation, that made the most use of
icebreaking research vessels of the Republic of Korea, China, and
Japan. In terms of personnel exchanges, Japan regularly invited
AFoPS members and other partners to its Antarctic overwintering
training sessions and medical workshops held every year which led
to robust discussions on Antarctic expeditions, infrastructure, and
medical operations.
Over the years, AFoPS expanded the Annual General Meeting
inviting observers such as Australia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka,
Türkiye, Vietnam, the European Polar Board (EPB), and the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
AFoPS Joint Publication
Following the review in 2008, to increase the visibility of Asian
polar research, AFoPS began to produce joint publications in the
form of special issues in academic journals. The first AFoPS journal
was published in 2013 as a special issue in Advances in Polar
Science through efforts led by China (Yang, 2013). The second joint
publication was led by Japan and published in Polar Science in
2015 followed by the third joint publication led by India and
Malaysia in Current Science in 2018 (Watanabe et al., 2015, Mohan
& Wong, 2018). The fourth and most recent joint publication was
led by Korea and published in Environmental Research in 2022 as a
special issue (Kim et al., 2022).
(From left to right) Cover pages of AFoPS Joint Publications (Yang,
2013; Watanabe et al., 2015; Mohan & Wong, 2018; Kim et al.
2022)
Cooperation with other International organizations
AFoPS enhanced its position as a regional scientific forum and
engaged with various international partners including the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the International
Arctic Science Committee (IASC). Specifically, a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with SCAR and IASC was signed in 2016
(Colombo, 2019). The MoU allowed enhanced cooperation between
IASC, SCAR, and the AFoPS members, and laid the foundation for
joint efforts in developing international programs and initiatives
based on scientific priorities, scientific excellence, and shared use of
Asian Antarctic and Arctic infrastructures for scientific and
technological purposes, as well as increasing the engagement of
Asian scientists in both IASC and SCAR activities. The MoU was
subsequently renewed in 2021.
AFoPS also held a joint workshop with the European Polar Board
(EPB) in October 2022, further expanding its scope of collaboration
with international counterparts.
Signing of the MoU between AFoPS, IASC, and SCAR (2016), and
renewal of the MoU (2021)
Capacity Building Efforts
AFoPS members not only cooperated in science and logistics but
also organized various capacity-building programs, workshops, and
training sessions to enhance the research capabilities of both early
and established researchers in the Asian region. Initiatives such as
the AFoPS Webinar for early career researchers, fellowship
programs from AFoPS members,
hosting of field training sessions have promoted skill development,
knowledge transfer, and the nurturing of young polar scientists
among AFoPS members.
AFoPS Webinar for early career researchers held online (2021)
Future Endeavors
2024 marks 20 years of AFoPS, a period of significant expansion in
research infrastructure and investments among Asian polar
programs. Undoubtedly, AFoPS has achieved notable
accomplishments during this time (Colombo, 2019; Kim & Jeong,
2015,). The establishment of an information-sharing scheme and
the creation of a collaborative framework are noteworthy
achievements in their own right. However, much more needs to be
done to engage with more regional and international partners.
Looking forward, AFoPS aims to have a more prominent presence
and a contribution in the international polar community. However,
it is important to note that AFoPS does not intend to form an
exclusive regional bloc. Instead, AFoPS is determined to establish a
channel and leverage it to maximize contributions to the global
community, aiming for greater output than what can be achieved
when AFoPS members work individually and in isolation.
As AFoPS enters a new decade of its existence, it remains
committed to:
(1) enhancing regional cooperation in polar science among Asian
partners, and further it to the international community. Through
collaborative efforts among Asian countries in the field of polar
science, AFoPS will serve as a platform to encourage and facilitate
this cooperation among Asian countries in the polar regions.
(2) advancing polar research in general and generating and
providing more opportunities to research entities in the region.
AFoPS will continue to encourage and support the progress and
growth of polar research activities in Asian countries, to expand the
scope and depth of research conducted in the polar regions that will
contribute to the global scientific community's understanding of
climate change, biodiversity, ecosystem dynamics, and other critical
aspects related to the polar regions.
(3) contributing to international polar research initiatives and
collaborating with international research partners in the polar
regions. AFoPS will seek to enhance its active participation in
international research endeavors in the polar regions contributing
to our shared understanding of these extreme environments.
Through sharing of data, conducting joint research projects, and
participating in international conferences and symposia, exchange
of personnel, AFoPS member countries will actively engage with its
partners in the Antarctic and the Arctic.
References
Colombo, A. (2019). The Asian Forum for Polar Sciences: An
assessment of regional cooperation. Advances in Polar Science,
30(1), 1-10.
Kim, S-J., Kang, S., Xu, H., Bhaskar, P., and Chenoli, S. (Eds.).
(2022). AFoPS on climate and life in poles [Special issue].
Environmental Research, 211. Available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.113125 (Accessed 28 March 2024).
Kim, Y., & Jeong, J. (2015). The development of the Asian Forum
for Polar Sciences (AFoPS). Polar Science, 9(4), 338-344.
Mohan, R., and Wong, M. (Eds.). (2018). Special section: Asian
Forum for Polar Sciences [Special section]. Current Science, 115(9).
Available at https://www.currentscience.ac.in/show.issue.php?
volume=115&issue=9 (Accessed 28 March 2024).
Watanabe, K., Doi, K., Ewe, H.T., Krishnan, K.P., Lee, J.I., and Liu,
R. (Eds.). (2015). The Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFOPS)
[Special issue]. Polar Science, 9(4). Available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2015.10.005 (Accessed 28 March 2024).
Yang, H. (Ed.). (2013). Proceeding of the Asian Forum for Polar
Sciences (AFoPS) 2012 [Special issue]. Advances in Polar Science,
24(4). Available at https://aps.chinare.org.cn/EN/volumn/
volumn_55.shtml (Accessed 28 March 2024).
