The international cooperation and support of Ukraine’s National
Antarctic Program
The international cooperation and support of Ukraine’s National
Antarctic Program
Informational Paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
The Information Paper summarizes the international cooperation
and support of Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program in 2022-2023
during the continued military aggression of the Russian Federation.
Background
International reaction to the ongoing Russian full-scale military
invasion of Ukraine started on the 24th February 2022, resulting in
the overwhelmingly supported UN General Assembly Resolutions
and a subsequent broad range of individual and collective actions
and sanctions.
Since the Russian invasion of Ukraine also has a considerable
influence directly on Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program,
sequestering its budget and reducing activities, this issue also falls
within the mandate of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. In
2022 and 2023, most Consultative Parties expressed their support
for Ukraine. They strongly condemned Russia’s unjustifiable,
unprovoked, and illegal invasion of Ukraine and noted that this
breach of international law was also contrary to the spirit of the
Antarctic Treaty (ATCM XLIV Final Report, paragraphs 10–11, 35–
40).
The challenges facing Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program and
international scientific and logistic cooperation in 2022-2023
In 2021, the President of Ukraine entrusted the Government to
prepare a new State Special-Purpose Antarctic Research Program for
2024-2033 as a follow-up of the current Program, which was to
expire in 2023. Due to the aggression of the Russian Federation and
the forced sequestration of government expenditures on science,
these plans have been suspended.
Despite the consequent barriers to implementing future
development plans, Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program remains
among the governmental priorities in science and technology
policy.
In order to ensure the continuation of the maintenance of the
station and long-term environmental monitoring projects, the
Government of Ukraine in December 2023 extended the current
Program until the end of 2025 at the minimum allowable financial
level.
National Antarctic Program continues to be severely understaffed.
Many Ukrainian researchers joined the Armed Forces of Ukraine to
defend the country, among them more than 20 scientists and
technicians involved in National Antarctic Program of Ukraine.
Many of them already have injuries of varying degrees of severity.
Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program restored its main office after
the Russian missile attack on the center of Kyiv on October 10,
2022, has established new supply chains and a scheme of logistics
operations and, most importantly – ensured continuous monitoring
data collection at the year-round Vernadsky station.
Moreover, Ukraine systematically and consistently integrates into
the European research area despite the imposed martial law. Thus,
in April 2022 the State Institution National Antarctic Scientific
Center (SI NASC) became a member of the European Polar Board –
a consortium of research and academic institutions, logistics
operators, and other interested organizations of the
EU member states, aimed to coordinate European strategic priorities
of scientific activity in the Arctic and Antarctic by improving the
exchange of information, optimizing the use of polar infrastructure
and conducting large-scale and multilateral initiatives between its
members and international partners.
One of the most promising initiatives resulting from the
participation of the SI NASC in EPB is joining the POLARIN (Polar
Research Infrastructure Network) project, which aims to facilitate
the sharing use of international polar infrastructures. To this end,
the SI NASC contributes two key Antarctic research infrastructures –
the year-round Vernadsky station and the ice-class research vessel
Noosfera.
International support to Ukraine’s National Antarctic Program
during wartime circumstances
Furthermore, the international scientific community helps
Ukrainian scientists to continue Antarctic research during wartime
and the state’s budget sequestration. Ukraine’s National Antarctic
Program appreciates this support and assistance considering it as
the highest degree of solidarity and adherence to the principles of
scientific co-operation in the field of Antarctic research.
First of all, it should be specially noted the assistance in the
deployment of members of the 27th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition
kindly provided by Polish Antarctic Program (the Department of
Antarctic Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish
Academy of Sciences) in March 2023. In this regard, it should also
be noted that Uruguayan and Czech Antarctic Programs offered
Ukrainian Antarctic biologists the opportunity to carry out research
at its Antarctic stations. In addition, the US Antarctic Program
(National Science Foundation), the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute,
and the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena (Germany) supported
sampling or serving autonomic scientific field equipment.
Department of Antarctic Biology (Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences), Antarctic Ecosystem
Research Division (Southwest Fisheries Science Center, the US), and
Argentinian Antarctic Institute, for their part, provided
organizational and financial support to the CEMP project, where
Ukrainian scientists were involved.
Furthermore, from March 2022, a number of research institutions
and organizations provided their facilities and equipment for
Ukrainian scientists in the field of Antarctic research. In particular,
the British Antarctic Survey provided access to its processing power
(server) to perform Ukrainian part of the work in the framework of
the EU multi-partner project PolarRES. Department of Physics,
University of New Brunswick (Canada), provides the possibility for
Ukrainian geophysicists to work at the Radio and Space Physics
Laboratory to study the ionosphere and space weather of the
Canadian Arctic and also continue to work with the relevant data
obtained from Vernadsky station for comparative studies. Masaryk
University (Brno, Czech Republic) provided access to the Czech
Collection of Microorganisms for experimental studies of
endosymbiont bacteria of Antarctic vascular plants. Institute of
Nature Conservation and W. Szafer Institute of Botany, Polish
Academy of Sciences, provided its laboratories and equipment to
investigate bryophytes and lichens. Silesian University (Katowice,
Poland) allowed Ukrainian biologist to continue her work on
Antarctic environmental spatial protection. The Adam Mickiewicz
University (Poznan, Poland) hosts Ukrainian scientists for
investigations of Antarctic Tardigrada. The International Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology (Polish Academy of Sciences) also
provided its equipment and laboratories, while the US National
Center for Atmospheric Research (managed by the University
Corporation for Atmospheric Research and funded by the National
Science Foundation) offered a fellowship to help Ukrainian
scientists work during the war. The Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) founded a special travel grant for a
young Ukrainian researcher to the British Antarctic Survey.
Conclusions
As shown at the ATCM in Berlin (2022) and Helsinki (2023),
military aggression by one Consultative Party against another has a
destructive effect on the implementation of the invaded Party’s
National Antarctic Program, resulting in sequestering its budget,
reducing research program, and the need to support the scientists
threatened or displaced by the warfare.
Nevertheless, consolidated diplomatic, financial, and logistics
support provided by the most Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
demonstrates, as never before, that the Antarctic Treaty System is
an outstanding example of successful international cooperation for
peace and research for the benefit of all humanity.
