IAATO Considerations During the Development of a Tourism
Framework
IAATO Considerations During the Development of a Tourism
Framework
Information Paper Submitted by (IAATO)
Summary
It was decided at ATCM XLV “to start a dedicated process to
develop a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
regulation of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica” (Decision 6 (2023)). As part of that process, IAATO has
been asked by Parties to contribute to these discussions and
highlight those areas outside of IAATO’s remit and those areas
where industry would benefit from guidance from the ATCM.
This document outlines IAATO’s sphere of legal responsibilities and
capabilities, highlighting some challenges and opportunities that
the Special Working Group on the Development of a Tourism
Framework may wish to consider during their discussions on the
development of a comprehensive and consistent framework for
Antarctic tourism and other non-governmental activities.
Background
IAATO is a trade association comprised of over one hundred
international organizations, many of whom are competitors. These
organizations come together through a shared commitment for safe
and environmentally responsible private-sector travel to Antarctica.
They recognize that Antarctica is an extremely valuable resource
that must be managed sustainably in order to conserve its unique
ecosystems and intrinsic wilderness value for future generations.
Since its inception in 1991, IAATO members have actively self-
managed their activities within the framework of the Antarctic
Treaty System (ATS). As part of this effort, IAATO Operators must
subscribe to the principle that their planned activities will have no
more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment (IAATO Bylaws Article II, Section E).
While the scope of IAATO’s work is far-reaching and
comprehensive, as a trade association IAATO is bound by certain
legal responsibilities. For example, IAATO legally cannot restrict
trade such as placing a cap on number of visitors, or operators, that
can operate in Antarctica as this would constitute anti-trust, or
monopolism. Should any such restrictions occur, they would have
to come from a higher regulatory level.
What IAATO can do, and has done for over three decades, is
facilitate the implementation and enforcement of Treaty agreements
within its membership. For example, IAATO has systems in place to:
Manage the expeditions authorized/permitted by the Competent
Authorities. To take that one step further, IAATO also requires that
should an operator be registered in a country that is not a party to
the Antarctic Treaty or has not implemented the Environmental
Protocol they must submit advance notification and an
Environmental Impact Assessment to IAATO for review and
comment at least 30 days prior to operating;
Require our Operators to work within the parameters of relevant
ATCM Measures, whether they have been fully ratified or not, and
to abide by the hortatory text in Resolutions and any other ATCM
agreements;
Be fleet-of-foot in the development and implementation of industry
best practice procedures to solve immediate issues that may
challenge the intent of ATCM agreements, for example the ban on
recreational use of RPAS in coastal waters, or the collaborative
response to HPAI;
Monitor our membership to ensure compliance with ATCM and
IAATO standards (see ATCM 46 (2024) IP109 IAATO Observation
and Compliance Programs for further details);
Maintain a comprehensive database of all Operator activities to help
inform decision making at both IAATO and ATCM level (see ATCM
46 (2024) IP107 A Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities);
Support our Operators with extensive information and training
resources on IAATO and ATCM agreements to ensure that they have
a platform to promote excellence in all their personnel in the field
and in their offices. Examples include mandatory online
assessments, webinar libraries, tailored animated briefing videos
and the IAATO Field Operations Manual (see ATCM 46 (2024) IP
106 IAATO Field Operations Manual);
Provide a platform for communication and coordination within the
tourism sector to support self-sufficiency and compliance with
relevant ATCM agreements, for example, Measure 4 (2004) and
Measure 15 (2009), see also ATCM 46 (2024) IP108 IAATO Site
Management Methods; and
Provide education and outreach to promote the value and
importance of the Antarctic and Antarctic Treaty System to both the
travelling and wider public, for example through the Antarctic
Ambassador program (see ATCM 46 (2024) IP110 IAATO Antarctic
Ambassador Expedition Program and ATCM 46 (2024) WP029
Seventh report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education
and Outreach.
Challenges and Opportunities to Strengthen Tourism Management:
Inevitably, no system is perfect and needs to evolve as new
challenges emerge. Consequently, over the years, often in response
to questions from Parties, IAATO has communicated where
assistance is needed from ATCMs to promote the responsible
management of tourism and non-governmental activities.
IAATO has identified some challenges and opportunities, listed
below, that it feels would benefit from additional consideration by
the ATCM to strengthen Antarctic tourism management. All of these
revolve around the single premise that given the unique legal
context of Antarctica, the most successful management of activities
in the region comes through collaboration with all sectors of the
community.
Challenges:
Aligning the permitting/authorization process
This would limit the potential for negative “permit shopping”,
minimize confusion amongst operators and ensure a level playing
field for all those working in the field.
Ratifying Tourism-related instruments at the earliest opportunity
Measure 4 (2004, Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism
and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area) and
Measure 15 (2009, Landing of Persons from Passenger Vessels in the
Antarctic Treaty area) remain unratified. While IAATO Operators
are committed to Measures whether ratified or not, ratification of
these and future Measures will assist in creating a level playing field
across any Antarctic operators working outside of IAATO.
Holding bad actors responsible
While IAATO acknowledges the challenges Competent Authorities
face in pursuing bad actors, there are consequences when bad
behaviour and/or non-compliance with Treaty instruments,
particularly the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty are not pursued. This has and continues to
embolden those actors who are either unpermitted/unauthorized or
permitted/authorized but not following the rules. In single instances
this can create irreparable damage.
Providing clear definitions
Confusion around definitions can create issues in the
implementation of ATCM agreements, for example, “Visitor” versus
“Tourist” and consequently the expectations around who is
expected to comply and who is not. Equally a clear definition of
Permanent versus Non-Permanent infrastructure would assist in the
planning and assessment of potential operations.
Opportunities:
IAATO has been facilitating the management of Antarctic tourism
for over 30 years and has a wealth of experience on the practical
management of activities. A key element to the success of many
such initiatives have been founded on a basis of collaboration with
other Antarctic stakeholders. IAATO has, and continues to, stand
ready to work with Parties and ATCM to continue to develop
successful management techniques. To strengthen this
collaboration, IAATO provides the following suggestions:
Expand participation in the Voluntary On-Board Observer Program
(ATCM XLIII Resolution 9 (2021)). IAATO has found success in
mentoring and implementing positive change in operations through
their own observation program. Details are provided in ATCM 46
(2024) IP109 IAATO Observer and Compliance Program. This
success has been expanded when the observation program was done
in collaboration with Competent Authorities. IAATO would
welcome working with more Competent Authorities on joint
observer programs.
Build upon existing collaboration with IAATO to further enhance
the current framework that IAATO provides. The current
infrastructure is a self-funded framework for the comprehensive
fleet and deep field management of IAATO Operators. It enables
robust systems, with checks and balances in place, that allow for co-
ordination, cooperation and collaboration in the field. Further
collaboration between IAATO, Competent Authorities and external
stakeholders will ensure that these systems can strengthen and meet
future requirements.
Identify opportunities to leverage the extensive expert knowledge of
IAATO Operator Field personnel to assist in understanding the
needs and changes related to specific areas in Antarctica. Field Staff
of IAATO Operators have the most opportunity to observe changes
or events, such as high mortality events, occurring in the field. Field
Staff often have tertiary degrees in education, environmental
sciences, and conservation management, and are passionate about
protecting Antarctica. There is potential for this resource to assist
in, for example, additional monitoring of sites, or the regular
evaluation of ATCM Site Guidelines, and also to use their expertise
to find pragmatic solutions for managing tourism on the ground.
With Thanks
IAATO appreciates the opportunity to contribute to discussions
around the development of a comprehensive and consistent
framework for the regulation of tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica and looks forward to further
collaboration with Antarctic Treaty Parties, COMNAP, SCAR,
CCAMLR, IHO/HCA, WMO, ASOC and others toward the long-term
protection of Antarctica.
