Report on the results of a population size survey on snow petrels
supporting the designation of the proposed ASPA Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge
Report on the results of a population size survey on snow petrels
supporting the designation of the proposed ASPA Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
This IP complements the WP 08 ATCM XLVI “Report on the
informal ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management Plan for the
Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica)”.
It presents the main results of an expedition to the Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge in 202223 by German scientists. The expedition was carried
out after the expression of an urgent need to update information on
the area, particularly on the snow petrel population there, in
support of the designation of an ASPA. The survey results validate
the magnitude of the population estimate from former literature
(~10.000 breeding pairs (Hiller et al., 1988)). The Otto-von-
Gruber-Gebirge breeding site thereby hosts one of the largest known
snow petrel aggregations (Croxall et al., 1995). This underpins the
importance of the site for the global population and thus prescribes
its protection as ASPA. Furthermore, the data supports the
compilation of the Draft Management Plan by defining specific
areas of habitat suitability
Introduction
In May 2022, at ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV in Berlin, the Treaty
Parties agreed to the proposed prior assessment for Otto-von-
Gruber-Gebirge and the Committee ‘welcomed the prior assessment
and encouraged Members to work with the proponents towards a
management plan during the intersessional period’. Further, it was
stated that ‘In reply to a concern about older data on snow petrels
and the size of the proposed site, Germany mentioned that an
expedition was planned for 2022-23 to gather more data. Germany
expressed its appreciation for offers of assistance from Members and
IAATO in further work.’ (see paras 111-113 in (ATCM (2022) and
WP12 XLIV ATCM).
In May 2023 at ATCM XLV in Helsinki, Germany informed the
Treaty Parties about the elaboration of the Draft Management Plan
for the area (see para 123 in ATCM (2023) and IP60 XLV ATCM).
This included an expedition to the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge in
November/ December 2022 by German scientists. As a main result,
updated population estimates for the area based on ground surveys
and extrapolation by habitat suitability gained through remote
sensing (drone) data were recently published (Rümmler et al.,
2024). A summary of the information contained in this publication
is given below.
With WP 08 ATCM XLVI the proponents Germany and the USA
inform the CEP about the results and recommendations of the
expert discussions, which took place in an informal ICG to develop
an ASPA Draft Management Plan for the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge
(Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica).
Summary of the publication "Survey of a snow petrel nesting site in
a remote high mountain region to inform designation of an
Antarctic Specially Protected Area" (Rümmler et al., 2024)
Despite the sensitivity of ecosystems in extreme conditions, only
0.029 % of the Antarctic continent is currently granted special
protection as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA).
Additionally, protected areas are unevenly distributed and
unrepresentative of the biodiversity of Antarctica. The Treaty
Parties are thus striving to establish a more coherent network of
protected areas. In this context, the mountains of Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge were identified as an area highly worthy of protection due
to their relative pristine nature and their unique environments,
ecosystems and habitats, including one of the largest snow petrel
breeding sites. However, in the process of designation, the need for
an update of knowledge, particularly of the population status of
snow petrel in the area, was recognized. The population size survey
(Rümmler et al., 2024) was aimed at estimating a population census
of snow petrel breeding pairs in the Lake Untersee catchment, an
important subarea of the potentially protected area. Investigations
were severely limited by the remoteness and harsh conditions of the
area, enabling only a short fieldwork period with limited resources.
Thus, a combination of remote sensing and traditional methods was
applied. A ground survey of a smaller reference area was
conducted, including locating nest sites and assessing nest site
characteristics. Snow petrels usually nest in the cavities of large
boulders, and thus habitat suitability was classified based on
boulder presence (see Fig. 1 below). To do so, the study area was
remotely surveyed with a Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS)
to gain aerial photographic images (orthophotomosaics) in
sufficient resolution to distinguish on-ground conditions for
breeding. Based on these images, nest site densities for the
reference area were calculated. Nest site data such as nest cavity
depth, orientation, and attendance were also studied to gain basic
knowledge of the characteristics of the breeding site. As the main
result it was possible to obtain nest site data and to extrapolate it,
which produced population numbers of 11,765 breeding pairs and
22,493 nest sites for the whole study area. This underpins the size
of the breeding site and thereby its importance for the species as a
whole.
Figure 1: Results of the habitat suitability classification within the
area of the proposed ASPA and comparison with abundance
screening (visual inspection of areas with active snow petrels
outside of nest sites) and known breeding sites (from (Hiller et al.,
1988) and pers. comm. M. Andreev). Figure from Rümmler et al.,
2024.
References
ATCM (2022) Final Report of the Forty-fourth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Berlin, Germany, 23 May - 2 June 2022.
Buenos Aires: Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
ATCM (2022) WP012 Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area at Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctica) by Germany and the United States
ATCM (2023) Final Report of the Forty-fifth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Helsinki, Finland, 29 May – 8 June 2023.
Buenos Aires: Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
ATCM (2023) IP060 Elaboration of an ASPA Draft Management
Plan for Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning Maud Land, East
Antarctica by Germany and the United States
Croxall, J.P. et al. (1995) ‘Breeding distribution of the snow petrel
Pagodroma nivea’, Marine Ornithology, p. 32.
Hiller, A. et al. (1988) ‘Occupation of the Antarctic continent by
petrels during the past 35 000 years: Inferences from a 14C study of
stomach oil deposits’, Polar Biology, 9(2), pp. 69–77. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00442032.
Rümmler, M.-C. et al. (2024) ‘Survey of a snow petrel nesting site in
a remote high mountain region to inform designation of an
Antarctic Specially Protected Area’, Frontiers in Conservation
Science, 5. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3389/
fcosc.2024.1298962.
