Reporting details for non-governmental intra-continental air
operations in Antarctica
Reporting details for non-governmental intra-continental air
operations in Antarctica
Summary
At ATCM XLV the Meeting agreed with Norway’s recommendations
to move toward standardised information exchange for air-
supported land-based tourism and welcomed Norway’s offer to
work intersessionally on this matter. In considering the matter
further, it has become clear that it is not entirely obvious where in
the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) non-
governmental intra-continental air operations should be reported. In
light of this, Norway would like to work to clarify whether non-
governmental intra-continental flights should be reported as non-
governmental aircraft activities or as non-governmental land-based
activities. Depending on the outcomes of these considerations,
further adjustments to EIES might be necessary before considering
whether IAATO’s Deep Field PVR could be used as template for
EIES reporting non-governmental intra-continental flights.
Background
In ATCM XLV WP 34 (More data needed to manage air-supported
land-based tourism), Norway noted that current discussions on
tourism management have mainly focused on cruise tourism, which
is understandable due to its nature and role as the key driver of
Antarctic tourism. However, air-supported land-based activities
seem to be increasing. Norway suggested that more information is
required for Parties to be able to assess and understand trends and
change in air-supported land-based tourism. Lack of information
impairs our ability to consider management needs. Mechanisms for
standard post-visit reporting for air-borne tourism were proposed.
The Meeting welcomed WP 34 and noting the specific challenges
and characteristics of these activities, thanked Norway for focusing
attention on the need for improved information exchange. The
Meeting noted the importance of carefully identifying and
specifying information exchange requirements, with clear formats
for data entry into the EIES. The Meeting agreed with Norway’s
recommendations to move toward standardised information
exchange for air-supported land-based tourism. It welcomed
Norway’s offer to work intersessionally with interested Parties and
IAATO, and in coordination with the Secretariat, on a standardised
post visit reporting as basis for information exchange requirements.
Current reporting of intra-continental air operations in EIES
The current reporting in the EIES does not facilitate easy access to
robust data about aircraft operations in support of land-based
tourism. The lack of available data is an obstacle to understanding
current status, trends and changes. This in turn impairs our ability
to consider management needs.
Decision 4 (2023) specifies currently agreed information exchange
requirements.
Section 1.1.2 on non-governmental activities, specifies the following
information requirements relating to non-governmental land-based
activities (pt. B): Name of expedition, name of the operator, method
of transportation to, from and within Antarctica, type of adventure/
activity, location/s of activities and/or routes, dates of expedition,
number of personnel involved, contact address, web-site address.
Section 1.1.2 on non-governmental activities, specifies the following
information requirements relating to non-governmental aircraft
activities (pt. C): Name of operator, type of aircraft, number of
flights, period of flights, departure date per flight, departure and
arrival location per flight, route per flight, purpose per flight, and
number of passengers.
Pt. C does not exclude intra-continental aircraft activities. Such
activities have nevertheless often/normally been reported under pt.
B as part of the land-based activities or as a separate land-based
activity. Details on the individual flights are often convoluted or
lacking.
Next Steps
Considering the reporting practice as described above it would be
useful to know how Parties understand the difference between pt. B
and pt. C in Section 1.1.2 of Decision 4 (2023). Consideration
should furthermore be given to whether intra-continental aircraft
activities best could or should be reported under non-governmental
activities, or under non-governmental aircraft activities.
It might provide more clarity as well as access to more robust and
usable data for management purposes if aircraft operations in
support of non-governmental activities were reported as “non-
governmental aircraft activities”, i.e. under section 1.1.2, pt. C. This
would enable more consistency in reporting of aircraft operations in
support of land-based tourism and thus enable comparability and
allow easy access to statistics.
Norway would like to further discuss these questions with
interested Parties and the Secretariat. Depending on the outcomes
of these discussions, it may be relevant to consider adjustments to
the EIES to differentiate between inter-continental flights and intra-
continental flights under this section.
Norway intends to come back to a later meeting to report on the
outcomes of these discussions and considerations, and if appropriate
also put forward proposals looking at if and how IAATO’s Deep
Field PVR could be used as template for EIES reporting for non-
governmental intra-continental flights.
