Overview of the McMurdo Offload Infrastructure Project
Overview of the McMurdo Offload Infrastructure Project
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) conducts annual
resupply operations at McMurdo Station using at least one ice-class
cargo vessel and a bulk fuel tanker. Aside from resupply, the cargo
vessel is the primary means of removing retrograde equipment and
waste from both the Amundsen-Scott South Pole and McMurdo
Stations.
For more than fifty years, vessel operations at McMurdo Station
have relied on a unique ice pier. Early ice piers lasted many years
and simply required annual upkeep to remain functional for vessel
operations. In recent years, the average ice pier remained functional
for only one to two years which creates almost an annual
requirement to rebuild the ice pier from scratch. Ice pier
development is also dependent on annual sea ice conditions,
temperatures, and weather.
To have a more reliable platform for vessel operations, the NSF
explored alternatives to the ice pier, to include: a permanent pier, a
modular causeway, and a barge pier. After comparing the
alternatives, the barge pier provided the most operational support
with minimal impacts to the local environment and relatively little
annual maintenance. The barge pier is currently under construction
and is scheduled for delivery to McMurdo Station in February 2026.
Background
Prior to the first ice pier at McMurdo Station, the U.S. Navy
conducted vessel operations directly from the ship over to the
shore. Over time, the shoreline began to erode and required an
alternative means of vessel offload and onload. A permanent
structure was constructed but only lasted a brief period before it
was destroyed by a storm.
An ice pier was developed as the next attempt to create a long-term
platform for vessel operations. Initially, ice piers remained
functional for many years. In the early 2000’s, the ice pier began to
crack after one to two years. To construct an ice pier, sea ice
conditions and weather must cooperate during the May-August
timeframe to reach adequate thickness to support vessel operations
the following January-February.
The ice pier has failed or didn’t achieve adequate thickness three
times in the last twelve years. During seasons with an ice pier
failure, the U.S. Army supports the NSF with a modular causeway
system (MCS) that consists of pontoons pinned together to make a
floating pier with beach-ends to access the shore. The MCS is costly
to employ and is not a viable long-term solution.
To create a long-term alternative to the ice pier, the NSF explored a
permanent pier, a modular causeway, and a barge pier. A
permanent pier would have significant impacts on the environment
with drilling into the seafloor in Winter Quarters Bay. A modular
causeway would be labor intensive to build and maintain each
season and would also require the U.S. Antarctic Program to
procure and maintain dedicated watercraft for annual causeway
assembly and disassembly. A barge pier could remain in place for
many years, would require limited annual maintenance, and have
relatively little impact to the environment. For that reason, the
barge pier was selected as the way ahead to support vessel
operations at McMurdo Station.
McMurdo Barge Pier
In November 2023, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers awarded a
contract to build and deliver the barge to McMurdo Station in
February 2026. The barge pier will be 328 feet long, 100 feet wide,
and 18 feet deep. All sides of the barge are raked similar to the
sides of a bathtub to allow the barge to rise during sea ice
development and then break down through the ice using the sheer
size/weight of the barge. The barge will be constructed with thick/
cold weather steel and have a Polar Class rating of PC-6.
The barge will be moored directly to the shore using four stiff-leg
connections that also allow for movement of the barge when ice
forms or during weather when Winter Quarters Bay has open water.
The barge pier is designed to remain moored and in service at
McMurdo Station for at least twenty years. The Initial
Environmental Evaluation was completed February 2024 (see EIA
Database).
Figure 1: Barge pier layout and components.
Path Forward
To prepare for barge delivery and installation in February 2026, the
U.S. Antarctic Program, along with assistance from Antarctica New
Zealand and the U.S. Navy, will began drilling pile holes, placing
piles, and pile caps for the mooring stiff legs in the 2024/2025
season. Construction will continue early in the 2025/2026 season to
build the bridge abutments and ramps.
When the barge arrives at McMurdo Station in February 2026, the
mooring stiff legs will be installed and then the bridges will be
moved into place to complete the project. Based on the current
schedule, the barge will be ready to support operations during the
2026/2027 season.
