Unregulated discharges in the Antarctic Treaty Area: gray water
from ships
Unregulated discharges in the Antarctic Treaty Area: gray water
from ships
Summary
Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty establishes guidelines for the prevention of marine
pollution by ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including
the prohibition or regulation of certain discharges.
vol1_8_AT_Protocol_Annex_IV_e.pdf (ats.aq). These, however, do not
extend to gray water. Gray water from vessels can contain high
levels of nutrients, microplastics, heavy metals, pathogens such as
fecal coliforms, and other contaminants. ASOC proposes that ATCPs
consider including the management of gray water from ships in the
future ATCM workplan and encourage stakeholders to share
information about best practice in the management and disposal of
gray water.
Introduction
Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty establishes guidelines for the prevention of marine
pollution by ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including
the prohibition or regulation of certain discharges.
vol1_8_AT_Protocol_Annex_IV_e.pdf (ats.aq). These, however, do not
extend to gray water, defined by the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) as “drainage from dishwasher, shower, laundry,
bath, and wash basins drains.” Resolution MEPC 295(71) 2017
Guidelines for the Implementation of MARPOL Annex V. Adopted 7
July 2017. Despite the toxicity of many of its constituents, gray
water disposal is not regulated under the International Convention
for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) or any other
instrument of the IMO. No treatment is required, and it can be
discharged in the Antarctic Treaty Area without restriction. 
Over ten years ago, ASOC submitted an information paper to the
XXXVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on the discharge of
sewage (black water) and gray water from vessels operating in
Antarctic Treaty waters (ATCM XXXVI IP 66). The paper expressed
concern that the current system of management of black and gray
water was inadequate to provide the necessary protection for
Antarctic ecosystems and wildlife. It proposed that Antarctic Treaty
Parties give consideration to the need for more stringent
management of the disposal of black and gray water discharges
from vessels. This includes considering the need for a prohibition on
the discharge of untreated sewage or gray water into Antarctic
Treaty waters and seeking Special Area status for the Antarctic
Treaty Area under MARPOL Annex IV. 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) have identified the
need for ‘further attention or development’ to the risk of non-native
species release in wastewater discharge, including gray water
Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area (2021).
https://documents.ats.aq/atcm44/ww/atcm44_ww018_e.pdf
Accessed 16 April, 2024. (ATCPs, 2021). ASOC proposes that ATCPs
consider including the management of gray water from ships in the
future ATCM workplan, and in the meantime encourage:  
Discussion of the management of gray water amongst all
stakeholders, 
Sharing of information on management and best practices in the
management of gray water, and 
Consideration of a prohibition on the discharge of untreated gray
water into Antarctic Treaty waters. 
What is gray water?
Gray water is one of the largest sources of wastewater generated by
ships. While its primary sources include drainage from dishwasher,
shower, laundry, bath, and wash basins drains, research conducted
on vessels in Alaska found that gray water systems may also receive
wastewater from salon; day spa and medical facility sinks and floor
drains; deck drains in non-engine rooms (e.g. chemical storage
areas); and refrigerator, air conditioner and dry-cleaning
condensate, among others United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). (2008). Cruise Ship Discharge Assessment Report,
Section 3: Gray Water. https://pame.is/
images/05_Protectec_Area/2019/PAME_II/Other/SEG/EPA_-_2008_-
_Cruise_Ship_Discharge_Assessment_Report_Section_3_Graywater.pdf
Accessed 16 April, 2024. Analyses of gray water from passenger
vessels have found that gray water contains high levels of nutrients,
microplastics, heavy metals, and pathogens such as fecal coliforms,
in concentrations up to three orders of magnitude greater than
those typical in untreated domestic wastewater EPA, 2008; United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2011). Gray Water
Discharges from Vessels. https://www3.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/
vgp_graywater.pdf Accessed 16 April, 2024. Jalkanen, J.-P.,
Johansson, L., Wilewska-Bien, M., Granhag, L., Ytreberg, E.,
Eriksson, K. M., Yngsell, D., Hassellöv, I.-M., Magnusson, K.,
Raudsepp, U., Maljutenko, I., Winnes, H., and Moldanova, J.
(2021). Modelling of discharges from Baltic Sea shipping, Ocean
Sci., 17, 699–728, https://doi.org/10.5194/os-17-699-2021, 2021.
Jang Y.L., Jeong J., Eo S., Hong S.H., Shim W.J. (2023) Occurrence
and characteristics of microplastics in greywater from a research
vessel. Environmental Pollution. Jan 15;341:122941. doi: 10.1016/
j.envpol.2023.122941..
Gray water is produced as part of normal operations on fishing,
tourism, research, and supply vessels, as well as in land-based
operations in the Antarctic Treaty Areas. The highest volumes are
inevitably produced by those with the highest passenger numbers or
longest duration of stay. Vessels are not required to report volumes
of gray water produced, however estimates based on voluntary
reports from passenger vessels in Alaska range from 36 to 119
gallons (136 to 450 liters) per person, per day, with an average of
67 gallons (250 liters) per person, per day EPA, 2008..
The pH, salinity, and turbidity of gray water varies considerably
between sources, with temperatures ranging from 64 to 95°F (18 to
35°C) Oteng-Peprah M., Acheampong M.A., deVries N.K. (2018).
Greywater Characteristics, Treatment Systems, Reuse Strategies and
User Perception-a Review. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2018;229(8):255.
doi: 10.1007/s11270-018-3909-8.. Depending on its source, gray
water may also contain food waste; oil and grease; pharmaceuticals
including antibiotics; chemicals found in cleaning products, such as
chlorine; xenobiotic organic compounds (XOCs); and other
contaminants toxic to marine life Oteng-Peprah et al., 2018..
Risks of gray water disposal in the Antarctic environment
Polar waters are vulnerable to changes in the nutrient status of the
water column or seabed. Nutrients, such as nitrogen and
phosphorous, are naturally present in the marine environment, and
their limited availability helps regulate the growth of
microorganisms, such as algae. Even small changes in the nutrient
status can have consequences for the fluxes and flows of nutrients
between the trophic levels within a food web. The introduction of
excess nutrients in gray water increases their availability for uptake
by algae, which can lead to a cascade of events such as algal
blooms, ocean acidification, eutrophication, loss of biodiversity, and
disruption of food
webs, including declines in fish stocks. In cases of severe over-
enrichment, hypoxic dead zones can be created Malone, T.C &
Newton, A. (2020). The Globalization of Cultural Eutrophication in
the Coastal Ocean: Causes and Consequences. Frontiers in Marine
Science. 10.3389/fmars.2020.00670  . 
Other components of gray water, including its elevated temperature
relative to the Southern Ocean, and contaminants which may be
present, such as chlorine, heavy metals, microplastics, and
xenobiotic organic compounds (XOCs), can cause changes in
biochemical, physiological, morphological, and behavioral patterns
of marine organisms EPA, 2008; Komyakova, V., Vince, J., Haward,
M.(2020) Primary microplastics in the marine environment: scale of
the issue, sources, pathways and current policy. Report to the
National Environmental Science Program, Marine Biodiversity Hub.
IMAS, University of Tasmania..
Gray water discharges can also be vectors for the introduction of
marine non-native organisms, which may threaten the integrity of
Antarctic ecosystems, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula area
Hughes, K. A., Pescott, O. L., Peyton, J., Adriaens, T., Cottier-Cook,
E. J., Key, G., Rabitsch, W., Tricarico, E., Barnes, D. K. A., Baxter,
N., Belchier, M., Blake, D., Convey, P., Dawson, W., Frohlich, D.,
Gardiner, L. M., González-Moreno, P., James, R., Malumphy, C.,
Martin, S., … Roy, H. E. (2020). Invasive non-native species likely
to threaten biodiversity and ecosystems in the Antarctic Peninsula
region. Global change biology, 26(4), 2702–2716. https://
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14938; Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R.,
Brooks, C.M., Convey, P., Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips,
L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II & Grant, S.M. (Eds.) (2022) Antarctic
Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and
Recommendations for Action. Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.. This region, which is
significantly impacted by warming temperatures, sea ice loss, and
increased susceptibility to the establishment of non-native species
due to climate change Chown et al., 2022; McCarthy, A. H., Peck, L.
S., & Aldridge, D. C. (2022). Ship traffic connects Antarctica's
fragile coasts to worldwide ecosystems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 119(3),
e2110303118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110303118, also
receives the majority of Antarctic ship traffic. Between 2014 and
2018, 90% of ship traffic in Antarctic waters was to and from the
Antarctic Peninsula and South Shetland Islands. Many of these
vessels travel along the same or similar routes, so wastewater
discharges may be concentrated in limited areas, and cumulative
impacts are possible. 
The rate at which gray water discharges decompose is affected by
several environmental factors including solar radiation, water
depth, dissolved oxygen content, sea ice, algal blooms, salinity,
water currents, temperature, turbidity, and stratification. Polar
waters are characterized by minimal to low light for approximately
six months of the year, and very low temperatures from 28 to 50°F
(-2 to 10°C), which slows the decomposition of gray water
González-Alonso, S., Merino, L. M., Esteban, S., López de Alda, M.,
Barceló, D., Durán, J. J., López-Martínez, J., Aceña, J., Pérez, S.,
Mastroianni, N., Silva, A., Catalá, M., & Valcárcel, Y. (2017).
Occurrence of pharmaceutical, recreational and psychotropic drug
residues in surface water on the northern Antarctic Peninsula
region. Environmental pollution (Barking, Essex : 1987), 229, 241–
254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.05.060.. Some
components of gray water, such as microplastics and heavy metals,
never decompose, and may bioaccumulate Miller M.E., Hamann M.,
Kroon F.J. (2020) Bioaccumulation and biomagnification of
microplastics in marine organisms: A review and meta-analysis of
current data. PLoS One. Oct 16;15(10):e0240792. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0240792. PMID: 33064755; PMCID: PMC7567360.
Kumar M, Singh S, Jain A, Yadav S, Dubey A, Trivedi SP. (2024) A
review on heavy metal-induced toxicity in fishes: Bioaccumulation,
antioxidant defense system, histopathological manifestations, and
transcriptional profiling of genes. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2024
May; 83:127377. doi:10.1016/j.jtemb.2023.127377. or act as
vectors themselves Komyakova et al., 2020.. 
Regulation of gray water
The disposal of wastewater from ships, including black water
(sewage) and ballast water, is regulated by the IMO, and
enforceable under international law. Even comparatively new
wastewater streams, such as discharges from the use of exhaust gas
cleaning systems or scrubbers are subject to IMO guidance. Despite
the toxicity of many of its constituents, gray water disposal is not
regulated by the IMO. No treatment is required, and it can be
discharged without any restrictions. Furthermore, regulation of gray
water discharges from international shipping is not even under
active consideration at the IMO. 
In the Antarctic Treaty Area, the deliberate release of non-native
organisms is not permitted under Annex 2 of the Environmental
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, and ATCPs have previously
identified the need for ‘further attention' to the risk of non-native
species release in wastewater discharge, including gray water
Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area (2021)..
There are examples of local, regional and national authorities
independently regulating gray water discharges in territorial waters.
For example, in the United States, gray water discharge is regulated
under the Clean Water Act and the National Marine Sanctuaries Act
EPA, 2011.. In Alaska, local laws regulate gray water disposal for
Commercial Passenger Vessels Alaska Department of Environmental
Conservation. Regulation 18 AAC 69. Chapter 69: Commercial
Passenger Vessel Environmental Compliance Program. https://
dec.alaska.gov/commish/regulations/Accessed 8 April, 2024.. In
2023, Canada introduced mandatory regulations for the discharge
of gray water and treated sewage in Canadian waters under the
Canada Shipping Act Interim Order Respecting the Discharge of
Sewage and the Release of Greywater by Cruise Ships in Canadian
Waters. https://tc.canada.ca/en/ministerial-orders-interim-orders-
directives-directions-response-letters/interim-order-respecting-
discharge-sewage-release-greywater-cruise-ships-canadian-waters
Accessed 8 April, 2024..
Current gray water practice 
There is little publicly available data on current practice with
respect to gray water storage, treatment, and disposal practices by
vessels in Antarctic waters. Research in Alaska and the Baltic Sea
suggests that a wide range of practices may be taking place
depending on a vessel’s age; the presence or absence of filtration,
grease traps or other methods of treatment; the combination and
treatment with sewage (in which case it becomes subject to Annex
IV of the MARPOL Convention); controlled or immediate discharge;
and gray water holding capacity EPA, 2008.. 
The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO)
Observer Report Forms include questions on sewage and waste
management practices, although it is unclear whether this includes
the disposal of gray water. Several Antarctic tour operators are
members of the Cruise Lines International Association (CLIA),
which has developed guidelines for gray water disposal
Environmental Protection | CLIA UK (cruising.org). 
Recommendations
ASOC proposes that ATCPs consider including the management of
gray water from ships in the future ATCM workplan and in the
meantime encourage:  
Discussion of the management of gray water amongst all
stakeholders, 
Sharing of information on management and best practices in the
management of gray water, and 
Consideration of a prohibition on the discharge of untreated gray
water into Antarctic Treaty waters.
