Palmer Station pier replacement: environmental monitoring update
Palmer Station pier replacement: environmental monitoring update
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
This paper describes environmental monitoring conducted in
association with a major construction project for a pier replacement
at Palmer Station in the Antarctic Peninsula. Impacts on the
affected environment that would potentially result from
construction activities were identified and assessed as part of an
Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE). The objective of this paper
is to present key findings from the environmental monitoring effort:
confirmation of anticipated localized disturbance to benthic and
terrestrial habitats, which corroborates the previous determination
of a no more than minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment.
Figure 1 – Aerial photographs of Palmer Station and Gamage Point
before and after pier replacement.
Palmer pier replacement
Background
Palmer Station (64˚46.45’S, 64˚03.25’W) is located on Anvers
Island, Antarctica and is one of three scientific research stations in
Antarctica operated by the United States Antarctic Program (USAP)
that are occupied year-round. All cargo deliveries and personnel
transfer operations are conducted by marine vessel due to the lack
of an airstrip at Palmer Station. The purpose of the project was to
provide a safe and reliable pier for the unloading of personnel and
critical supplies from marine vessels at Palmer Station, which is
necessary for the National Science Foundation to effectively carry
out its scientific mission. The previous pier, constructed in 1967,
was at the end of its useful life and needed to be replaced.
Additionally, the new design would allow for regular
access by larger vessels, a necessary feature that was lacking before.
Construction of the new pier occurred in 2021-2022.
Regulatory compliance
All construction activities were conducted in accordance with
applicable international and domestic agreements and laws
including, but not limited to, the Antarctic Treaty of 1959
(Antarctic Treaty), the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (Protocol), the Marine Mammal Protection Act,
and the Antarctic Conservation Act, as amended by the Antarctic
Science, Tourism, and Conservation Act of 1996 (ACA). The ACA
implements the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol
for the United States. Its primary role is to conserve and protect the
native mammals, birds, and plants of Antarctica and the ecosystems
of which they are a part.
Environmental monitoring
Background
Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Protocol introduce and describe the
Environmental Impact Assessment process, providing categories of
environmental impacts according to their significance. Potential
impacts associated with the Palmer pier project were anticipated to
incur no more than a minor or transitory impact; therefore,
documentation of existing conditions and anticipated impacts were
evaluated under an IEE, Palmer Pier Replacement, Palmer Station,
Antarctica and amendment (hereafter “IEE”).
USAP developed a monitoring program for this project that follows
guidance in the Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook:
Standard techniques for monitoring in Antarctica (Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs [COMNAP] and Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research 2000) and the Practical
Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring
Programmes in Antarctica (COMNAP 2005).
As described in the IEE, trained USAP staff conducted the following
monitoring activities: wildlife observations of marine mammals and
birds around Palmer Station, assessments of marine benthic habitat
around the Palmer pier, and assessments of vegetation sites on
Gamage Point.
Wildlife
To assess possible impacts of construction on birds and marine
mammals, Palmer Station staff conducted over 1,100 wildlife
monitoring watches between 21 January 2019 and 30 March 2023
in which the area around Palmer Station was scanned for six
minutes, noting presence and behaviour of animals. Data were
collected in seven MS Excel worksheets, then combined, and
standardized for analysis using Microsoft Power BI. Analysis
compared wildlife sightings prior to and after construction
activities, including comparing averages of wildlife sighted per
monitoring watch during the austral summer months. All species
that were observed before construction were also observed after
construction with the exception of four bird species, one seal
species, and one whale species which were not seen after
construction. The average number of birds observed post-
construction was higher than seen in pre-construction monitoring
watches (due to large flocks of Kelp Gulls sighted throughout the
2022-23 season), and the averages of penguin and seal observations
were slightly reduced. Differences in
observed wildlife may be due to natural variance in wildlife
populations and could not be directly attributed to construction
activities.
Benthic habitat
The IEE predicted that areas of excavation, fill, and pile installation
would lead to temporary and/or permanent loss of marine benthic
habitat as a direct result of the new pier construction. Assessments
of the benthic area around the Palmer pier project area were
conducted as planned, using videos taken by USAP divers. The
subject of the videos was for operational purposes, but benthic
areas were recorded and used for pre- and post-pier assessments. It
was not practicable to conduct regular underwater assessments
during construction.
Video recorded pre-construction showed a well-developed and
diverse epibenthic community dominated by brown and red
macroalgae to the extent that hardly any of the inorganic substrate
was visible. In comparison, footage taken in June 2022, after the
majority of construction activities had ceased, revealed a
predominantly abiotic benthic environment dominated by clean
gravel, cobbles, and boulders. Long-term effects are not anticipated,
however, given the general abundance of adjacent, quality habitat.
Early signs of recolonization were observed post-construction,
including a small presence of seastars, fish, and algae.
Terrestrial flora
The immediate vicinity surrounding Palmer Station was already
heavily disturbed, consisting primarily of gravel devoid of
vegetation, but some areas of moss, grass, and lichen were present
on the distal end of Gamage Point. Dominant species include the
moss Sanionia uncinata, the vascular plant Deschampsia antarctica,
and various lichens. Palmer staff conducted vegetation surveys
before, during, and after pier construction. As described in the IEE
document, environmental staff were notified immediately when
existing vegetation was damaged. Palmer staff captured monthly
reference photographs of vegetation before, during, and
immediately following pier construction. A final set of photographs
was taken 20 months post-construction.
Construction of the new Palmer pier resulted in the necessary
removal of five small assemblages of moss and grass because they
were in the project’s footprint. Three remaining sites showed no
changes during or after construction. Because of the size of the
habitats in question (less than 1 m²) and their location within
previously disturbed operational areas at Palmer Station, the overall
impact of construction on terrestrial flora in the area is considered
minor.
Concluding remarks
Environmental impact
Monitoring activities surrounding Palmer pier construction revealed
various degrees of benthic and terrestrial habitat disruption
consistent with expected impacts, and no significant differences in
the presence of local wildlife. Due to the small geographical area
and presence of adjacent quality habitat, the findings presented
here corroborate the IEE’s determination of a no more than minor
or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.
