terrANTALife: Increasing the availability of terrestrial and
freshwater biodiversity data checklists to inform CEP decision-
making
terrANTALife: Increasing the availability of terrestrial and
freshwater biodiversity data checklists to inform CEP decision-
making
Summary
This information paper presents terrANTALife 1.0, a curated
biodiversity data checklist comprising a broad catalogue of known
of eukaryotic and prokaryotic life forms in Antarctic terrestrial
ecosystems (Pertierra et al 2024). This compendium represents a
comprehensive tree of life in Antarctic non-marine ecosystems that
solidifies the work of Wauchope et al. 2019 that collated a massive
compendium of spatial records of living entities reported in the
continent, now in the form of a taxonomically-resolved biodiversity
checklist. This comprehensive baseline data basis represents an
extraordinary tool for conservation and management. It will allow a
better inclusiveness and representativeness of all life forms for
holistic science and strategic conservation. Future biodiversity
analyses compared with this baseline will allow considering the
vulnerability of some species and the introduction of new ones as
well as the identification of ecological knowledge gaps.
Background information
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) provides advice
to the ATCM on issues relating to the protection of the Antarctic
Environment including its biodiversity. Through the CEP Five-Year
Work Plan (available at https://www.ats.aq/e/committee.html), the
Committee has identified ‘Biodiversity knowledge’ as a Priority 2
issue where the need of science knowledge and information on the
‘Collection and submission of further spatially explicit biodiversity
data’ has been identified.
The best available science regarding biodiversity knowledge of the
Antarctic terrestrial and freshwater environment may assist the
ATCM and CEP in its decision-making, including:
the conservation of species and habitats through designation of
Specially Protected Species and protected areas; and
the delivery of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process.
SCAR has a long track record of supporting the Committee in its
provision of advice to the ATCM with regard to biodiversity
information (see ATCMXLII IP52; ATCMXL WP13; ATCMXXXIX
IP38; ATCMXXXVI WP37; ATCMXXXIII WP3). Currently, the most
recently updated compendium of Antarctic diversity records is
Wauchope et al. 2019 ‘Biodiversity Database’ (ATCMXLII IP52),
which compiled terrestrial species occurrence records from
Antarctic Special Protected Areas (ASPAs), covering over 2,000
described terrestrial and freshwater taxa from the Antarctic.
However, opportunities exist to build on this database, including in
terms of data accuracy and comprehensiveness.
Recent developments and potential improvements
A research consortium created under the auspices of SCAR and its
Scientific Research Programme ‘Integrated science to inform
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Conservation’ (Ant-ICON) has
compiled, improved and revised eukaryotic species inventories and
provided a first compendium of microorganisms present in
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems in Antarctica in a checklist
preliminarily called terrANTALife.
Version 1.0 of terrANTALife
contains all Antarctic life forms (i.e. 470 animals, 997 fungi, 306
plants and 418 “protists”) detected from scientific literature in the
continent, harmonized and revised by group of experts up to
January 2024;
includes genetic information (about 350,000 amplicon sequence
variants) relating to prokaryotic biodiversity, which is relevant to
Antarctic microorganism; and
has been scrutinized through a peer-reviewed journal specialized in
biodiversity data in order to ensure the data set conforms to
existing quality standards (https://bdj.pensoft.net/article/106199/
instance/8812334/).
Links with global biodiversity knowledge
The Antarctic Biodiversity Information Facility (AntaBIF), acting as
the Antarctic node to the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF), represents a centralized digital meta-repository of Antarctic
biodiversity datasets, allowing for the integration of Antarctic
biodiversity information. The terrANTALife long-term intent is to
make the biodiversity checklist a living repository integrated with
GBIF and AntaBIF facilities that allows for open contributions,
regular updates and interannual provision of key summary
information to the CEP.
The complete materials are publicly available for free usage in the
Spanish CSIC server (https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/307449)
and are also deposited in GBIF under the DarwinCore’s biodiversity
standardized information system for wider visibility as to follow the
FAIR open science principles approach.
Keeping the biodiversity knowledge current
To provide a living database, it is anticipated that checklists will be
updated (with the intent to be biennially) through open
participatory processes involving SCAR and any interested Parties,
with post-launch ongoing curation following the successful and
pragmatic approach of GBIF DarwinCore. Subsequent revisions of
the checklist will be updated regularly with new versions, provided,
ideally, on an annual basis, post publication.
To this end, members of the polar research community will be
regularly consulted via social media and events asking for new
contributions and updates to include. It is proposed that the updates
shall be coordinated by a taxonomic expert consortium among
current and new contributors from the Antarctic research
community through open calls for offered added expert
involvement under the auspices of SCAR, with approval of proposed
updates confirmed following appropriate peer-review. Each version
of the dataset will be made available to enable any changes, errors
and/or sources to be traced back.
Next steps
The authors aim to ensure that datasets will be regularly revised
and improved, with the new updates published under subsequent
peer review processes. The resulting products will be presented to
the CEP to inform environmental management policy making, and
SCAR hopes to submit updates to future CEP meetings providing
more information.
References
Pertierra LR, Varliero G, Barbosa A, Biersma EM, Convey P, Chown
SL, Cowan D, De Los Rios A, Escribano-Alvarez P, Fontaneto D,
Fraser C, Harris M, Hughes K, Griffiths H, le Roux P, Liu XP, Lynch
H, Majewska R, Martinez PA, Molina-Montenegro M, Olalla-Tarraga
MA, Peck L, Quesada A, Ronquillo C, Ropert-Coudert Y, Sancho L,
Terauds A, Vianna J, Wilmotte A, Hortal J, Greve M (2024)
TerrANTALife 1.0 Biodiversity data checklist of known Antarctic
terrestrial and freshwater life forms. Biodiversity Data Journal 12:
e106199.
Wauchope, H., Shaw, J.D. & Terauds, A. A snapshot of biodiversity
protection in Antarctica. Nat Commun 10, 946 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08915-6
