Indian-Norwegian Scientific Co-operation in Antarctica
Indian-Norwegian Scientific Co-operation in Antarctica
Summary
Over the last decade(s) the national Antarctic programs of India and
Norway have initiated and developed collaborative efforts in
Dronning Maud Land, drawing on the scientific strengths and the
available logistics of both programs. This paper provides insight
into some of the collaborative efforts initiated and on the horizon.
Background
The International Geophysical Year of 1957–1958 was a major
milestone and in many ways laid the groundwork for the Antarctic
Treaty and cemented international scientific collaboration as a
cornerstone. Since then, extensive collaboration and numerous
small and large international research projects have underpinned
the important contributions from Antarctica to the global science
and knowledge production.
Over the last decade(s) the national Antarctic programs of India and
Norway have initiated and developed collaborative efforts in
Dronning Maud Land, drawing on the scientific strengths and the
available logistics of both programs. This has resulted in important
contributions to the knowledge base required to answer how
changes in Antarctica will impact globally and have implications for
society.
The Indian National Antarctic program
The Indian Antarctic Program was officially launched in 1981 with
the first Indian expedition to Antarctica. Since then, India has
undertaken 43 scientific expeditions to the continent, making it one
of the most active nations in Antarctica. The Indian Antarctic
program is operated and coordinated by the National Centre for
Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), an autonomous institute under
the Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India. India has
established three permanent research stations in Antarctica:
Dakshin Gangotri (1983-1990), Maitri (1989-present), and Bharati
(2012-present). Maitri, located in the Schirmacher Oasis, is India's
second and currently operational research station, while Bharati,
located on the Larsemann Hills, is the most recent addition to the
country's Antarctic infrastructure. Recently, The Indian government
has passed the Indian Antarctic Act 2022, which provides a
comprehensive legal framework for India's activities and operations
in Antarctica. This act underscores India's commitment to the
sustainable management and conservation of the Antarctic region.
The Indian Antarctic Program has ambitious plans for the future,
including efforts to acquire a dedicated Polar Research Vessel (PRV)
to support its scientific activities in Antarctica. Additionally, India is
planning to rebuild its Maitri Station with the new state-of-the-art,
environmental friendly technologies, to replace the aging Maitri
station.
The Norwegian National Antarctic program
Norwegian research activity in Antarctica is rooted in a long
tradition. Already in the 1920s and 1930s Norwegian nationals
carried out extensive research in Antarctica, most often on
expeditions that combined whaling and research activities.
NARE (Norwegian Antarctic Research Expeditions) – operated and
coordinated by the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) - was formed as
an expedition framework that supported the accomplishment of all
Antarctic research funded by the Norwegian government. The
modern Norwegian Antarctic Research Expeditions (NARE)
commenced in 1976, and expeditions took place regularly. In
1989/90 the summer field station Troll was established in
Jutulsessen, Dronning Maud Land (72°00′42″S 2°32′06″E). The
upgrading of Troll to an all-year station in 2005, together with the
change to air transport as main mode of transportation, had
significant impact on the form of the Norwegian Antarctic
operations. While a relatively small operation in the beginning, the
operations are now quite extensive with a continuous presence on
the continent.
The Norwegian Government has recently decided to initiate a total
renewal of the Troll Research Station (cf. ATCM XLV IP 20), and a
new station is expected to be operational in 2032.
Indian-Norwegian collaboration
Indo-Norwegian collaboration in Antarctica dates back to early
1980s when India undertook its first scientific expedition to
Antarctica.
The Norwegian Embassy in India has since 2011 facilitated
researcher to researcher dialogue for potential collaborative
projects through several workshops. The Research Council of
Norway and Ministry of Earth Sciences in India have established the
INDNOR bilateral program, which allows an India-Norway team to
submit a single proposal to the funding agencies in both nations.
INDNOR covers various scientific topics and polar region was
selected as one of these topics. This coordinated funding is crucial
to carry out a collaborative project including fieldwork.
In brief the Indian-Norwegian collaboration can be summarized as
follows:
An MoU was signed between NPI-NCPOR (then NCAOR) in 2008.
NPI’s ICE Centre, which was established in 2009, was amongst
other mandated to focus on sharing knowledge and experiences on
glaciology, paleoclimate, and fieldwork between Norway and India.
NPI and NCPOR initiated a dialogue to start a student training
program at NPI, and in 2014 the first PhD candidates started their
PhD periods at NPI. The student PhD-program was funded by the
Indian MoES.
A number of high-level seminars about polar collaboration have
been held over the last decades, cementing the Indian-Norwegian
collaboration in Antarctica.
Projects with joint field work
Maitri and Troll lie approx. 350 kilometers apart, and collaboration
in the field has its challenges due to this geography. However, over
the years the two programs have developed and established a
practical and tailored approach to logistical, technical and scientific
collaboration in the field. The following field-based collaborative
projects are worth highlighting:
MADICE (2016-2021): This joint project combined India’s expertise
with ice cores and paleoclimate with Norway’s expertise in
glaciology and field safety to investigate the central DML coastal
regions. India provided logistic support from its base at Maitri
Station, about 1 hour east by airplane from Troll. The Norwegian
team flew into Maitri Station and jointly conducted the ground
traverse across crevasse terrains. Under this project the two national
Programs jointly organized the first summer school of Antarctic
glaciology and climate in Goa.
SIWHA (2020- continuing): The ongoing project aims to expand
MADICE collaboration to drill a deep ice core reaching the Last
Glacial Maximum. An India-Norway joint team flew from Maitri
Station, developed two local base camps each on
the two adjacent ice rises, and flew back to Maitri. The site survey
has been completed to select the optimal ice core site. India is
evaluating various options to facilitate the drilling of the ice core.
RINGS (2022- continuing): Although a multi-lateral project, India is
an important partner of the first RINGS survey in Antarctica,
implemented to Dronning Maud Land and Enderby Land, with
Norway playing a leading role. This past season, the RINGS survey
flights in DML flew over two Indian ice core sites so that new radar
data and the Indian ice cores will be used to map snow
accumulation in DML, a big wild card for the Antarctic contribution
to the sea-level change.
RAICA (2023 - continuing): India and Norway have jointly
conducted glaciological site survey work in West Antarctica, for the
RAICA project, The Ross – Amundsen Ice Core Array. The first
expedition in the 2023-24 season was led by Korea Polar Research
Institute as a part of their K-NOW project. While the geographical
location is beyond the logistical support capabilities of the Indian
and Norwegian stations, we have adapted our expertise developed
through MADICE and SIWHA projects to further develop
international collaboration with South Korea and the USA.
Memorandum of Understanding
NPCOR and NPI will sign an MOU in the margins of the 46th ATCM
for further future collaboration. This MoU will be a renewal of the
2008 MoU between NPI and NPCOR (then NCAOR), further
developing the collaboration between the two institutes. The MoU
aims to facilitate collaboration on topics of mutual interest between
the two institutions in the area of polar studies and logistic
operations. The MoU’s objective is to facilitate further cooperation
in research and development activities (RnD). This MoU is a
statement of intent to foster genuine and mutually beneficial
collaboration.
Through the MoU, NPCOR and NPI seek to promote, inter alia, the
following fields of scientific studies and logistic operations:
a. Geological Sciences
b. Paleoclimatology and paleoceanography
c. Marine Sciences
d. Biogeochemistry
e. Biological Sciences and Terrestrial Ecosystem
f. Atmospheric Sciences
g. Cryospheric Sciences
h. Environmental Sciences
i. Earth Observations
j. AI/ML applications in Earth Sciences
k. Advanced technology for polar and ocean studies
The co-operation will also include the exchange visits of scientists,
early career researchers, students and technical personnel, as well
as training, joint execution of scientific projects, and support in
polar logistics operations.
