Overview and Update of Canada’s Antarctic Regulatory Framework
Overview and Update of Canada’s Antarctic Regulatory Framework
Summary
This paper provides an overview of Canada’s current domestic
Antarctic legislation, recent updates, and presents a path for
planned regulatory amendments. The purpose of this paper is to
fulfil Canada’s obligations to notify all Parties of the measures taken
in pursuance to Article 13 of The Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and to provide updated
information on Canada’s Antarctic regulatory framework.
Background
Canada became a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty in 1988
and ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection in 2003.
Domestically, Canada implements its environmental protection
obligations under the Treaty and the Protocol through the Antarctic
Environmental Protection Act (2003) (AEPA) and associated
Antarctic Environmental Protection Regulations (AEPR).
The Department of the Environment (Environment and Climate
Change Canada) is responsible for administration and enforcement
of the AEPA and acts as Canada’s Competent Authority. Each year
Canada issues permits for activities in the Antarctic organized by
Canadians or Canadian companies, for either tourism or scientific
activities. Canada’s permit process and salient issues were
previously discussed at ATCM 38 in IP 107 and 108 as part of the
Special Working Group on Competent Authorities Issues. However,
a fulsome description of Canada’s existing regulatory framework
has not previously been presented to the ATCM.
National legislation
The AEPA is the federal legislation that provides Canada the legal
authority to ensure that Canadians meet all of the obligations of the
Protocol and its Annexes; the AEPA received Royal Assent and
thereby became law on October 20, 2003. Canada’s AEPR are the
mechanism through which the AEPA is implemented and enforced;
the AEPR was registered and became effective on November 10,
2003. The AEPA applies to Canadians and Canadian corporations,
expeditions that are organized in Canada, expeditions leaving for
Antarctica from Canada, Canadian vessels, and Canadian aircraft.
Canada’s AEPA requires that Canadian activities must be assessed
for their potential environmental impact prior to proceeding. The
AEPA specifies the three levels of environmental evaluation as
required by Annex I of the Protocol, and the AEPR establishes the
minimum information requirements, and thresholds for approval for
the Preliminary, Initial, and Comprehensive levels of Environmental
Evaluations. All Initial Environmental Evaluations are uploaded
annually to the EIES, as have pre- and post-season information on
all permitted activities, regardless of the level of environmental
evaluation.
The AEPA gives the Minister of the Environment the authority to
issue permits and sets out the minimum requirements to receive a
permit. There is a general prohibition for persons on Canadian
expeditions, Canadian vessels, and Canadian aircraft to be in
Antarctica without a permit authorized pursuant to the AEPA or
written authorization of another Party to the
Protocol; additional prohibitions mirror those found in the Protocol
and its Annexes. The legislation also:
Establishes the requirements for permit applicants to provide waste
management plans and emergency (contingency) plans;
Allows the Minister to require an applicant to provide insurance or
other financial security that can be called on to reimburse costs in
the case of an environmental emergency;
Contains sections related to enforcement of the legislation,
including the designation of enforcement officers, powers of search
and seizure, environmental compliance orders, and prosecution;
Allows the Minister to designate officers for inspections in
Antarctica; and,
Sets out the conditions under which the Minister may issue permits
for prohibited activities such as entry into Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas, taking native species, and the introduction of non-
native species.
Recent updates and forward-looking regulatory agenda
Annexes V and VI
In October 2021, when Canada’s application for Consultative Party
status was submitted, Annexes I-IV had already been accepted.
Subsequently, Canada deposited an instrument of acceptance of
Annex V to the Protocol on February 23, 2022, in addition to the
amended Annex II. Canada had implemented the requirements of
Annex V in the AEPA and AEPR in 2003, so no legislative or
regulatory changes were required prior to acceptance.
Canada continues to be supportive of the principles of Annex VI,
and existing domestic legislation implements the regulatory
requirements related to preventative measures, contingency plans,
and insurance or financial security. Further legal analysis is
underway to determine any regulatory amendments that may be
necessary to allow the transfer of money to the fund referred to in
Article 12 of Annex VI of the Protocol. If no legislative changes are
required Canada will take steps to formally accept Annex VI.
Expected regulatory amendments
Canada’s Competent Authority has begun a regulatory review
process of the current AEPR and has identified a number of possible
amendments. The Canadian legislation and regulations fully
implements all requirements of the Protocol, as described above,
but amendments are needed so the AEPR complies with the
enabling authority under the AEPA and to resolve minor domestic
administration issues. In addition, Canada’s Act and Regulations
currently have the same level of requirements for preliminary,
initial, and comprehensive environmental evaluations. Proposed
amendments will create a clear distinction between the
requirements for each level of environmental assessments and will
therefore better harmonize domestic legislation with the
requirements of the Protocol, specifically for preliminary and initial
environmental evaluations.
Modern data collection methods provide opportunities to create a
more agile regulatory approach to permit applications. For example,
having the format of the application form prescribed by the
legislation is antiquated. The proposed regulatory amendments will
focus on the information to be submitted in support of a permit
application, as opposed to the specific format of the application
form. This will allow the Competent Authority to design application
forms that are specific to different classes of activities in the
Antarctic. As part of the modernization, Canada is also seeking to
more efficiently reference the lists of Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas and Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments in the AEPR.
This information can change based on decisions taken at the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the lists are updated
and readily available from the Antarctic Treaty System website.
Referencing the website in legislation will ensure that Canadian
permit holders have access to the most up-to-date information.
These planned regulatory amendments will result in a Canadian
Antarctic framework that is modernized, harmonized, and
streamlined to better support applicants who wish to visit
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean for tourism or scientific
purposes.
