Plans for a fifth International Polar Year 2032/33
Plans for a fifth International Polar Year 2032/33
[Co-sponsored IP by SCAR and WMO]
Summary
As reported to ATCM XLV IP50 Plans for a fifth International Polar
Year 2032/33, planning has begun for a fifth International Polar
Year (IPY) to be held in 2032-33. Organizing the fifth IPY 25 years
after the last IPY in 2007-08 reflects the urgent need for
coordinated international research to tackle the biggest challenges
of polar research, for both the polar regions themselves and for the
world as a whole. The publication of a concept note in October
2023 by those organisations involved in the initial planning stages
of the preparations, facilitated awareness raising and dialogue
amongst a broader range of stakeholders.
Background 
An International Polar Year (IPY) provides an opportunity for
intensive, coordinated research efforts focussed on the polar
regions, as well as for awareness raising and capacity building on a
global scale. There have been four IPYs: 1882–1883; 1932–1933;
1957–58 (part of the International Geophysical Year) and 2007–
2008.  Aside from the International Arctic Science Committee
(IASC) and SCAR, the initial planning efforts for the 5th IPY are
currently supported by the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), International Science Council (ISC), University of the
Arctic, International Arctic Social Sciences Association (IASSA), the
Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) and other
partners worldwide representing both poles.   A SCAR community-
wide survey in early 2022 indicated widespread support for a fifth
IPY. In September 2022, the SCAR Delegates expressed support for
a future IPY and endorsed the creation of an IPY planning
committee within SCAR to participate in the planning discussions of
the wider polar community. Delegates also supported the holding of
a joint SCAR-IASC Polar Conference in 2030 in the lead up to the
5th IPY.  
At ATCM XLV in Helsinki, the support for a fifth IPY was
highlighted in the Helsinki Declaration in which the Parties
committed to : “Give strong support to the 5th International Polar
Year (IPY) 2032-33 by championing its objectives, and seek to
provide sufficient means to support the scientific endeavours of
those planning IPY projects and logistics, and encourage SCAR and
COMNAP, together with its IPY partners, to use the occasion to take
a further step forward to understand the impacts of climate and
environmental change on the Antarctic environment and dependent
and associated ecosystems, as well as the global implications of
these changes”.
The European Polar Board and the International Arctic Science
Committee are supporting authors on this paper.
Progress to date 
The latest planning meeting was held in October 2023 and included
representatives from SCAR, IASC and a number of partner
organizations including the ISC, WMO, APECS, EPB, IASSA,
UArctic, PEI, the Saami Council, and Integrating Climate and
Ecosystem Dynamics (ICED). Discussions included progress on a
draft concept note, which was published later in October 2023 and
can be downloaded here. The concept note outlined the rationale
for the IPY, the guiding principles, the timeline of activities (see
Figure 1), the societal impacts and benefits of the IPY, and the next
steps. The concept note has been shared at a number of high profile
fora
including the Arctic Circle Assembly and CCAMLR since then.
Further planning discussions have also taken place at meetings with
individual organisations including at the Arctic Circle Assembly in
Reykjavik, Iceland in October 2023, the One Planet – Polar Summit
in Paris, France in November 2023, the Polar Symposium in
Monaco in February 2024, and at the Arctic Science Summit Week
in Edinburgh, Scotland, UK in March 2024.
Participants at the Polar Symposium (www.thepolarinitiative.org/
en/symposium-2024-74) in Monaco emphasized the importance of
inclusiveness in the IPY and highlighted that it must not only
include relevant contributors and regions but also emerging
scientific disciplines, such as robotics and machine learning.
Additionally, they agreed that the IPY provides an opportunity to
include different sources of funding, both private and philanthropic,
that have not yet been engaged in polar research.
A next meeting of the wider IPY Planning Group is planned for end
of April 2024 to further discuss the timeline and interim planning
structure. Stakeholder engagement (including but not limited to
involvement of national stakeholders and funders within the
planning process) as well as the meaningful involvement of
Indigenous Peoples in the planning process, will be a strong
emphasis for the work of the IPY Planning Group over the coming
year. Another important topic will be the identification of funding
and a potential host for an IPY Secretariat. In the absence of a
funded IPY Secretariat, the Secretariats for SCAR and IASC are
temporarily fulfilling the role of an interim IPY Secretariat.
Figure 1 – IPY Timeline
Next steps 
As highlighted in ATCM XLV IP50 Plans for a fifth International
Polar Year 2032/33, the 5th IPY is neither envisioned as a single
focal year with heightened activities, nor as a polar decade. It will
involve a multi-year, build-up phase leading up to the IPY, and a
legacy phase for reporting and implementation of identified actions
afterwards. Projects will be able to contribute to the IPY during
either or both of these phases. This will provide the flexibility for
urgent issues to be tackled without delay under the umbrella of the
IPY. It will also create a focal point for the polar research
community and wider stakeholders. Some projects may involve
activities during the lead-up phase with results reported during the
IPY. Other projects that require longer planning phases may involve
dedicated field and measurement campaigns during the IPY itself,
with results reported afterwards. Coordination between key actors
from an early stage will be vital to the IPY’s success. Sharing
research experience and skills between researchers in both polar
regions will be important, as will identifying common research
questions and approaches, wherever appropriate. 
Work is now underway to expand stakeholder engagement and to
identify options for long term governance and leadership of the IPY
as well as funding to support a programme office. As part of the
build-up to the IPY in 2032, SCAR and IASC have also invited
proposals from their members, to host a joint SCAR/IASC
conference in 2030. Following publication of the concept note,
work is underway to prepare a more detailed planning document
setting out a way forwards. The aim is to build an IPY that reflects
the aims and objectives of the organisations involved, and of the
international research community, as well as Indigenous Peoples
and other residents of the Polar Regions and wider stakeholders. 
