Polar Science Early Career Community Office (PSECCO):
An Initiative to Increase Accessibility and Inclusion in Antarctic
Research
Polar Science Early Career Community Office (PSECCO):
An Initiative to Increase Accessibility and
Inclusion in Antarctic Research
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
Providing direct support for professional development and cohort
building to early career polar scientists is one way to ensure that
future generations of researchers are ready to lead polar research
and field teams in the challenging international collaboration spaces
in Antarctica.
Background
The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) began several
initiatives to proactively support increasing accessibility and
inclusion in Antarctic Research (these are described in ATCM XLV
IP107 Initiatives to Increase Accessibility and Inclusion in Antarctic
Research). One set of initiatives is focused on the development of
early career researcher cohorts. A foundational program, called the
Office of Polar Programs Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (OPP-
PRF) includes direct support for new postdoctoral research paired
with professional development. This program provides support for
about ten new Fellows each year. However, an NSF goal is to offer
support for all U.S. polar scientists with a special focus on early
career scientists, which cannot be accomplished through the OPP-
PRF. To meet this broader goal, NSF supported the creation of the
Polar Science Early Career Community Office (PSECCO), hosted by
the University of Colorado at Boulder which provides professional
development and community-building events that are available to
all in the polar early career researcher community. PSECCO also
provides funding support for travel, administrative, and belonging,
accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (BAJEDI)
efforts led by U.S. early career polar scientists as well as support for
polar early career networks or organizations.
Key PSECCO objectives include professional development,
connecting networks of communities focused on polar science, and
funding U.S. early career polar scientists. This initiative aims to
develop inclusive and thoughtful leaders who have the skills to lead
diverse teams, build supportive environments for their future
students and laboratory members, and open pathways for new
partnerships in polar research.
Key Objective: Professional Development
PSECCO, although focused on the early career stage, is developing
tools, resources, and events that are openly available to everyone
interested in polar research. As this portion of their work has
developed, active listening to input from the polar research
community has guided content development and resources that
PSECCO curates. The community is invited to and often able to
point out real or perceived gaps, that PSECCO may be able to work
to address. PSECCO hosts an active Slack channel, that allows
dispersed polar researchers to connect across the country and across
various institutions. Additionally, PSECCO creates and circulates a
monthly newsletter to share information about upcoming polar
partner organization and PSECCO-led events and activities. These
mechanisms promote the connection, communication, and sharing
of information across the polar early career research community.
Another element of professional development is the workshops
PSECCO hosts. These workshops offer practical support for polar
science fieldwork and an opportunity to practice belonging,
accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (BAJEDI)
principles. For example, in spring of 2024, PSECCO hosted a three-
part Leadership Workshop series, focused
on development for leading inclusive teams. This series explored
foundational aspects of leadership, tools for team building and
navigating conflict, and strategies for intentionally constructing safe
work atmospheres. The workshops are presented in a way that is
accessible for individuals with any amount of leadership experience.
Workshops were designed with active attendee participation but are
also available online for asynchronous access to the materials and
resources.
A diverse array of resources is also available to early career polar
scientists for professional and educational growth. PSECCO’s
educational materials webpage hosts a list of freely accessible links
for various earth science datasets, interactive multimedia learning
modules, lesson webinars, and educational outreach opportunities.
These resources are free to all, with content applicable to
individuals of all career stages.
Key Objective: Connecting the Networks of Polar Communities
In addition to supporting the individual development of the next
generation of leaders in polar research, PSECCO is also committed
to supporting and amplifying, existing organizations building polar
networks. PSECCO intentionally avoids duplication work by existing
networks and organizations. Existing polar networks have a variety
of foci, including the multitude of research disciplines working in
the polar regions and polar researchers with specific interests or
identity alignment. PSECCO maintains a webpage with links to all
the polar and polar-adjacent networks they are aware of and are
working to connect. This list is updated as PSECCO becomes aware
of new polar networks or organizations.
Many polar community networks are organized by volunteers that
may be budget and experience limited. PSECCO is developing
partnerships with these organizations to facilitate cross network
connections for organizations doing similar work where support is
appropriate and needed. For example, if another network is
interested in hosting an event and plans to provide the subject
matter expertise for the event, PSECCO can offer support for the
event organization, management, and publicity. In this example of
event support the hosting network can focus on the content and
PSECCO can help ensure a smoothly facilitated event.
Internationally, the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
(APECS), works to support early career polar scientists. While the
goals of PSECCO are in alignment and at times overlap with
APECS’s goals, PSECCO acts as a complementary entity to APECS.
Both organizations regularly communicate and work to ensure early
career resource development and support is not duplicated by either
program. Sometimes APECS and PSECCO actively partner on
planning community-building and social events at large
international polar conferences. A key difference between programs
is that APECS supports the international polar early career scientist
community and PSECCO supports U.S. polar early career scientist
community.
Key Objective: Funding for U.S. Polar Early Career Researchers
In response to the Antarctic Research community, PSECCO offers
three categories of funding which U.S. early career researchers can
apply to for financial support. All funding opportunities provided by
PSECCO are conducted through small grant awards that cover costs
that are often not covered through other funding sources.
The first funding category provides financial support in the form of
travel grants to enable researcher travel and participation in
professional science conferences and workshops. The second
funding category supports the important work of enhancing
belonging, accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion
(BAJEDI) in the polar regions. Funding associated with BAJEDI is
primarily awarded to individuals and organizations that will lead to
tangible impacts on BAJEDI-related issues. The third funding
category provides financial support for early career individuals who
need administrative resources. Funding though this mechanism
supports a wide range of costs, ranging from costs associated with
BAJEDI event planning to resource
costs associated with data management or website administration.
PSECCO has purposefully made this last category highly flexible to
ensure early career researchers are able to advance their mission,
elevate their presence, and increase the impact of their work. These
funding opportunities will support the development of leaders
within polar research to successfully navigate the challenging
international collaboration spaces in Antarctica.
Conclusions
The U.S. National Science Foundation is committed to advancing
the careers of polar scientists who often struggle to establish
research teams and develop leadership skills for polar fieldwork due
to the difficulty of getting funding for their work as they begin their
careers. The NSF’s Office of Polar Programs expects that direct
support for postdoctoral researchers combined with professional
development and training support for early career researchers will
help the polar sciences maintain a vibrant and diverse community
with the engagement of researchers at all career stages.
