Outreach and Education Activities Review
Outreach and Education Activities Review
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Dissemination among the younger generation of information about
Antarctica, its environment and its role in global climate processes,
about the research conducted there, as well as about the
mechanisms for regulating activities in Antarctica, the Antarctic
Treaty and the Environmental Protocol, is an important area in the
activities of the Russian State Operator in Antarctica – the Federal
State Budgetary Institution “Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute”
(AARI).
AARI pays great attention to the popularization of polar science and
the achievements of Russian scientists. The media group of the
AARI is conducting a comprehensive information campaign aimed
at informing the general public about the projects of the institute
and the activities of Russian polar explorers in high latitudes.
AARI scientists take part in major exhibitions and conferences. The
Institute organizes its own international scientific and business
conference POLAR.
Work is carried out on a regular basis with the media at the federal
and regional levels. In 2023, more than 8,200 publications were
published in the media mentioning AARI, including about 200
television stories and 3 documentaries aired on NTV, Nauka and
OTR television channels.
Specialists of the AARI Media Group are actively working on social
networks: they are developing the ICE telegram channel (https://
t.me/aari_official), a group on the social network VK and YouTube.
The total audience of the official pages of AARI on social media is
about 18 thousand people. In addition, a sufficient number of young
scientists of the institute also conduct active educational work and
talk about the achievements of Russian polar explorers in their
personal blogs.
As part of the “Polar School” project implemented by AARI, a series
of events were held aimed at involving schoolchildren in the
problems of safety and conservation of biodiversity of the Polar
regions; several monographs have been published on Antarctic
professions, the organization of meteorological observations in the
Polar regions; popular lectures were given and online courses on
Antarctic research were recorded.
The goal of the project is to carry out career guidance work within
the framework of interaction between secondary educational
institutions in St. Petersburg and AARI. Main tasks are professional
guidance for students in the field of studying the polar regions of
the planet, popular science reviews of the institute’s activities,
formation of future personnel for the AARI.
The Polar School program includes lectures by leading scientists of
the AARI, fascinating stories about scientific expeditions to the most
distant corners of the planet, and about modern methods of
studying the Polar regions. In addition to theory, program
participants have the opportunity to take part in winter
hydrological and meteorological practices at the Ladoga, scientific
base of the AARI, and summer oceanography practice on Ladoga
Lake.
In recent years, the Russian Geographical Society has been
implementing the international educational project “Lessons from
the Ocean”. Lessons for high school students are conducted online
with participants of scientific expeditions in the World Ocean,
travelers and scientists. Lessons are devoted to current problems of
studying and preserving the nature of the World Ocean. On April 3,
2024, the seventh “Lesson from the Ocean” was held, which was
dedicated to Antarctica. The teleconference involved six active
platforms where several hundred schoolchildren and teachers
gathered: three in Russia, two in India and one in Australia.
Scientists from the polar stations of India (Bharati) and Russia
(Progress) got in touch and answered questions from
schoolchildren. The polar explorers spoke about life at Antarctic
stations, the natural and climatic conditions of Antarctica and the
research they conduct. Thanks
to broadcasts on social networks, more than three thousand
participants from all over the world joined the action.
As in previous years, in the 2023/2024 season, artists took part in
the work of the 69th Russian Antarctic Expedition in order to
popularize the values and knowledge about the Antarctic
environment, as well as the life and work of Russian scientists.
During the expedition, the author of three-dimensional panoramas
and immersive exhibitions, Dmitry Poshtarenko, collected photo
and video material to create video content (films, videos,
educational materials), exhibitions, museum spaces, and movie sets.
The famous watercolor artist Anna Mikhaylova created a series of
watercolor and graphic works for a future exhibition dedicated to
the upcoming 70th RAE. She also prepared a model of a children's
book about the life and work of polar explorers and the unique
nature of the Antarctica.
Figure 1 – R/V “Akademik Fedorov”. Watercolour. ©Anna
Mikhaylova, 2024
