Gender, diversity and inclusion policy of the Chilean Antarctic
Institute
Gender, diversity and inclusion policy of the Chilean Antarctic
Institute
Summary
The progress on gender, diversity and inclusion issues of the
Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) is presented, including the
recently approved institutional policy on these matters. It is worth
highlighting the promotion and growing presence of women in
various logistical tasks in Antarctica and the establishment of a
protocol for the reporting, investigation and punishment of
mistreatment, workplace and sexual harassment and sexist or
discriminatory practices.
Background
Chile was the first South American country to implement a Feminist
Foreign Policy (PEF), joining those who already have one, such as
France, Canada, Spain, Luxembourg and Mexico.
The PEF's priority is to strengthen democracy with a focus on
gender equality; commit to greater empowerment and
representation of women; delve deeper into the agenda for women,
peace and safety; address issues such as commerce and gender,
climate change, science, technology and innovation and promote a
comprehensive care system.
At institutional level, the Chilean Foreign Ministry will create the
Gender Affairs Division, which will be in charge of implementing
this policy, in addition to coordinating the work with the agencies
dependent on the ministry: the Directorate of Borders and Limits,
ProChile, the INACH and the International Cooperation Agency.
On the other hand, Antarctic activity has historically had a strong
gender bias, with its first development in the 19th and 20th
centuries being highly marked by the presence of males and the
exclusion of women.
In recent years, INACH has implemented a series of initiatives to
definitively change this situation both in the organisation of the
service and in strategic activities (e.g. the Antarctic Scientific
Expedition, ECA from its initials in Spanish).
INACH is made up of 43% women, a figure that increases in
leadership positions, with 57% in leadership positions.
Being aware that the female representation in the staff that carries
out logistical activities in the expeditions is lower, varying between
8.11% and 16.3% in the 2017-2020 expeditions, it was proposed to
increase this participation to reach the ambitious figure of 50%
female participation in the short term.
Advances in gender, diversity and inclusion
The first efforts made in ECA 58 made it possible to reach 24.2%,
while in ECA 59 it reached 45%. In ECA 60 (2023-2024) the
number of women in logistics exceeded men for the first time ever,
with a record figure of 53.8%. This was made possible through
determined action by INACH and a strong communication
campaign carried out at the national level to promote the hiring of
women in logistics and science support functions.
In 2021, the INACH Gender Technical Roundtable was established,
which leads the implementation of strategies and actions necessary
to institutionalise gender equality in the institute and the actions it
carries out with other public and private institutions.
Training on gender issues for male and female officials has been
encouraged. In 2021, 52.6% of the staff had at least one training
session on this topic and in 2022 this figure reached 65.8%. We are
on track to achieve 100% coverage in the very short term.
An effort has been made to incorporate the gender issue at all levels
of INACH action as a tool for the prevention of abuse, workplace
and sexual harassment, and sexist or discriminatory practices; for
the mainstreaming of the gender approach in the Service's
programmes and policies, and as a means of social transformation.
The INACH Gender Roundtable has worked intensely to improve
the induction process for the Antarctic Scientific Expedition with a
specific talk on sexual abuse and harassment and the establishment
of a simple and effective protocol for reporting, investigation and
punishment. The Protocol, as well as the complaint form, is
available on the institutional website: https://www.inach.cl/sobre-
inach/igualdad-y-equidad/
INACH has also promoted the participation of women in the
National Antarctic Science Programme (PROCIEN). Of the 90
projects in execution by 2022, 44.4% are led by women, a
percentage higher than the average in other national scientific
fields. Along these lines, the inclusion of the gender perspective in
the conditions of the competitive funds to strengthen equity in the
formation of research teams has allowed us to advance from 32%
participation by women in the applicant teams in 2020 to 50% in
2022.
Meanwhile, in the “Antarctic School Fair (FAE)” programme, which
promotes polar-related knowledge among teachers and high school
students, there is also greater female participation in all stages. In
the FAE 2023, the participation of the female gender was widely
highlighted, which in the case of female students exceeds 60% in all
stages of the programme, with 65% of women in application,
admissibility and selection, and reaching 82% among the winning
teams. In the case of teachers leading participating teams, this
indicator is greater than 50% for the initial stages of the
competition.
Finally, this year 2024, INACH created a document with its Gender,
Diversity and Inclusion Policy, which promotes actions to
mainstream these themes to eliminate the obstacles that impede the
advancement of women and girls in the Antarctic fields and gender
gaps in the different dimensions of human development. Its specific
objectives include:
• Institutionalise the gender perspective by advancing the
incorporation of gender issues in INACH and the National Antarctic
Programme.
• Review structures, processes and policies for the institutional
strengthening of gender equality, diversity and inclusion, as well as
greater participation of women in decision-making.
• Identify spaces for the creation and updating of regulations and
policies that incorporate the gender approach.
• Generate an environment free of violence and discrimination in all
areas of work of INACH and the National Antarctic Programme.
• Intervene in various instances within the Antarctic Treaty System
to strengthen the protection and promotion of the dignity,
autonomy and participation of women and diversities in Antarctic
activity.
The full text of the INACH Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Policy is
available for reading and downloading at: https://www.inach.cl/
politica-de-genero-diversidad-e-inclusion-del-inach/
