Status of Observational Coverage and Gaps in the Southern Ocean
Status of Observational Coverage and Gaps in the Southern Ocean
Information paper submitted by SCAR on behalf of the Southern
Ocean Observing System (SOOS)
Summary
This paper presents preliminary maps of observational coverage of
the Southern Ocean being developed by the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS). SCAR and SOOS welcome feedback on
these maps from all interested Parties and programs.
Background
The Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) is an international
initiative with the mission to facilitate the sustained collection and
delivery of essential observations of the Southern Ocean to all
stakeholders, through the design, advocacy, and implementation of
cost-effective observing and data delivery systems. One SOOS
product which is working towards this mission is the identification
of the spatio-temporal and thematic requirements of observations
needed to address community agreed SOOS Science Themes and
Challenges (outlined in the SOOS 2021-2025 Science and
Implementation Plan Newman, L., Hancock, A.M., Hofmann, E.,
Williams, M.J.M., Henley, S.F., et al., (2022). The Southern Ocean
Observing System 2021-2025 Science and Implementation Plan.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6324359), the existing coverage
and gaps.
SOOS integrates national and international observing efforts, much
of which is regional and based on interconnected sectors of national
infrastructure and activities. To support this, SOOS has developed
five Regional Working Groups (RWGs, Figure 1): The Southern
Ocean Indian Sector, the Ross Sea, the Weddell Sea and Dronning
Maud Land, the West Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Arc, and the
Amundsen/Bellingshausen Sea. The RWGs coordinate and
implement regional observing systems and enable integration of the
internationally coordinated observing programmes with the shorter-
term national/multi-national observing projects. Each RWG has
defined sub-regions for their sector which are being used to develop
and map the regional importance of key environmental drivers, the
observational requirements to monitor those drivers, and the
current observational coverage and gaps. Initial draft maps of
observational coverage to address the SOOS’s Science Themes and
Challenges have been developed and are ready for community
feedback and input.
These maps of observational coverage reflect the relative
importance of various environmental, biological and
biogeochemical processes in each sub-region, the stakeholder
requirements in the region, as well as the current observational
coverage and data availability required to address each Science
Theme and Challenge. Preliminary maps of observational coverage
required to address the SOOS Science Themes are shown in Figure
2. All maps clearly show the patchiness of observations within the
Southern Ocean and the pressing need to have sustained and
coordinated observations to provide an understanding of current
conditions, inform predictions of future states, and support policies
and regulations for the benefit of society.
Future Directions
SOOS is seeking community feedback and input on these maps to
ensure that they capture all observing efforts and community needs.
To provide feedback, please contact info@soos.aq.
The membership and activities of each RWG are open for all to join.
If you would like to be kept informed on the activities of any of the
SOOS Regional Working Groups, please subscribe to their mailing
list (via www.soos.aq).
Figure 1: The five SOOS Regional Working Groups (RWG), which
coordinate and integrate observing efforts in each region. The
smaller divisions of each regional group (thin blue lines) are the
sub-regions and have been used by each region to identify
observational requirements and coverage (see Figure 2). Sub-
regions were developed by each regional group, and are organised
around oceanographic or bathymetric features, or take into account
other boundaries such as CCAMLR Subareas or Marine Protected
Areas.
Figure 2: Maps of existing observational coverage and data
availability for SOOS Science Themes: understanding and
quantifying the state and variability of the Southern Ocean (a)
cryosphere, (b) circulation, (c) carbon and biogeochemistry, (d)
ecosystems and biodiversity, and (f) ocean - sea ice - atmosphere
fluxes. For the sub-region shown in grey, the observational coverage
is still to be determined. The ranking of observational coverage has
been conducted within the SOOS Regional Working Groups, with
each SOOS Science Theme being the average rank of the Challenges
within that Theme. SOOS Science Themes and Challenges are
outlined in the SOOS 2021-2025 Science and Implementation Plan.
