Waste Treatment at the Syowa Station Waste Landfill
Waste Treatment at the Syowa Station Waste Landfill
Summary
At Syowa Station, waste was landfilled until the Antarctic Treaty
Protocol on Environmental Protection was signed (January 14,
1988), and there is a landfill with an area of approximately 1,400
m2 and a volume of approximately 5,500 m3. This Information
Paper describes the waste disposal at the Syowa Station Waste
Landfill.
Introduction
The Antarctic Treaty Protocol on Environmental Protection states as
a basic policy that ''Waste generated by Antarctic exploration
activities shall be disposed of under the full responsibility of the
generator and the user,'' and ''It does not apply if removing the
waste by any practicable method would have a greater adverse
effect on the environment than leaving the waste in place.''　
The National Institute of Polar Research, an Inter-University
Research Institution Corporation under the Research Organization
of Information and Systems (hereinafter referred to as the National
Institute of Polar Research), has decided to dispose of waste at the
Syowa Station Waste Landfill Site, based on the current state of the
landfill and the results of test drilling operations. Considering that
removing the waste would not have a greater negative impact on
the environment than containing it in its original location, and that
the plan to contain the waste would require maintenance and
management of the waste landfill in the future, it was decided to
carry out the work with a policy of completely removing it.
Syowa Station Waste Landfill
Syowa Station is located on East Ongul Island (69°00'25''S,
39°35'01''E), about 4 km from the continent on the eastern shore of
Lützow-Holm Bay, and the waste landfill is located to the north of
the base (located on the north side of the processing building),
adjacent to the coast.
Syowa Station is located on East Ongul Island, about 4 km from the
continent, so it is not affected by katabatic winds and belongs to the
coastal weak wind zone, where the climate is relatively warm and
the winds are not very strong.
The soil at the waste landfill is covered with snow for most of the
year, becoming frozen ground. However, in the summer (December
to January), the snow melts and the surface soil is exposed. It is
known that frozen soil can thaw to a depth of about 1.0 to 1.5
meters.
Waste landfills are thought to contain a variety of waste, including
household waste, observation equipment, construction debris,
machinery, and vehicle waste.
Status of consideration, investigation, and work to date
Waste treatment will begin in the 66th team (FY2024), and the
status of studies, surveys, work, etc. to date is as follows.
48th (FY2006)
Trial excavation to investigate the actual state of land reclamation.
It was confirmed that waste had been buried under a 10-20cm
embankment.
51st (FY 2009)
Trial excavation to investigate the actual state of land reclamation.
Sampling of excavated soil waste. Composition analysis in Japan.
Sampling was planned to be conducted at depths of 1.5 m and 3 m,
but sampling at 3 m was not possible because the area below 1.5 m
was frozen soil.
54th (FY 2012)
Installation of a geothermometer.
It was confirmed that the soil below the surface of the earth to a
depth of 1.5 m thaws in the summer, but the ground below 1.5 m is
frozen year-round.
55th (FY 2013)
Waste distribution survey using landfill ground penetrating radar.
It was confirmed that the area deeper than 1.5m is bedrock or
frozen soil. In the waste landfill survey, sampling was conducted
from 22 locations and soil analysis was conducted.
56th (FY 2014)
As a measure to prevent the spread of contamination, some sheets
were buried to prevent snowmelt water from flowing into the area.
57th (FY 2015)
As a measure to prevent the spread of contamination, a water guide
wall was installed on the slope side of the landfill site to prevent
snowmelt water from flowing in.
Syowa Station Waste Landfill Measures Study Working Group (total
of 5 meetings)
(December 2017 to October 2018)
Consideration of treatment policies and methods for waste and soil
left at the waste landfill site of Syowa Station. ・Consideration of
trial excavation and investigation methods of reclaimed land by the
60th team ・Consideration of work policy and methods for the 61st
team and beyond ・Future tasks
・Long-term work schedule
60th (FY 2018)
Trial excavation on flat ground to determine labor productivity per
unit (Bugakari*1).
61st (FY 2019)
Test excavation on the slope (Norimen*2) was carried out in order
to grasp the labor productivity per unit, and slope formation at the
edge was carried out as a measure to prevent diffusion.
62nd (FY 2020)
As a measure to prevent the spread, slopes were created around the
edges and landfill waste was collected.
63rd (FY 2021)
As a measure to prevent the spread, slopes were created around the
edges and landfill waste was collected.
64th (FY 2022)
As a measure to prevent the spread, slopes were created around the
edges and landfill waste was collected.
65th (FY 2023)
Excavation of plain ditches, installation of survey reference points
(benchmarks), and collection of landfill waste.
*1: Bugakari (Commission): A numerical representation of the
amount of work required to formulate a treatment plan.
*2: Norimen (Slope): An artificial slope created by an embankment,
etc.
Details of waste treatment operations
Waste treatment operations are as follows:
Screen the excavated material and sort it into waste and excavated
material containing soil.
All waste discharged from the landfill will be packed and brought
back to Japan.
Samples of waste-containing soil will be taken back to Japan and
soil contamination analysis will be conducted. If there is no
contamination, the soil will be recycled as is. If there is
contamination, treatment methods will be considered depending on
the situation. As one of these methods, insolubilization treatment is
applied as an on-site containment measure for the foundation
ground of structures and the construction subgrade/subgrade of
road pavement. After the measures are completed, environmental
monitoring will be carried out.
etc.
Antarctic environmental impact
Since the waste excavation will be carried out when the freeze is
lifted, impacts such as flow and diffusion of pollutants, soil
disturbance due to excavation, generation of dust, and exhaust gas
emissions from the use of heavy machinery are expected.
Regarding the flow and diffusion of pollutants, measures will be
taken to prevent high water content in the excavated area due to
snowmelt water that flows out from the remaining snow layer
during the summer, and to prevent contaminated water seeping
from buried waste from spreading into the surrounding
environment. An unexcavated ditch will be installed to collect
snowmelt water and channel it to the discharge area (ocean), and a
slope will be formed on the ocean side of the reclaimed land to
prevent pollutants from spreading due to collapse.
Regarding soil disturbance, the landfill is already an extensively
disturbed area and is therefore unlikely to further degrade the
environment at the site unless continued excavation continues
beyond the contaminant boundary.
To prevent the generation of dust, measures such as covering it with
water-shielding sheets, etc. and temporarily fixing it with weights
(weights, sandbags, etc.), prohibiting entry to landfills during the
winter, and prohibiting materials from being left behind are
measures that will be taken to prevent dust from scattering.
Regarding exhaust gas emissions from the use of heavy machinery,
it is believed that the emissions are minor as the work will be
carried out using a limited number of heavy machinery.
The National Institute of Polar Research will conduct waste disposal
at waste landfills, taking measures to minimize or mitigate the
impact on the Antarctic environment.
