Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Government has a steadfast and ongoing
commitment to be at the forefront of efforts to promote gender
equality and social inclusion, in Australia, Antarctica, and in our
international relations. Ensuring diversity and inclusion is centred
in our policy development and decision making, strengthens our
thinking and reflects Australia’s modern society.
Recalling priority item 13 in the ATCM’s Multi-Year Strategic Work
Plan encouraging Parties to “address equality, diversity and
inclusion issues, by promoting full participation of
underrepresented groups in Antarctic science and operations
activities across all Antarctic issues including science, operations,
policy and law”, and the agreement at ATCM XLV to encourage
Parties, Observers and Experts to continue promoting inclusivity,
equity and diversity in their national Antarctic programmes,
relevant national authorities and other institutions responsible for
Antarctic issues, particularly with respect to gender equality (ATCM
XLV Final Report Para 205), Australia provides this update on
ongoing work to improve diversity and inclusion in the Australian
Antarctic program (AAP).
Australia is committed to increasing diversity and inclusion and
ensuring that Australia’s Antarctic workforce in all locations, from
employees to expeditioners feel safe, welcome and respected.
Background
The Australian Antarctic workforce includes people from a wide
range of Australian and international organisations, located at head
offices, on Antarctic research stations, in the field, and on
Australian Antarctic vessels. As with other Antarctic programs, our
Antarctic workplaces are also personal, living and social places.
Australia seeks to ensure that all employees and expeditioners are
safe, welcome and respected, and free from any discrimination, and
is committed to increasing diversity across all aspects of the AAP.
As Australia has previously advised, the Department of Climate
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) and its
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) has committed to implementing
recommendations guided by a 2023 review of organisational
culture, the Russell Review, and is continuing a program of work to
address these.
The following actions have been completed:
creation of a new Respect and Equality Reform Council to guide and
oversee changes
additional resources to provide advice, support and incident
response
raising awareness of the nature and impacts of bullying, harassment
and discrimination
training for all staff in unconscious bias and bystander obligations
Australia led a proposal for a Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Code of Conduct,
developed in consultation with other focused on enabling all
attendees to have safe and respectful experiences.
These actions are partially completed or ongoing:
reinforcing the obligation to prevent unacceptable behaviour and
workplace harm
creating a safe reporting culture, ensuring support and no adverse
consequences
facilities to support “Independent Safe Space”
training for all leaders to address unacceptable behaviour and
provide support
breaking down barriers to progression based on gender or
background
Antarctic workplace facilities and equipment designed for safety,
inclusion and respect
international collaboration on diversity and inclusion in Antarctica.
The above actions represent just some of the key activities taking
place. A full list is contained in DCCEEW's response plan.
The AAP continues to deliver training to staff to support diversity
and inclusion:
More than 400 head office staff and expeditioners have successfully
completed Bystander Intervention and Unconscious Bias training,
which assists staff in developing skills to respectfully challenge
problematic behaviours and show support to their colleagues. In
2023, 55% of staff completed this training.
All Antarctic-based staff attended training as part of their
onboarding process for the 2023-24 season. It covered expected
standards of behaviour and how to report inappropriate behaviour.
This training was also made available to non-Antarctic staff.
295 staff attended Integrity sessions held by the Professional and
Ethical Standards and People Support teams, covering topics such as
integrity processes, standards, expectations and reporting
mechanisms, the department’s internal performance and probation
management policies and understanding Cultural Performance
Expectations.
