ASOC report to the ATCM
ASOC report to the ATCM
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be attending the 46th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the last year.
ASOC’s Secretariat is located in Washington, DC, USA, and its
website is https://www.asoc.org. ASOC currently has 21 member
organizations active in a wide range of Antarctic Treaty countries
who are committed to the preservation of Antarctica as a place for
peace and science. We are pleased to report that Tara Ocean
Expeditions and the Monaco Oceanographic Institute have joined
ASOC in the past year.
Intersessional Activities
ASOC and its member organizations have been involved in a wide
range of activities relevant to Antarctic governance and
environmental protection in the intersessional period.
ASOC participated in meetings of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) to support continued implementation of the
Polar Code; progress on improving reporting of abandoned,
discarded, and lost fishing gear; work on reducing underwater
noise; expansion of the Polar Code to fishing vessels and yachts; and
reductions in shipping emissions. To support further action by the
IMO on the problem of microplastic pollution, ASOC has prepared a
new infographic to highlight the problems of microplastics in ships’
gray water. https://cdn.asoc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/
thumbnail_Shipping-Graywater-Solutions-Probelems-2024-
DIGITAL_final.png 
ASOC and several of its members attended the 28th Conference of
the Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). ASOC member, the International
Cryosphere Climate Initiative (ICCI), coordinated two Cryosphere
Pavilions in conjunction with the Ambition on Melting Ice High-
level Group. ICCI hosted nearly 20 side events focused on
Antarctica and/or the Southern Ocean, with exhibits on ice sheets
and sea-level rise as well as impacts on polar ocean fisheries. ICCI
also sponsored several Antarctic scientists to attend the COP. In
addition, ICCI organized a one-day Technical Dialogue on
Cryosphere, including Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, in
conjunction with the 58th meeting of the UNFCCC Subsidiary
Bodies (SB58) in June 2023, with approximately 35 Parties in
attendance.
In November 2023, Pew Bertarelli Ocean Legacy (PBOL) co-led the
organization and running of the civil society sections of the first
One Polar Summit in Paris, contributing significantly to discussions
on polar regions' governance and conservation in which ASOC and
some of its members participated.
In June 2023, ASOC and several of its members attended the third
Special Meeting of CCAMLR in Santiago, Chile, aiming to address
urgent matters in Antarctic marine conservation. Although there
were no decisions made on MPAs at the meeting, there continues to
be high global interest in Antarctic marine protection, as reflected
in the G20 Leaders’ Declaration in September, which reiterated
support for Antarctic MPAs.
ASOC and several of its members also attended CCAMLR-42. ASOC
co-led a workshop with the Republic of Korea in January 2024 on
transshipment and other compliance issues in the
CCAMLR context. The workshop was well attended by 40+
participants from NGO, industry, and government. ASOC, along
with the Association of Responsible Krill Operators (ARK) is
currently supporting delivery of the July 2024 CCAMLR symposium
that was agreed at CCAMLR-42. The symposium will discuss
harmonizing spatial management approaches, including marine
protected areas, in the Antarctic Peninsula region.
Support for policy-relevant science, science communications, and
public outreach
Pew Bertarelli Ocean Legacy supported researchers at the University
of Colorado to submit a paper to the 2023 meeting of the CCAMLR
Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-
EMM) on modelling movement of Antarctic krill. This study
contributes to our understanding of habitat connectivity, krill
population dynamics, and their potential responses to
environmental changes in the Southern Ocean ecosystem.
Pew Bertarelli Ocean Legacy and the Great Blue Ocean Coalition
brought together world leading cetacean experts for a one-day
workshop in Oxford, UK in October 2023. The scientists held
discussions on various topics including the rebounding populations
of baleen whales in the Southern Ocean, understanding the extent
to which krill fisheries and baleen whales overlap in the Southern
Ocean, threats to baleen whales from the krill fishery, and more.
ASOC supported a number of science projects through funding from
the Blue Nature Alliance, including two projects through the
National Museum of Natural History in France. One project
addressed phylodiversity patterns in the Southern Ocean. Project
results were presented at the 2023 CCAMLR WG-EMM meeting. The
second pilot project focuses on research and monitoring plans and
the development of an East Antarctic Marine Biodiversity
Observation Network with collaborative and accessible data access
and analysis workflows.
ASOC, led by Deutsche Umwelthilfe e.V., supported delivery of the
April 2024 SCAR Krill Expert Group workshop, focusing on revising
the krill stock hypothesis to ensure sustainable management
practices are based on the latest scientific research.
WWF partnered with Intrepid Travel to undertake research in
February and March 2024 around the Antarctic Peninsula to better
understand foraging ecology and health trends of baleen whales
along their migratory routes. Additionally, WWF provided a grant
to the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) aimed at using satellite
imagery to better understand emperor penguin populations in the
Weddell Sea and Antarctic Peninsula. The researchers have
published important findings related to lack of breeding success due
to early ice break-up in the Bellingshausen Sea and also discovered
four new colonies, with a total of 66 known now, 33 of those
tracked from space. WWF is also supporting work to monitor the
response of Adélie penguins to climate change through a grant to
the Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), which
focuses on extending the D'Urville Sea-Mertz Marine Protected Area
proposal to protect Adélie penguins in the critical winter period.
Other WWF-supported projects include: a project with BAS to map
Southern Ocean blue carbon hotspots, which is currently in the data
collection and analysis phase; supporting long-term monitoring by
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution on emperor penguins’
behavior and foraging ecology in the Weddell Sea; and a project
with Imperial College London to analyze the contribution of krill
and salps to long-term carbon storage in the Southern Ocean. In the
past year, the latter project worked in collaboration with the
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) to run new experiments at the
AAD krill aquarium. ASOC participates as a stakeholder in the
following programs developing policy-relevant science:
SCAR’s AntICON (Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Conservation).
Several tourism research projects, part of the thematic programme
“Antarctic tourism - Research Programme on Assessment of Impacts
and Responses” (PT-REPAIR) of the Dutch Research Agenda (NWA).
Weddell Sea Observatory of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Change
(WOBEC).
ASOC and its members celebrated World Penguin Day on April 25.
Outreach events included a penguin art contest for kids and adults,
educational content on social media, and events in China and the
Republic of Korea. August 11 marked the 2nd celebration of World
Krill Day. Activities included an op-ed by Chilean Senator Lagos,
distribution of the ASOC krill origami video on social media with
international subtitles, podcasts, and a Sherman’s Lagoon
syndicated comic series.
In March 2024 ASOC supported the release of the documentary “Ice
Mermaid: A swim in the heart of the ocean” which followed
Bárbara Hernandez in her record-breaking swim in Antarctica in
2023. The documentary, with English subtitles, can be viewed at
https://youtu.be/MG-dRtoQHxE?si=dI0n-Zn9nlUri1px.
ASOC Member Agenda Antartica has initiated a global campaign to
raise awareness about the need to reduce the use of plastics
worldwide, including in Antarctica. As part of this work, Agenda
Antarctica commissioned a redesign of Antarctica's flag to
symbolize the pervasive issue of microplastics in its snow. https://
antarcticaflagredesigned.org/.
ASOC member SeaLegacy collaborated with Yo Yo Ma on the Life
Emerging program. Yo Yo Ma contributed a solo performance along
with forty artists from eighteen orchestras from around the world.
This program was used last year to innovatively engage students via
teacher-led experiences in orchestras around Canada. Students
participated in coursework and experienced “Life Emerging,”
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jsDhxk9f5FY which is a
fusion of incredible music and spectacular imagery from Antarctica.
ICCI released its 2023 State of the Cryosphere Report https://
iccinet.org/statecryo23/. in November, right before COP28,
including chapters and research updates on the Antarctic ice sheet
as well as on Southern Ocean acidification, warming, and
freshening.
Concluding remarks
The dramatic changes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean caused
by rising CO2 levels, received growing attention in the past year
from the public. Some independent actors have begun promoting
geoengineering schemes, such as the use of “marine curtains” to
halt ice loss. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/feb/04/
how-do-you-stop-a-glacier-from-melting-simple-put-up-an-
underwater-curtain ASOC believes that global emissions reductions
and the incorporation of climate change information into the
decision-making process of the ATCM are the most effective ways to
protect the Antarctic environment and the rest of the planet from
the negative effects of climate change. The ATCM should follow this
issue closely to ensure that these projects are subject to the rigorous
environmental impact assessment process required under the
Protocol.
ASOC appreciates the opportunity to contribute to the ATCM’s work
on protecting the Antarctic environment. We value the constructive
and collaborative nature of discussions during the ATCM and the
intersessional period, and thank ATCM Observers and Experts, such
as IAATO, SCAR, and COMNAP for engaging with us on a variety of
important issues.
