Spatial protection supports scientific research
Spatial protection supports scientific research
Summary
This paper examines the role of area protection in scientific
research, based on an examination of the prior assessment for nine
proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) submitted to
the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) 2017-2024.
Scientific research was part of the rationale for all ASPA prior
assessments; all of them prioritized scientific values, mostly as a
primary value of the proposal; and all the proposed areas were
considered relevant for current and/or future or potential scientific
research. Spatial protection helps to protect both the environment
as well as scientific values. The paper also underscores the “erosion
by negotiation” of ASPA management plans in recent years, with
respect to earlier ASPA practice. The paper recommends:
Continued expansion of the series of ASPAs (and other spatial
management tools) to protect values under Art. 3 of the Protocol.
Prevention of further “erosion by negotiation” of new or revised
ASPA management plans.
Work by the ATCM to ensure that the objectives of the Protocol and
its Annex V are met and contribute to global protected area targets.
Introduction
The objective of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty is the “comprehensive protection” of a range of
intrinsic values and uses of Antarctica, which include ecosystem/
environmental protection as well as scientific research. Article 3
establishes that “…the protection of the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems and the intrinsic value of
Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its
value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular
research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be
fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.” Spatial protection under the
Protocol’s Annex V is one of the means to achieve this objective.
In parallel, Members of the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) have committed to
the establishment of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in the CAMLR
Convention area. Global environmental protection targets under the
groundbreaking 2022 Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework have a 30% marine and land protection target by 2030.
In the current climate and biodiversity crisis, the overlap between
conservation and scientific values and uses is increasingly apparent.
Both are intrinsically related – protecting one helps to better protect
the other. However, in Antarctic Treaty system bodies it is
sometimes argued that aspects of spatial protection can interfere
with scientific research, which is one of the values protected by the
Antarctic Treaty. Do protected areas in Antarctica help or hinder
scientific research? This paper examines this question, taking as an
example the case of ASPAs, and notes that spatial protection helps
to protect both conservation and science values. The paper also
underscores the “erosion by negotiation” of ASPA management
plans in recent years, with respect to earlier practice. It suggests
that this trend needs to be reversed to ensure that the
objectives of the Protocol and its Annex V are met, and contribute
to global protected area targets.
Antarctic protected areas
Some areas of Antarctica have been set aside for the protection of
their natural and/or scientific values since the earlier ATCMs.
Recommendation III-VIII (ATCM III - Brussels, 1964) provided for
the designation of “Specially Protected Areas” (SPAs), for which
areas of outstanding scientific interest “… shall be accorded special
protection by the Participating Governments in order to preserve
their unique natural ecological system.” Recommendation III-VIII
(ATCM III - Brussels, 1964) Agreed Measures for the Conservation
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Art. VIII. The Agreed Measures
entered into force in 1982. Other elements of Recommendation III-
VIII provided further protection for Antarctic fauna and flora. This
early spatial protection tool clearly outlined the connection
between scientific interest and the protection of Antarctic fauna and
flora. Other protected area categories were agreed by the ATCM in
later years, although not all of them have been used in practice.
These included Specially Protected Areas (SPAs); Sites of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSIs); Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs);
Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs); Multiple-use Planning Areas
(MPAs); and Areas of Special Tourism Interest (ASTIs). The early
SPA designations, beginning at ATCM IV in 1966, were the basis of
the current list of protected areas. In 1972, the concept of Sites of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) was introduced. Recommendation
VII-3 (ATCM VII - Wellington, 1972). In 1975 the first SSSIs were
adopted, in recognition that “…a limited number of sites of
exceptional scientific interest may require long-term protection
from harmful interference.” In subsequent years SPAs and SSSIs
continued to be adopted as distinct spatial protection tools.
Although each emphasized the protection of either ecosystem or
scientific values, in practice, they protected both.
In 1991, the Protocol designated Antarctica as “…a natural reserve,
devoted to peace and science.” In 1998 Annex V on area protection
and management was adopted, outlining several categories of
spatial protection tools. See e.g. Roura, 2023. Protected areas
labelled as SPAs and SSSIs continued to be adopted up until 2001.
Once Annex V entered into force in 2002, all existing SPAs and
SSSIs became ASPAs, once again protecting conservation and
scientific values with a single designation. Article 3(3) of Annex V.
Here we focus on ASPAs, as the direct “descendants” of SPAs and
SSSIs. Annex V, Art 3(1) lists a suite of values that may trigger
spatial protection in “any area, including marine areas”. Annex V,
Article 3(1) states that. “Any area, including any marine area, may
be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area to protect
outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or
wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or
planned scientific research.” Annex V, Art. 3(2) provides for the
expansion of the system of ASPAs according to eight different
categories. Annex V, Article 3(2) states that “Parties shall seek to
identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical
framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas: (a) areas kept inviolate from human interference
so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have
been affected by human activities; (b) representative examples of
major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and
marine ecosystems; (c) areas with important or unusual
assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native
birds or mammals; (d) the type locality or only known habitat of
any species; (e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned
scientific research; (f) examples of outstanding geological,
glaciological or geomorphological features; (g) areas of outstanding
aesthetic and wilderness value; (h) sites or monuments of
recognised historic value; and (i) such other areas as may be
appropriate to protect the values set out in paragraph 1 above.” It is
evident that most of these categories are based on scientific criteria
and are described in a language that is recognizable to science. In
fact, area protection can contribute to enhancing scientific
knowledge not only with respect to Antarctic ecosystem processes,
but also sites of recognized historic value, wilderness, and other
values.
Methods
ASPA management plans broadly follow a standard format.
Resolution 2 (2011), Appendix 1 - Format of Management Plans for
ASPAs. However, “many Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
Management Plans do not state clearly if conservation or science is
the priority objective.” Hughes et al., 2013. This might be
improving as ASPA management plans are periodically revised and
updated.
We analyzed all prior assessments for ASPA proposals submitted to
the CEP, 2017-2024 (Table 1). In 2017 the CEP amended
Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs
and ASMAs agreed in 2015 to include a non-mandatory ASPA prior
assessment template as a voluntary means of assessing the potential
of an area as an ASPA. In these assessments the rationale and
primary objective and values of proposed ASPAs are outlined in a
concise and consistent format. Specifically, we focused on the
following items of the prior assessment template for ASPAs:
Initial rational for area protection for the potential ASPA;
Indication of the values to be protected within the potential ASPA,
in accordance with Annex V, Article 3(1);
Characteristics contained within the potential ASPA, in accordance
with the site categories of Annex V, Art. 3(2); and
Consideration as to whether the ASPA be protected primarily for
conservation or scientific research purposes.
Taken together, these items provide an indication of the
significance of science to ASPA proposals. To corroborate this
analysis, we also examined summarily the listing of SPAs, SSSIs,
and their ASPA “descendants.” For this, we use the Antarctic
Protected Area database which includes a field with this
information. However, this database lists a single primary objective
for each ASPA, whereas most ASPAs have multiple objectives.
Results
The main findings are summarized in Table 1. Ten prior
assessments for nine ASPA proposals across Antarctica were
submitted to the ATCM/CEP between 2017 and 2024. A prior
assessment by Ukraine for an ASPA in the Argentine Islands and
Kyiv Peninsula area (ATCM XLV - CEP XXV/WP058) was
resubmitted in 2024 with substantial changes. Only the 2024
assessment was considered for this analysis.
The prior assessments were submitted by eleven ATCPs,
individually or jointly: Belgium, Chile, China, Germany, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Türkiye, Ukraine, UK, and USA.
Collectively the ASPA proposals as originally outlined cover an area
of ≈331 km2, of which ≈285 km2 corresponds to a single ASPA
proposal. However, the area listed in prior assessments is
approximate and might not be the final area of an ASPA once
adopted.
Three ASPA proposals have completed the designation process to
date.
Concerning the initial rationale for area protection, all prior
assessments noted the actual or potential scientific values of the
proposed ASPAs, and/or ongoing or planned scientific research.
Concerning the scientific objectives/values of the proposed ASPAs
in accordance with Annex V Article 3(1):
The protection of scientific values was part of the initial rationale
for all proposed ASPAs, together with the protection of conservation
values, with varying emphasis.
Science was a “primary objective” for five proposals, and a
“secondary objective” for two proposals.
Ongoing or planned scientific research was a “primary value/
objective” for four proposals, and a “secondary objective” for one
proposal.
All areas in the proposals were the subject of ongoing research and/
or were regarded as having potential for future scientific research.
One ASPA proposal protecting a designated historic site (the wreck
of the Endeavour) considered that questions about scientific values
as not applicable, however it noted the site’s value for potential
future research concerning colonization of the shipwreck by
invertebrates.
186 scientific papers supported the proposals, with nearly 70% of
them published in 2014 or later.
Concerning the site categories outlined in Art. 3(2) of Annex V of
the Protocol:
All nine proposals aimed to meet criterion (g) outstanding
wilderness.
Eight proposals aimed to protect areas meeting the criteria (e) areas
of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research and
(b) representative examples.
Seven proposals protected criteria (c) important or unusual
assemblages and six proposals aimed to protect criteria (a) inviolate
areas.
Regarding consideration of primary use of the ASPA:
Eight proposals considered that the ASPA would serve for both
conservation and science.
Two proposals noted additionally that “...Both [conservation and
science] purposes would coexist thanks to a designation of some
sites/zones that would be kept inviolate for conservation and
comparison research, and other areas that would be earmarked for
scientific research.” The same text was used in proposals by
Belgium (2017) and China (2018).
One proposal prioritized first science, then conservation (of a lake
in the area).
One multi-site proposal prioritized both science and conservation
for one site, science for one control site, and conservation for the
five remaining sites.
In all, scientific research was part of the rationale for all ASPA prior
assessments; all of them prioritized scientific values, mostly as a
primary value of the proposal; and all the proposed areas were
considered relevant for current and/or future or potential scientific
research.
Discussion
ASPAs designated after 1998 did not make a distinction between
SPA or SSSI categories, and earlier SPAs or SSSIs were turned into
ASPAs, thus combining conservation and scientific value. Although
we have not examined the existing “population” of ASPAs in detail,
most ASPAs protect both conservation and scientific values in
varying degrees. Of the 75 current ASPAs, 22 were previously
designated as SPAs, emphasizing conservation; 29 were designated
as SSSIs, emphasizing scientific research; and seven were designated
as both. Hughes et al., 2013 Table 1. These numbers still hold, since
some ASPAs had been added to the list since 2013, and some de-
designated. Based on the APA database, three of the 20 ASPAs
designated since 2002 (the entry into force of Annex V) were
designated primarily for their scientific values. However, the APA
database lists only one primary reason for ASPA designation, while
most ASPAs would have several reasons for their designation.
Aside from ASPAs, Annex V establishes Antarctic Specially Managed
Areas (ASMAs) and Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs).
Scientific values were identified in the six ASMAs currently in place.
ATCM XXXIV IP69, Table 1. Antarctic heritage sites including
HSMs, and aesthetic and wilderness values are also the focus of
scholarly research. E.g. Summerson & Tin, 2018; Leihy et al., 2020;
Senatore, 2023.
In the context of CCAMLR, robust scientific work is carried out in
preparation of MPA proposals, and as part of the design and
implementation of Research and Monitoring plans for current and
proposed MPAs, even though some of these plans have not yet been
formally adopted by CCAMLR. Furthermore, marine areas that have
been exposed following the retreat or collapse of ice shelves in the
Antarctic Peninsula are protected for their scientific values
(although not specifically for their ecosystem values). CCAMLR
Conservation Measure 24-04 (2017): Establishing time-limited
Special Areas for Scientific Study in newly exposed marine areas
following ice-shelf retreat or collapse in Statistical Subareas 48.1,
48.5 and 88.3 Attempts to expand the area of application of this
tool across Antarctica were blocked.
Implementing ASPAs in practice
The expansion of the series of ASPAs has been comparatively slow
since the adoption of the Protocol, with relatively few ASPA
additions to date, a patchy distribution, and questions about their
conservation effectiveness. See e.g. Shaw et al, 2014; Hughes &
Grant 2017, Lee et al., 2023, Roura, 2023. Nonetheless, our focus
here is on the current practice of ASPA adoption particularly with
respect to conservation and science. Some conflicts might exist
between scientific needs and the management of ASPAs. Hughes et
al., 2013. However, this conflict is not necessarily between science
and conservation, but rather between the management of scientific
disciplines with different ways to “see” and interact with
environmental features, depending on
their scientific interest. ASPA scientific use issues may be resolved
through appropriate management such as zoning. Hughes et al.,
2013.
In recent years some ASPAs have been de-designated and a process
for de-designation has been established. While there may be valid
reasons for de-designation, protected areas are likely to accrue
conservation and scientific value over time. The consequences of
de-designation for science and research should be carefully
considered.
In addition, in recent years there have been increased constraints on
the designation, design, and management of ASPAs. This marks a
shift by which ASPAs adopted by the ATCM are increasingly more
controversial. For instance:
Annex V 3(2) requirements include the establishment inviolate
areas and the rationale behind doing so. However, the use of
inviolate areas has been subject to critique in recent years. It is
important to note that an area is considered inviolate in accordance
with its management plan, not in an abstract sense. Management
plans shall be reviewed periodically, in accordance with Annex V,
and therefore inviolability provisions can be reviewed as well.
Furthermore, new remote technologies – such as satellites, drones,
and animal-carried sensors – increasingly facilitate research without
requiring human presence on the ground.
The adoption of ASPAs with marine components has also become
increasingly controversial, in terms of being used at all, their size,
when they need to be reviewed and approved by CCAMLR, and
their management. For instance, in recently modified ASPAs with a
marine component, the top part of the water column has been
removed not to restrict shipping traffic. This type of provision did
not exist in some early ASPA management plans, which included
the entire water column. No existing ASPA management plan poses
any major restrictions to shipping. In practice, most ASPAs with a
marine component allow the free passage of ships and only provide
guidance for e.g. boat access, landings, anchoring, particularly
where the benthos is protected. Part of ASPA 173 Cape Washington
and Silverfish Bay includes a seasonally restricted zone to protect
primary emperor breeding area (Roura et al., 2018). In another
instance, the management of a small marine zone was designed so
that the ASPA protects only the seafloor only and not the water
column above.
Annex V, Art. 5 establishes the requirements of management plans
for ASPAs, including zoning, which may include managed,
restricted or prohibited zones. Annex V, Art. 3(f) states that
“Proposed Management Plans shall include, as appropriate…the
identification of zones within the area, in which activities are to be
prohibited, restricted or managed…” for the purpose of achieving
the ASPA aims and objectives. While Parties are supportive of
research and monitoring, it has been suggested that prohibited
zones may conflict with freedom of research under Art. II of the
Antarctic Treaty. ATCM 45 (2023) Final Report, paras 75-84.
Although prohibited zones do not restrict research (and can be
changed in the five year reviews of the management plans), the use
of “prohibited zones” in ASPAs has been compromised.
Closing remarks
Antarctic conservation values as outlined in the Protocol’s Art. 3
ARE also scientific values. Protecting the environment and
ecosystems through the use of spatial protection tools helps to
protect scientific values, including research essential to
understanding the global environment.
Conversely, research and monitoring can contribute to
environmental protection, for instance by informing policy making.
Annex V identifies the values that may require protection and
mandates the expansion of the series of ASPAs according to a series
of categories. Scientific research is closely connected to this process,
and this is apparent in the examination of prior assessments for
ASPA proposals. However, the ambition of ASPA management plans
is weakening in practice. ASOC contends that the standards of ASPA
protection should be upheld, and management plans for ASPAs
should maintain consistent criteria and avoid further “erosion by
negotiation.” Scientific interests and needs, including access
conditions to specific areas, should not be used as an argument to
oppose area protection where this is required.
Overall, the value of protected areas for scientific research should
be recognized in current and future ASPAs and other spatial
protection tools of the Antarctic Treaty system. Protected areas in
Antarctica are also a contribution to global environmental
protection targets, including the 30% marine and land protection
target of the 2022 Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity
Framework, which was supported by most parties to the Antarctic
Treaty.
Recommendations
Continued expansion of the series of ASPAs (and other spatial
management tools) to protect values under Art. 3 of the Protocol.
Prevent further “erosion by negotiation” of new or revised ASPA
management plans.
Ensure that the objectives of the Protocol and its Annex V are met
and contribute to global protected area targets.
References
Burrows JL, Lee JR, Wilson KA 2023 Evaluating the conservation
impact of Antarctica's protected areas. Conservation Biology 37:3.
 https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.14059
Hughes, K.A., L.R. Pertierra, D.W.H. Walton, 2013.Area protection
in Antarctica: How can conservation and scientific research goals be
managed compatibly?, Environmental Science & Policy, Volume 31,
2013, Pages 120-132, Https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsci.2013.03.012.
Hughes, K. A., & Grant, S. M. (2017). The spatial distribution of
Antarctica's protected areas: A product of pragmatism, geopolitics
or conservation need? Environmental Science & Policy, 72, 41–51.
Leihy, R.I., Coetzee, B.W.T., Morgan, F. et al. Antarctica’s
wilderness fails to capture continent’s biodiversity. Nature 583,
567–571 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2506-3
Roura, R.M, Steenhuisen, F., & Bastmeijer, K. (2018). The shore is
the limit: Marine spatial protection in Antarctica under Annex V of
the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. The Polar
Journal, 8(2), 289-314.  https://
doi.org/10.1080/2154896X.2018.1541549
Roura, R.M. (2023). Spatial protection tools as indicators of the
'health' of the Antarctic Treaty System. The Geographical Journal
89-1, 25-39, [https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/
geoj.12482].
Senatore, M. X. (2023). Antarctic conservation policies and
practices: Towards a more inclusive and sustainable future. The
Geographical Journal, 189(1), 49-62.
Summerson, R., & Tin, T. (2018). Twenty years of protection of
wilderness values in Antarctica. The Polar Journal, 8(2), 265–288.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2154896X.2018.1541548
Shaw J.D., Terauds, A., Riddle, M.J., Possingham, H.P., Chown, S.L.
(2014). Antarctica's protected areas are inadequate,
unrepresentative, and at risk. PLoS Biol. 17;12(6):e1001888. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.1001888. PMID: 24936869; PMCID:
PMC4060989.
Table 1 – ASPA prior assessments submitted to the CEP
Year
Meeting
Document
Submitted by
Proposed ASPA location
Scientific value
Ongoing or planned research value
Primary use - science or conservation
ASPA designation
Area (km2)
2017
ATCM XL - CEP XX
WP042
Belgium
Eastern Sør Rondane Mountains
Primary
Primary
Both
2023
≈21.00
2018
ATCM XLI - CEP XX
WP018
rev. 1
UK, Netherlands
Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
Primary
Primary
Both (1 site), science (1 control site), conservation (3 sites).
2021
1.07
2018
ATCM XLI - CEP XX
WP030
China
Inexpressible Island
Primary
Primary
Both
2021
≈1.92
2022
ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV
WP012
Germany, USA
Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
Primary
Primary
Both
Pending
285.00
2022
ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV
WP013
Germany, USA
Danger Is. Archipelago, North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula
Primary
Secondary
Both
2023
4.46
2022
ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV
WP038
Belgium, Türkiye, UK
Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
Primary
Primary
Science > conservation
Pending
0.50
2024
ATCM 46-CEP 26)
WP09
UK, Chile, New Zealand, South Africa, USA
Weddell Sea
Secondary
Potential interest
Both
Pending
3.42
2024
ATCM 46-CEP 26
WP031
Ukraine (revised 2023 version)
Collins Bay, Argentine Is. Antarctic Peninsula
Secondary
Secondary
Conservation
Pending
1.84
2024
ATCM 46-CEP 26
WP014
Italy, Netherlands, UK
Western Signy Is. & Gourlay Peninsula, South Orkney Is.
Primary
Primary
Both
Pending
12.00
