The discovery of the remains of the Neptune 2-p-103 aircraft of the
Argentinian navy by members of the 32nd Bulgarian Antarctic
expedition
The discovery of the remains of the Neptune 2-p-103 aircraft of the
Argentinian NAVY by members of the 32nd Bulgarian Antarctic
expedition
Summary
This paper provides information about the discovery of the remains
of the Argentinian aircraft Neptune 2-P-103 Aircraft, which took
place during the last Austral summer season when scientists and
members of the logistics team of the 32nd Bulgarian Antarctic
expedition found together 18 pieces of debris of said aircraft. The
Argentinian plane crashed on September 15th, 1976 on one of the
slopes of Mt. Barnard on Livingston Island. The authors like to bring
to the audience`s attention if such important findings could be
considered as object with historical value to be preserved.
The Discovery
On 14th and 15th January 2024, during geological sample
collection around False Bay and Barnard Point on Livingston Island,
members of the scientific and logistics team of the 32nd Bulgarian
Antarctic Expedition, found four metal pieces of debris on the shore
and one composite fragment. The debris were found on the East
shore of False Bay, between Charity Glacier and Barnard Point on
Livingston Island, in an area centered around coordinates
Lat.:62°44,950 S and Long.: 060°19,710 W.
The Bulgarian polar researchers reported the finding of the debris to
the commander of the St.St.Cyril and Methodius Naval RSV 421.
Along with geological samples, the latter were embarked onto RSV
421 and turned over to the crew.
Upon initial survey and inspection of the debris on board the vessel,
it was assumed that they belonged to the wreckage of a military
aircraft.
Having reviewed the current historical account of aircraft accidents
in the Antarctic region, the initial hypothesis was that the wreckage
was of a C-130 Hercules transport aircraft of the Chilean Air Force,
which crashed in 2019 in the Drake Passage during a flight from
Punta Arenas to King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), South
Shetland Islands.
The commander of RSV 421 thereafter established communication
with a representative of the Antarctic airspace command of the
Chilean Airforce. The Chilean authorities expressed interest in the
debris and requested their prompt submission to their polar military
base Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva on King George Island (Isla
25 de Mayo).
Later, on 28th January 2024, in the same bay albeit in the vicinity
of Piedras Point, North of Charity Glacier, members of the
Bulgarian Antarctic team discovered more debris. There were now
13 new pieces, of which 12 were metal and one was textile. On one
of the discoveries an image of the sun was spotted – the coat of
arms of Argentina and part of the national flag, and on another
piece an inscription which read “AREA COMPAS MAGNETICO” in
Spanish.
Rear Admiral Marcelo Tarapow, former Director General of
Education and Preparation of the Argentine Navy, was informed of
the newly found debris, and he pointed out that the debris most
probably belonged to the Argentinian Neptune aircraft. The debris
irrevocably countered the version that the latter were remains from
the accident of the Chilean transport C-130 Hercules aircraft, but
rather that they instead belonged to the wreckage of this
Argentinian military aircraft. R.A Tarapow in turn reported to Rear
Admiral Carlos María Allievi, Chief of the General Staff of the
Argentina Navy.
The Antarctic airspace command of the Chilean Airforce was duly
informed of these new circumstances by contact with CDR,
Commander of the Chilean Antarctic Airforce Division. The Chilean
Coast Guard CDR was notified by means of establishing contact
through the Betanzos Research/Survey Vessel. The former requested
survey of the debris on 31/01/2024. Upon verifying the Republic of
Argentina’s coat of arms on the debris, he decided no claims were
due for the retrieval of the discovery.
The History
Based on analysis and historical data, it was assumed that these
were most probably the remains of the Argentinian navy
exploration aircraft Neptune 2-P-103, which early in the morning
on 15th September 1976 departed from the Argentinian navy base
in Rio Grande, Tierra del Fuego Province, on a glaciology
exploration in the Drake Passage and around the South Shetland
Islands, to support A.R.A. “General San Martín” Argentinian Navy
icebreaker. The 10-member crew consisted of Lt Cdr Arnaldo Mutto,
Lt Miguel Berraz, Lt Romualdo Migliardo, Jr Lt Claudio Cabut, Chief
PO Nelson Villagra, Chief PO Remberto Brizuela, Chief PO Juan
Noto, PO I Class Omar Campastri, and PO I Class Benjamin Scesa,
PO II Class Jesus Arroyo, as well as cameraman of Canal 13
Television in Río Grande in Ushuaia Rodolfo Rivarola.
Upon loss of communication with the aircraft a SAR (Search and
Rescue) operation was launched, and on 18th September 1976 the
site of the accident was determined on one of the slopes of Mt.
Barnard on Livingston Island.
A Hercules C-130 aircraft of the Argentine Air Force sighted the
accident site on September 20th, 1976, reporting the exact place
where the Neptune had crashed and the area where its remains
were seen. Subsequently, another plane, in this case a Twin Otter
(T85), also belonging to the Argentine Air Force, overflew the place
confirming the accident, taking several photographs. Those pictures
were later enlarged and allowed to recognize that the remains
observed belonged to the Neptune 2-P-103.
The “General San Martín” icebreaker was sent to search for, and
potentially rescue survivors, but none were found.
On January 11th, 1977, during the southern hemisphere summer,
Argentina organised a complex operation with naval and ground
forces to search for the bodies of the crew members in the hard-to-
reach mountainous terrain at altitude 1,500 m. While providing
aerial support to the mission, the BELL 212 helicopter crashed and
its three crew members were killed in the accident - 1st Lt Mario E.
García, Lt Alejandro Merani, and board mechanic Sgt Ricardo Luis
Segura. Theirs bodies were recovered on January 16th after a storm
left the area. The Commander of the Antarctic Naval Force decided
to suspend rescue operations for the bodies of the Neptune crew
after this new fatal accident.
On October 4th of that year, a helicopter Alouette belonging to the
Icebreaker General San Martin that was sailing close to Livingston
Island, took off and overflew the accident area and took new
pictures of plane wreckage.
These two crashes turned into the greatest tragedy of Argentina’s
Antarctic presence.
During the delivery of the 32nd Bulgarian Antarctic Expedition on
4th February 2024 in the vicinity of Barnard Point on Livingston
Island, on board RSV St. Cyril and Methodius a memorial service
was organised to honour the Argentinian servicemen killed during
the performance of their duties in Antarctica.
The Argentinian Navy issued the technical report 05/24, which
confirmed that the debris are indeed of the Neptune 2 - P -103
crashed in 1976.
We would like to bring to the audience`s attention if such important
findings could be considered as object with historical value to be
preserved.
Annexes
62°44,95 S
060°19,71 W
62°44,95 S
060°19,71 W
Fig1. Location of the findings – Bernard Point, False Bay, Livingston
Island
Fig.2.1. Some of the fragments found
Fig.2.2. Some of the fragments found
Fig.3. NEPTUNE 2-P-103
Fig.4. Frontpage of ¨Cronica¨ newspaper announced the Neptune´s
accident. (September 24, 1976). (Armada Argentina)
