Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community
Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community
Summary
The Republic of Korea has been a Consultative Party to the
Antarctic Treaty since 1989, conducting scientific research in
cooperation with other Parties in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
This report is prepared to inform the Consultative Parties and the
broader Antarctic community about the highlights of Korean
scientific activities during the 2023-24 Austral summer season, the
cooperative efforts with the wider Antarctic Community, and the
support for early career researchers.
Research Highlights of the 2023-24 Austral Summer Season
The Antarctic King Sejong Station, situated on King George Island,
continues to be a pivotal research site for the Korean Antarctic
program and its international scientific collaboration. Throughout
the 2023-24 summer season, the station hosted 115 Korean and
international visitors from 29 research and expert groups,
supporting their in-situ research activities.
Primary focus of the research at King Sejong Station is ecosystem
science. Research teams carried out field studies to monitor the
activity of Antarctic terrestrial vegetation in the vicinity, collecting
data on the growth and physiological responses of terrestrial
vegetation. They also collected samples to explore how the
vegetation adapts to the environmental changes. Studies on the
habitat and behavioral patterns of invertebrate were conducted to
examine the marine and freshwater invertebrate fauna of King
George Island.
Additionally, coastal ecosystem surveys in Marian Cove and
Maxwell Bay were undertaken to study the effects of rapid glacier
retreat on the coastal marine environment, including benthic-
pelagic coupling and trophic relationships in the area. These
research efforts aim to elucidate the relationship between
environmental changes and ecosystem responses in Antarctica.
The Antarctic Jang Bogo Station, located in Terra Nova Bay,
functions as the central base for the scientific research in the Ross
Sea and the Northern Victoria Land region for the Korean Antarctic
Program. This past summer season, the station welcomed 99
scientists and experts from 18 multidisciplinary teams to conduct
field research.
Noteworthy achievements include a traverse team journeying
2,200km into the Antarctic inland to conduct aerial radar survey,
set up and Automatic Weather Station, and collect snow samples for
comprehensive site survey and environmental impact assessments.
The team plans to continue their work next season, aiming to
identify a location for deep ice core drilling and astronomical
observation.
Investigating the impacts of climate change on the oceanic
environment and biodiversity remains as one of the central foci of
the Korean Antarctic program. Annual surveys are conducted to
assess the ecosystem structure, function, and population ecology
within the Ross Sea Marine Protected Area. These surveys are
critical for painting a clearer picture of how climate change is
reshaping marine ecosystems.
International Cooperation
The Korean Antarctic program recognizes the importance of
international cooperation in research and logistic support. It has
engaged in close cooperation with the New Zealand and
Chilean programs through the Korea-New Zealand Antarctic
Cooperation Centre in Christchurch, and Korea-Chile Antarctic
Cooperation Center in Punta Arenas. Additionally, robust
collaboration with the Italian and US program continues,
particularly for logistical support at Jang Bogo Station and in the
Ross Sea sector.
The Korean program is committed to continuing the collaboration
with Consultative parties across a range of research and logistical
endeavors. During the past season, Korean program has facilitated
support and cooperation with 17 international scientists from Chile,
China, Lithuania, Malaysia, Portugal, and United States as a part of
a research expedition to King Sejong and Jang Bogo stations.
Support for Early-Career Researchers
Aiming to promote research collaboration and provide the next
generation of scientists with networking and research opportunities,
the KOPRI fellowship program has opened its call to early-career
scientists from Asian countries, as well as those from Chile and New
Zealand. In 2023, three early-career scientists from China, India,
and New Zealand were awarded the fellowship, which included an
opportunity to visit the KOPRI main campus and conduct
collaborative research with their Korean host scientists. Due to
budgetary concerns, the selection process for the 2024-25 season
will be delayed until further notice.
To further support early-career researchers, adhering to the
principles of equality, diversity and inclusion, the Korea Polar
Research Institute has supported capacity building schemes of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) by providing
funding for an additional fellowship position. This contribution
aims to support under-represented groups of early-career
researchers. The Korean polar program will continue its effort to
enhance international scientific capacities and continue to work
with SCAR to this end.
