Research Vessel Noosfera: three years of operational experience
Research Vessel Noosfera: three years of operational experience
Informational Paper submitted by Ukraine and Poland
Summary
The Information Paper highlights the experience of the National
Antarctic Program of Ukraine acquired during the operation of the
RV Noosfera over the last three Antarctic seasons in 2022-2024,
including the implementation of logistics operations to supply
Vernadsky station, conducting associated scientific research on
board the vessel during the voyages, as well as the involvement of
the vessel in support of the partner Polish Antarctic Program.
Background
Since 1996, after Ukraine obtained Vernadsky station, the main
method of delivering expeditions to the station was chartering
foreign tourist or supply vessels from Chile or Argentina.
Special scientific oceanographic expeditions from the ports of
Ukraine to Vernadsky station engaging Ukraine’s own scientific fleet
were carried out as well: in 1997 and 1998 ‒ on the research vessel
Ernst Krenkel; in 2000 and 2002 ‒ on the research vessel Horizon.
During these marine expeditions, Ukrainian scientists carried out a
complex of oceanographic and bioresource research in the Southern
Ocean, covering traditional krill fishing areas.
On August 19, 2021, the State Institution National Antarctic Science
Center (NASC), under the political leadership of the President of
Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky, acquired the British ice-class
research vessel James Clark Ross, built in 1991, which was re-
registered under the flag of Ukraine under the name Noosfera (IMO
8904496).
The funds for the acquisition of the vessel were provided by the
Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine for the needs of
Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions and the restoration of integrated
marine research not only in the Southern Ocean but also in other
parts of the World Ocean.
Her carrying capacity is 2917 t DWT, and her current draught is
reported to be 6.2 meters. Her length overall (LOA) is 100 meters,
and her width is 18 meters. The capacity is 77 births – 50 for
scientists and 27 for crew.
RV Noosfera is equipped with a suite of laboratories and winch
systems that allow the study of the seabed at a depth of 8 km. The
vessel’s autonomy of up to 2 months allows for conducting research
at any point in the World Ocean.
The first expedition (2021-2022 season)
Despite the difficulties of the cross-border movement of personnel
caused by quarantine restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the NASC completed the task of transferring the vessel from
Denmark to Ukraine, re-registering the vessel under the Ukrainian
flag, performing maintenance and repair work, obtaining necessary
certificates for sailing, forming a new ship crew and preparing for
the Antarctic expedition within five months.
RV Noosfera managed to go on its first voyage on January 28,
2022, less than a month before the Russian Federation launched a
large-scale military aggression against Ukraine and blocked the sea
routes of communication in the Ukrainian waters of the Black Sea.
RV Noosfera has made her transatlantic passage with the crew on
board and some scientists, while the main staff (winterers) of the
27th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition, as well as scientists and
technicians involved in the summer expedition, were supposed to
get to Chile by air and to board the RV Noosfera there.
Due to the difficult wartime circumstances in Ukraine and the
sequestration of Ukraine's budget allocations for education, science,
culture, and other socially important areas, the budget of the
National Antarctic Program of Ukraine was also cut. The marine
research program of the RV Noosfera was also reduced, which led
to the fact that only those scientific studies that could be carried out
during the voyage from Ukraine to Chile and next to Vernadsky
station remained in the program and carried out.
Despite the complexity, the following types of research were
conducted: geological (establishment of granulometric, mineral,
chemical, and microfaunistic composition of seabed sediments in
the water area around the Antarctic Peninsula); geospatial
(recording of powerful lightning) and radio-oceanographic (testing
of the sea wave model) both along the entire route and in the
Atlantic sector of Antarctica.
RV Noosfera successfully completed all tasks related to the logistical
support of Vernadsky station and the rotation of the wintering crew
of the 26th and 27th Ukrainian Antarctic expeditions (Fig. 1).
Figure 1 – Research vessel Noosfera in Antarctic waters (photo form
the NASC archive)
During her first visit to Vernadsky station, the RV Noosfera
uploaded and transported out from the station all the bulky waste
and obsolete equipment that had been accumulated over the years
and could not be removed from the station by chartered vessels (old
diesel power generators, old pier pal finger manipulator, old zodiac
boats, construction debris, etc.).
Polish Antarctic Program has terminated the contract for the
logistical support of the Polish Antarctic station Arctowski with the
Russian counteragent due to the Russian military aggression against
Ukraine. Therefore, RV Noosfera was engaged in the rotation of
Polish Antarctic expedition at the request of Polish Antarctic
Program.
After completing these works, the vessel, deprived of the
opportunity to return to her homeport, Odesa (Ukraine), stayed and
was serviced during the off-season in the port of Cape Town (South
Africa).
The second expedition (2022-2023 season)
The second Antarctic season of the RV Noosfera consisted of 2
voyages, most of the route of which was carried out within the joint
Ukrainian-Polish Antarctic expedition.
Cooperation between Ukrainian and Polish National Antarctic
Programs has a long history. The basic agreement on Antarctic
scientific and logistic cooperation between the National Antarctic
Scientific Center of Ukraine and the Department of Antarctic
Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences was signed in 2001.
In 2022, in furtherance of the provisions of this agreement, the
Ukrainian and Polish parties agreed on the systematic use (for 4
years) of the RV Noosfera for joint Ukrainian-Polish Antarctic
expeditions, which will include logistics operations for Arctowski
Polish Antarctic station.
On December 24, 2022, the vessel left Cape Town for the Antarctic,
delivering a team of Polish polar explorers to the Arctowski station,
and then made a passage to Vernadsky station, delivering a seasonal
team of Ukrainian technical specialists and scientists. Cargo was
also delivered to both stations during this passage. The RV Noosfera
left Antarctica and arrived to Punta Arenas (Chile) in the end of
February.
At the end of March, the vessel went to Antarctica again on board
with the new 28th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition and the cargo for
the wintering of the new team at Vernadsky station. Having carried
out the rotation of year-round expeditions at the Vernadsky station
on the way back RV Noosfera picked up Polish polar explorers from
the Arctowski station and transported large-sized construction
debris and other waste out from the Polish station. RV Noosfera
returned to Cape Town on April 29, 2023.
The third expedition (2023-2024 season)
Not being able to return the RV Noosfera to Ukraine before the end
of the full-scale war during the off-season, all the necessary
maintenance and modernization work for the vessel before the
2023-2024 season was carried out in Cape Town.
In particular, planned repair and maintenance of ship mechanisms
and systems in dry dock, overhaul of vessel power plants, and
modification of the cooling system of vessel power plants were
carried out. Ukrainian-made cavitation fuel module was installed to
improve fuel cleaning, reduce fuel consumption, and extend the
motor resource of the engines. In addition, the vessel was equipped
with new navigation system and other equipment. In particular,
super-powerful LED searchlights will significantly improve
adaptability to work in difficult ice conditions.
In the third season of the RV Noosfera’s Antarctic navigation, a joint
Ukrainian-Polish expedition was provided, partially financed by
Ukrainian and Polish Antarctic Programs. (Fig. 2)
Figure 2 – Research vessel Noosfera near Arctowski Polish Antarctic
Station (photo form the NASC archive)
On November 17, 2023, the RV Noosfera left Cape Town for
Antarctica. First, the vessel delivered a team of polar explorers and
cargo to Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station. Then, the vessel
delivered cargo and a seasonal expedition to Vernadsky station.
Scientific research on board the vessel during the voyages
Vernadsky station is a well-known center of geospace monitoring.
To expand the possibilities of these studies, a radiophysical
observatory was set up on board the RV Noosfera. This helps to
carry out constant monitoring, particularly ionospheric observations
during the vessel's voyages. The hardware and software components
of geospace monitoring systems set up on the RV Noosfera are
identical to the equipment installed at Vernadsky station and are
synchronized with it.
During the entire voyage of the RV Noosfera in January-April 2022
(from Odesa to Punta Arenas, from Punta Arenas to Vernadsky
station and from Vernadsky station to Cape Town), the LF complex
synchronously with a similar complex on Vernadsky station
conducted the reception of lightning discharge signals, for further
restoration of the thunderstorm activity characteristics and the
ionospheres' D-layer parameters. The results of radiophysical
measurements organized on the RV Noosfera during her navigation
in isolated and hard-to-reach places of the planet are an important
addition to the data obtained on the continents. They are used for
the analysis and forecasting of space weather.
Planned marine scientific studies were also carried out during the
voyages. In particular, mapping and bathymetric profiling of the
seabed topography in the the deep-water part of the Southern
Ocean around the Antarctic Peninsula, as well as in the waters of
the Argentine Islands adjacent to Vernadsky station, were carried
out from the board of the RV Noosfera. The geological samples
were taken as well from the board of the vessel for the further
establishment of granulometric, mineral, chemical, and
microfaunistic composition of seabed sediments in the water area
around the Antarctic Peninsula.
Conclusions and perspectives
For the three years after the acquisition of the RV Noosfera, the
National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine, despite the
difficulties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the
significant impact of military aggression against Ukraine on the
capabilities of the National Antarctic Program of Ukraine, has
successfully gained experience in operating the vessel in the
conditions of Antarctica, organized her safe operation in accordance
with the requirements, off-season service in the port of Cape Town.
The vessel is employed not only for the benefit of the Ukrainian
Antarctic Program but is also engaged on a long-term basis to
support the Polish Antarctic Expedition.
The Ukrainian side is interested in applying the RV Noosfera vessel
within the framework of joint international scientific projects. The
first experience of such collaboration will involve the participation
of the RV Noosfera as scientific infrastructure for shared use under
the EU Horizon Europe Program project called Polar Research
Infrastructure Network, POLARIN (2024-2029).
