Geological Exploration of Amery Ice Shelf (GeoEAIS)-Looking at
rocks beneath the ice
Geological Exploration of Amery Ice Shelf (GeoEAIS)- Looking at
rocks beneath the ice
Summary
This Information Paper reports a recently started program on
gaining an understanding of the sub-ice geology in a domain of
highly variable ice mass wastage. It aims to develop a reliable sub-
ice geological map and provide inputs for assessing geological
controls for basal melting of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Additionally, it also aims to establish measurement facilities for
integrated atmospheric observation in the selected base stations for
wider atmospheric and space physics studies. The following sections
briefly report firstly, the status of the project with the field
activities carried out so far and secondly, the plans for future field
activities, including international collaborations.
1. Introduction
Even though the Antarctic Ice Sheet represents the largest
accumulation of the freshwater cryospheric mass on our planet, the
uncertainties associated with its future behaviour remain very large.
There are initiatives to fill the data gaps through detailed surveys
(e.g. RINGS and ICECAP), most of which are aimed at refining the
sub-ice bed morphology. International collaborations for these have
been highlighted in ATCM (e.g. WP 39 in 45th ATCM1). Subice
geology is only a peripheral aspect in these endeavours on account
of thick ice cover and lack of correlation from other sources. It is
expected to show some of the most remarkable sea-level changes
(rise by 21-62 cm by the end of 2100; Fox-Kemper et al. 2021; IPCC
AR6). However, controls and boundary conditions of these changes
are poorly understood, especially the role of geological conditions.
This is mainly on account of very little knowledge on the sub ice
geology. There are increasing reports of the presence of water
bodies at the base of kilometre’s thick Antarctic Ice Sheet (e.g.3).
Considering the possibility of geological structures as well lithology
influencing the basal melting of East Antarctic Ice Sheet, sub-ice
geological information assumes significance. Because of the thick
ice cover, direct controls on ascertaining sub-ice geology are
limited.
The project “Geological Exploration of Amery Ice Shelf (GeoEAIS)-
looking at rocks beneath the ice” has been initiated as a part of
Indian Antarctic Scientific Expeditions with a view to establish
reliable sub-ice geological map in an area with highly variable ice
mass wastage of a segment of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS).
The project is conceived and led by the National Centre for Polar
and Ocean Research (NCPOR), Goa, India and is looking forward to
international participation in coming five years.
Preparations for GeoEAIS started from austral summer of 2019-20
and are continuing. Initial four years of activities have concentrated
in setting up of field camps, fuel dumps and geological sample
collections. A total of seven institutes from India have participated
till date in the preliminary stage of this project. Some of the results
obtained so far and published in peer reviewed journals are
mentioned in the bibliography 4 to 13.
The main scientific objectives of the project are two-fold- (i) to
prepare a sub-ice geological map of the area around and south of
Amery Ice Shelf to establish geological boundary controls on the
behaviour of a segment of EAIS and (ii) to demarcate sutures
delineating past geological affinities of Indian, Australian, and
Antarctic terrains.
The GeoEAIS project utilizes direct as well as indirect data
generation approaches in this context towards refining this
information. The initial period has been utilized to obtain direct
samples from rock outcrops, surface moraines and other terrestrial
glacial sediments and marine sediments. These samples are being
analysed at various laboratories in India.
2. State of the Art of the GeoEAIS
In ~4 years of initial preparatory operations ~15camping sites,
several landing sites and four sites (Fig. 1) for base camps have
been identified and reconnaissance field traverses and initial
sampling undertaken (Fig. 1 and 2).
Figure 1: Identified camping sites, landing sites and base camp sites
Figure 2. Sites of in-situ outcrop geological data and sample
collection
This sampling and geological mapping covered Gillock Island,
Reinbolt Hills, Moraine Island, Larsemann Hills, Landing Bluff,
Vestfold Hills besides several other small islands and nunataks.
Besides rock outcrops, following categories of provenance indicator
samples are being analyzed;
Sediment samples from the layer of sediments embedded in ice
sheets
Samples and orientation of boulders and erratics embedded in Ice-
sheet
Glacial Tills/debris / Erratic/ and boulders dumped by the glaciers
on different Islands
One of the base camps at Reinbolt Hills has been established in
2019-20 campaign and others are in the process of being set up and
are expected to be ready by the completion of field season 2025-26
(Fig. 3).
Figure 3- Locations of base camps for GeoEAIS field campaigns and
the Reinbolt camp
The surface mass balance measurements of selected glaciers of
Amery Ice Shelf domain physically through measurements of
coordinated arrays of stakes as well as by remote sensing is also
being carried out at Dalk and Polar glaciers.
Future Plans
The field campaigns for geological sample collection begun and
continued with the preparatory work in the last four years. Initial
results, in conjunction with the proximal marine sediment data,
indicates presence of sediments/rocks from hinterland including
from the Gamburtsev Subglacial Mountains (GSM) and contributes
to the origin of GSM. This work will be supported and validated by
the following in the five years following establishment of base
camps. Following activities are planned during this period;
Ground/drone/air based geophysical surveys in sub-kilometre
spacing for targeted sub-ice geological information
Structural mapping and geological sampling
Sampling and comparative study of Gondwana age coal beds from
Amery Ice shelf, Antarctica and Mahanadi Basin, India
Installation of Atmospheric/ meteorological/ Space physics Related
instruments at Geo EAIS base camps under Integrated Atmospheric
Observation Facility for Antarctica
Search for meteorites in the vicinity of the Grove Mountains
4. Invitation for participation Participation in field campaigns from
2025-26 field seasons is invited from interested Parties, under the
GeoEAIS program for both geological as well as geophysical
investigations. Hosting of participants within the Indian expeditions
can be discussed with Director, NCPOR, Goa.
5.Concluding remarks
This IP aims to provide a brief introduction to the GeoEAIS project
aimed at providing not only a reliable geological map of a segment
of Princess Elizabeth Land in east Antarctica not only for use for
geological correlation and contribution to the understanding of the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet stability but also to provide a guide for
implementation for similar objectives in other segments of the east
Antarctic terrain. The progress of the proposal and significant
results are proposed to be shared by a working paper in the 48th
ATCM.
6.Acknowledgements
Participating scientists from Geological Survey of India, National
Centre for Ocean and Polar Research, University of Allahabad,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Banaras Hindu
University, IIT-Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad and National
Centre for Earth Science Studies are acknowledged. Fausto
Ferracciolli (BAS and OGS) contributed significantly in discussions
on planning for the geophysical surveys. Kenichy Matsuoka
provided inputs for improvement of this IP.
7. References
ATCM 45, Agenda item 6d, Working paper 39 (DML-RINGS and
Enderby Land RINGS – opening extensive international
collaboration to close critical data gaps for sea-level projections
Fox-Kemper, B., Hewitt, H. T., Xiao, C., Aðalgeirsdóttir, G.,
Drijfhout, S. S., Edwards, T. L., et al. (2021). Ocean, Cryosphere and
Sea Level Change. In V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L.
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I.
Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K.
Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (Ed.),
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Livingstone, S.J., Li, Y., Rutishauser, A. et al. Subglacial lakes and
their changing role in a warming climate. Nat Rev Earth Environ 3,
106–124 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-021-00246-9
Arora, D., Pant, N., Pandey, M., Chattopadhyay, A., Greenbaum, J.,
Siegert, M., Bo, S., Blankenship, D., Rao, N.V.C. and Bhandari, A.,
2020. Insights into the geological
evolution of Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica-clues for
continental suturing and breakup since Rodinian time. Gondwana
Research, 84, pp.260-283.
Chatterjee, S., Debnath, A., Samantaray, S., Arora, D., Dey, S.,
Gupta, S. and Pant, N.C., 2023. Thermotectonic evolution of the
Rauer Group and Vestfold Hills in Prydz Bay: Implications for
Neoproterozoic assembly of the East Antarctic shield. Polar Science,
p.101015, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2023.101015
Gupta, R., Pandey, M., Arora, D., Pant, N. C., & Rao, N. V. C., 2022.
Evincing the presence of a trans-Gondwanian mobile belt in the
interior of the Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica: insights
from offshore detrital sediments, rock fragments, and monazite
geochronology. Geological Journal, 57( 7), 2581– 2607.
Gupta, S., Chatterjee, S., Arora, D., Bose, S. and Dobe, R., 2021.
Locating the Indo-Antarctica suture – correlating the Rengali, Rauer
and Ruker terranes in Gondwana. Polar Science, 100689.
Naik, A., Arora, D., Pandey, M., Pant, N.C. and Gupta, R., 2023.
Evidence of Paleoproterozoic metamorphism in Vestfold hills, East
Antarctica: Insights from phase equilibria modelling and monazite
CHIME dating. Polar Science, p.101004
Pandey, M., Pant, N.C., Arora, D. and Gupta, R., 2021. A review of
Antarctic Ice sheet fluctuations records during Cenozoic and its
cause and effect relation with the climatic conditions, 30, Polar
Science, 100720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2021.100720.
Ravindra, R., Arora, D., Pant, N.C. and Roy, S.K., 2020. Sub-ice
Geology of East Antarctica- the supercontinent connection and its
context to the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. Indian Journal of
Geosciences, 74(3), pp. 315-326.
Sadiq, M., Dharwadkar, A., Roy, S. K., Arora, D., Shah, M.Y. and
Bhandari, A., 2021. Thermal evolution of mafic granulites of
Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. Polar Science, 100641.
Shah, M. Y., Sadiq, M., Ayemi, K. K., Dharwadkar, A. and Roy, S. K,
2021. P-T-t-d evolution of Brattnevet Peninsula, Larsemann Hills,
East Antarctica In Special Issue on "Polar Studies - Window to the
changing Earth", 30, Polar Science, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.polar.2021.100728
Sadiq, M., Dharwadkar, A., Roy, S. K, Arora, D., Shah, M.Y.,
Bhandari, A., 2021. Thermal evolution of mafic granulites of
Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. 30, In Special Issue on
"Polar Studies - Window to the changing Earth",100641, Polar
Science. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2021.100641
