Initial informal discussions concerning a potential new Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay,
Antarctic Peninsula
Initial informal discussions concerning a potential new Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay,
Antarctic Peninsula
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom on behalf of
intersessional discussion participants
Summary
The area in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, is
becoming increasingly busy due to increasing national operator and
tourism industry activities. Here we report the details of initial
informal intersessional discussions concerning the usefulness of
proposing the designation of the area in the vicinity of Marguerite
Bay as a new Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA).
Introduction
Marguerite Bay – an increasingly busy place
The area in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, has
been subject to human activity for over 120 years. Today the area
contains research facilities operated by Argentina (General San
Martín Station), Chile (Teniente Luis Carvajal Station), the
Netherlands (Dirck Gerritsz Laboratory), Türkiye (Turkish Scientific
Research Camp), and the United Kingdom (Rothera Research
Station). Further national operator logistical activity is planned or
underway, for example, Türkiye recently submitted a
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
construction of a year-round research station on Horseshoe Island
and major redevelopment work is being undertaken currently at
Rothera Research Station (ATCMXLIII WP18; ATCMXLIII IP97).
Several other nations undertake scientific research activities in the
area (e.g., Spain, Italy, Malaysia, and the United States).
Annual levels of tourist visitation to the general Marguerite Bay
area in recent years have varied due to (i) the extent and duration
of seasonal sea ice that may limit access to the area and (ii) the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Antarctic tourism
industry overall. Nevertheless, tourist visitation levels have shown a
rapid rise in recent years with, for example, a c. 10-fold increase
between the 2015/16 and 2022/23 seasons. Impacts resulting from
tourism in the area have not been subject to comprehensive
monitoring but are likely to be low. However, tourists almost
landed inadvertently within Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(ASPA) No. 177 Léonie Islands and South-east Adelaide Island,
Antarctic Peninsula, and IAATO Operators have recently agreed to
restrict activities in Lystad Bay so as not to interfere with the
research of Turkish scientists. Examples, such as these, indicate the
potential need for and benefit of appropriate management and clear
communication.
Existing management
The ATCM has already used existing management tools to protect
many of the environmental, scientific, historic and intrinsic values
present in the Marguerite Bay area. Specifically, the area contains
five ASPAs (with a potential sixth, located on Farrier Col, Horseshoe
Island, currently under consideration by the CEP), three Historic
Sites and Monuments (HSM No. 55 East Base, Stonington; HSM No.
63 Base Y; HSM No. 64 Base E, Stonington) and Site Guidelines for
Visitors have been prepared for two popular visitor locations.
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Annex V, Article 4, to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty allows for the designation of Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas (ASMA). Any area, including any marine
area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be
conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed
Area to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid
possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or
minimise environmental impacts. ASMAs may include: (a) areas
where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative
environmental impacts; and (b) sites or monuments of recognised
historic value. Given (i) the increasing levels of human activity in
the Marguerite Bay area, and tourism activity in particular, and (ii)
the use of existing ATCM management tools across the area to date,
it may be useful to consider the benefits of proposing the
designation of a new ASMA to ensure effective management of the
area in a holistic and coordinated manner. Establishment of an
ASMA at this stage may ensure appropriate management tools are
in place before human activities, including tourism, expand further.
Recent developments
Informal discussions were held in the margins of CEP XXV in
Helsinki, Finland, concerning the potential benefits of an ASMA in
the vicinity of Marguerite Bay. Representatives from Argentina,
Chile, the Netherlands, Türkiye, the United Kingdom, the United
States, ASOC and IAATO contributed to the discussions. It was
agreed that further discussions should be held informally during the
intersessional period via e-mail, coordinated by the UK. During the
intersessional period, Argentina, the Netherlands, Türkiye, the
United Kingdom, the United States and IAATO participated in
general discussion. A summary of comments provided during the
two discussion rounds are provided in Attachment A. Further
information was provided between the first and second rounds of
discussion to facilitate further dialogue (see Attachment B). The
information comprised a map that including a potential ASMA
boundary (Attachment B: Figure 1), tourist visitation data for the
general area (Attachment B: Table 1) and a comparison of the
characteristics of the Marguerite Bay area alongside equivalent data
for the six ASMAs already designated by the ATCM (Attachment B:
Table 2). It was noted that the area in Marguerite Bay under
discussion (c. 7,200 km2) includes more research stations, ASPAs,
HSMs and Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas than any of the
ASMAs currently in existence.
Main points of discussion included the following:
It may be useful to have an effective management tool in place in
the near future to facilitate management of the anticipated increase
in ship and land-based activities in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay,
especially given recent declines in sea ice duration and extent that
have made ship access easier.
A potential ASMA in the area might benefit from zoning, for
example, to strengthen spatial protection and to identify areas
where uses other than research should be discouraged or
concentrated.
The Marguerite Bay area faces multiple challenges (e.g., climate
change impacts, human impacts, etc.), but given the presence of
natural values and a higher level of human activity in other, more
northerly, parts of the Antarctic Peninsula, it might be appropriate
to consider those areas for potential ASMA designation as a priority.
If it is possible that a marine area might be included in any ASMA
proposal for the Marguerite Bay area, then early engagement with
CCAMLR would be helpful to allow for consideration of appropriate
provisions such as those included in ASMA No. 1 (Admiralty Bay)
and ASMA No. 7 (Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin).
Next steps
Following earlier exchanges of views, it has been proposed that a
further brief informal meeting should be held in the margins of CEP
26 to establish next steps. Should it then be decided that
further efforts to consider a proposal for a new ASMA are merited,
then guidance set out in ‘Guidance for assessing an area for a
potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation’ (Resolution
1 (2017)) and ‘Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the
designation of ASPA and ASMAs’ would be taken into consideration
or followed, as relevant.
References
ATCMXLIII WP18. Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
(CEE) for the construction and operation of the Turkish Antarctic
Research Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica. https://
documents.ats.aq/ATCM43/wp/ATCM43_wp018_e.docx
ATCMXLIII IP97. Update and CEE compliance report: Rothera wharf
reconstruction and coastal stabilisation project. https://
documents.ats.aq/ATCM43/ip/ATCM43_ip097_e.docx
