New findings on the presence of non-native insects on the South
Shetland Islands
New findings on the presence of non-native insects on the South
Shetland Islands
Summary
The presence is identified of a new non-native species, Leptocera
caenosa, in the vicinity of the Arturo Prat base. In addition, a
possible establishment has been confirmed of non-native insects T.
maculipennis and P. albipennis, including larvae and pupae in semi-
natural environments, as well as a greater abundance in natural
areas. Unidentified specimens of Psocoptera were found again, as
well as the presence of flour moths in the Antarctic stations of Spain
(Deception Island), South Korea and Chile. The Parties are urged to
strengthen prevention, monitoring and control measures for non-
native insects and to jointly define an eradication plan.
Background
The presence of non-native insects on King George Island has been a
concern since 2006, with the first record of Trichocera
maculipennis associated with a mossy surface near an Antarctic
station on the Fildes Peninsula. Subsequently, the establishment of
this species was confirmed in the vicinity of waste water treatment
plants of at least six stations, which led to joint work between the
different parts of the Antarctic Treaty System for its monitoring, as
well as the provision of measures for its control. Between 2022 and
2023, a new non-native species was confirmed, the fly Psychoda
albipennis, associated with at least 4 Antarctic stations, but
unfortunately with one finding associated with moss in a natural
environment near Lake Kitiesch. Although it is recognised that the
Parties have made efforts to stop its spread, mainly by preventing
its entry into the Antarctic Treaty Area, the control measures have
not had the expected effectiveness and a joint eradication
programme has not been established, as previously suggested
(ATCM XLIII - IP35, ATCM XLIV - IP9).
Biological invasions represent one of the main challenges for the
conservation of species and the maintenance of the health and
structures of ecosystems. Bioinvasion processes are favoured by the
current climate change scenario, which could accelerate the
establishment of non-native species and endanger the
representativeness and survival of native species and the ecosystems
to which they belong.
In Antarctica there are only two native species of insects, Parochlus
steinenii and Belgica antarctica, the latter being endemic to the
Antarctic Peninsula and the South Shetland Islands [1,2]. The
spatial isolation of Antarctica, associated with its extreme
environments (low temperatures, availability of water) is an
example of protection against the colonisation of non-native or
invasive species [3]. The Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on
Environmental Protection makes it clear that, among the important
actions to protect Antarctic biodiversity and the intrinsic values of
the continent, is the prevention of the introduction of non-native
species and their movement from one biogeographic zone to
another. Although research to date on non-native species within the
Antarctic Treaty region has led to a better understanding of the
risks of species introductions, further studies on impacts on
ecosystems are still needed to support effective and rapid responses
[4].
Recent reports by researchers from the Chile-Korea International
Linkage project (Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH - Korean Polar
Research Institute, KOPRI) on Marine and Terrestrial Bioinvasions
(FOVI220036) have indicated the presence and establishment of
another non-native insect, this time a moth called “Flour Moth"
which was reported during the 2022/2023 season at the Yelcho
scientific station (Chile), on Doumer Island, located about 400 km
south of King George Island, recently published reports confirmed
this species as Plodia interpunctella [4] (ATCM XLIV - IP9
New findings
During the last and second-to-last Antarctic season 2022/2023 and
2023/2024, a research team from the Milenio Base Institute, of the
National Antarctic Science Programme of Chile, in collaboration
with researchers from the Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI)
and the Antarctica National Programme of Uruguay, carried out
active searches for non-native insects both inside and outside the
bases, installed UV light traps and temperature and relative
humidity recorders for the characterisation of microclimatic
conditions in key spaces at the stations.
After being collected in the 2022/23 Antarctic season and
molecularly analysed, the presence in high abundance was
confirmed again in this new 2023/24 season of the new non-native
fly Leptocera caenosa in the vicinity of the Arturo Prat base, on
Greenwich Island, with high abundances associated with sewer
areas; this has not yet been found in other scientific stations.
Once again during the 2023/24 season, the presence was observed
of high densities of P. albipennis inside the waste water treatment
chambers. We received a report from a researcher who indicated
the possible reproduction of specimens of P. albipennis that come
from Sanionia moss on Arley Island.
Specimens of T. maculipennis were found under rocks, while
walking, and in interception traps buried in the natural
environment at different points far from the scientific stations on
King George Island.
The discovery of an unidentified species of Psocoptera insect has
been reported. This discovery was repeated on the Antarctic
Expedition 2022/23, making it the second consecutive year that it
has been found in the vicinity of scientific stations.
Reports and photos were received from researchers who have
observed the presence of moths (Plodia interpunctella) at the
Spanish Gabriel de Castilla base on Deception Island, which was
reported to have been incinerated and a report of this same species
was received at King Sejong station.
Finally, during the 2023/24 expedition, a high abundance of T.
maculipennis were reported in the vicinity of Poland's Henryk
Arctowski station located at Rakusa Point in Admiralty Bay and it is
reported that it has been seen flying in a natural environment
kilometres from the station. The same observation was made for
King George Island in the Elefantera area, where researchers
working on bird viruses reported T. maculipennis flying in a natural
environment, obtaining a specimen which will be analysed by the
INACH specialist team for terrestrial invasions.
Conclusions
New report of species of other non-native diptera (Leptocera
caenosa) for the second consecutive year raises the alarm that a
new invasive species may begin to adapt and go out into the natural
environment. The findings already identified in previous years with
the processes of establishing T. maculipennis and P. albipennis in
different stages of development outside the stations, in semi-natural
environments and today directly natural environments call for
taking new precautions and establishing new protocols to study and
control this diversification of non-native species found in the
Antarctic Treaty Area and prevent them from becoming officially
invasive.
Given these findings, the Parties, especially those present on King
George Island, are urged to reinforce measures to prevent the entry
and spread of non-native organisms, to carry out a deep cleaning in
the waste water treatment systems to detect and eliminate larvae,
eggs and pupae, review the state of the facilities to seal possible
insect escape routes to the outside of the stations, instruct people
regarding the procedures for reporting sightings of non-native
species, as well as how to record and collect them properly for
analysis.
The joint definition of a plan for the eradication of non-native
insects is proposed, especially on King George Island, understanding
this as one of the main gateways to Antarctica.
References
[1] Chown, S. L., and P. Convey. 2016. Antarctic entomology.
Annual Review of Entomology 61.
[2] Frenot, Y., S. L. Chown, J. Whinam, P. M. Selkirk, P. Convey, M.
Skotnicki, and D. M. Bergstrom. 2005. Biological invasions in the
Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications. Biological reviews
80:45-72.
[3] Hughes, K. A., and M. R. Worland. 2010. Spatial distribution,
habitat preference and colonisation status of two alien terrestrial
invertebrate species in Antarctica. Antarctic Science 22:221–231
[4] Benitez, H. A., C. Salinas, J. Hernandez, T. Counter Mejias, S.
Kim, C. S. Maturana, L. Rebolledo, L. M. Perez, P. E. Camara, and V.
Alves Ferreira. 2024. An outsider on the Antarctic Peninsula: A new
record of the non‐native moth Plodia interpunctella (Lepidoptera:
Pyralidae). Ecology and evolution 14:e10838.
[5] Committee for the Protection of the Environment (CEP). 2017.
Protocol on Environmental Protection.307pp.
