Basis for the request of the Republic of Belarus on granting the
status of a Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty
English version provided by the author
Basis for the request of the Republic of Belarus on granting the
status of a Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
This Information Document (IP) contains the data on substantiation
of compliance of the activity of the Republic of Belarus in the
Antarctic Treaty System with the requirements to this status with an
additional information over the past five years. It takes into account
the comments received in the course of consideration of the Request
of the Republic of Belarus for the ATCM in Helsinki and provides
the data on the implementation of significant scientific activity in
the Antarctic, in particular, it draws attention to the regular and
multidisciplinary nature of scientific research in the traditional and
new areas of Antarctic research, as well as high scientific
productivity and provision of research with the necessary
infrastructure, modern instruments and highly qualified scientific
personnel. This IP supports the Request of the Republic of Belarus
for status of the Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty.
Introduction
In 2019 the Government of the Republic of Belarus sent to the USA
- the depositary country of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 - an
application for granting the status of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Party. The request of the Republic of Belarus was
considered at the XLIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(Paris, France, 2021) and XLIV ATCM (Berlin, Germany, 2022).
Taking into account holding the above-mentioned ATCMs in the on-
line and hybrid format, the Meeting participants noted the necessity
of a personal meeting to discuss such an important issue and
decided to postpone the request of the Republic of Belarus for its
formal discussion at the next ATCM in 2023. At the XLV ATCM
(Helsinki, Finland, 2023) the Republic of Belarus submitted
additional information on meeting the requirements for obtaining
the consultative status. The United States of America, acting as the
Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty, confirmed that the
Republic of Belarus had complied with the rules set out in Decision
2 (2017). Some Parties supported the application, while some
Parties, without providing solid arguments, groundlessly stated that
Belarus “did not fulfil the requirements of Article IX (2) regarding
the need to conduct substantial scientific research activities in the
Antarctic”. No consensus was reached on the application of Belarus
for obtaining the status of the Consultative Party.
In October 2023, the Government of the Republic of Belarus sent to
the USA - the depositary country of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 - a
repeated application for granting the status of the Consultative
Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
The status of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party and the
requirements for its submission are determined by Article IX of the
Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and Decision 2 (2017) of the XL ATCM
(Beijing, China). The activity of the Republic of Belarus in the
Antarctic Treaty System fully corresponds to the existing legal
provisions of this status.
Participation in the bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System
The Republic of Belarus acceded to the Antarctic Treaty on
December 27, 2006 and to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on August 154, 2008. From 2006
(XXIX ATCM) to 2023 (XLV ATCM) the Government Delegation of
the Republic of Belarus took part in the work of 15 ATCM and CEP
meetings as an observer (in 2021 and 2022 - in the remote format),
where 30 information documents were presented for discussion.
The Republic of Belarus since 2015 is a permanent member of the
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and
since 2018 is an Associated Member in the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR). In 2024, our country submitted an
application for agreement of full membership in SCAR. The
Delegation of the Republic of Belarus took part in twelve meetings
of the Council of Managers of the National Antarctic Programs, at
which 10 working papers and 9 presentations were presented, and
also in four sessions of SCAR, at which 2 reports, 4 communications
and 3 presentations were presented by our country.
National legislation on regulation of activity in the Antarctic
From 2006 to 2023, the Republic of Belarus adopted 17 regulatory
legal acts in relation to Antarctica: 1 Republican Law “On the
accession of the Republic of Belarus to the Antarctic Treaty” dated
July 19, 2006 No. 157-Z, 1 Decree of the President of the Republic
of Belarus “On the accession of the Republic of Belarus to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” No.
200 dated April 10, 2008, 7 Resolutions of the Government of the
Republic of Belarus, including the resolutions of the Government of
the Republic of Belarus adopted in 2020 “On the procedure for
considering and issuing permits for the activities of legal entities
and individual entrepreneurs in the Antarctic Treaty area” and “On
the approval of Measure 16 “Amendments to Annex II to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
“Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora””, as well as 4
Ministerial Resolutions and 4 bilateral international agreements on
cooperation in Antarctica. Currently, the draft Resolution of the
Government of the Republic of Belarus “On the approval of Measure
1 (2005) “Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty “Financial liability arising from environmental
emergencies” is under discussion by the Ministries and departments
of the Republic of Belarus situations.
Expeditionary activities and the creation of the Belarusian scientific
station in Antarctica
From 2007 to May 2024 with the transport and logistics support of
the Russian Federation, 16 Belarusian seasonal Antarctic
expeditions were organized and carried out, in which more than 90
Belarusian and 6 foreign scientists and specialists took part.
Transport operations on delivery and removal of the personnel and
cargo of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition to the seasonal station
“Vechernyaya Mountain” are carried out by sea vessels and
helicopters of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, as well as using
aircraft of the International Aviation Program DROMLAN, which
the Republic of Belarus became a participant from 2020.
Since 2015 in East Antarctica, Enderby Land near Vechernyaya
Mountain, a phased establishment of the Belarusian Research
Station has been under way. The start of construction was carried
out after the Final Comprehensive Environmental Impact
Assessment (CEIA) of this project was agreed with the CEP in 2015
at the XXXVIII ATCM, Sofia (Bulgaria). In 2021, the establishment
of the first stage of the Belarusian Antarctic station “Vechernyaya
Mountain” was completed. At present, its second stage is being
formed with a possible transition of the station operation to the
year-round mode in the next few years.
In January 2020, the Government of Australia conducted an
inspection of the Belarusian seasonal Antarctic station
“Vechernyaya Mountain” in accordance with the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The
final inspection report noted that members of the inspection team
were impressed by the high level of design and construction of the
plant, its minimal impact on the landscape, its efficient use of solar
energy and water, and its commitment to scientific research. The
inspection team considered the station’s modular and
efficient design to be a good example of a modern facility and noted
that all existing new facilities were fully operational and operating
efficiently. The Australian inspection team commended the rational
use of existing buildings and the clearing of the area at the site of
the former field base of the Soviet Antarctic expedition
“Vechernyaya Mountain” in cooperation with the Russian
Federation, and also noted that the construction and operation of
the station is carried out in accordance with the final СEIA prepared
by Belarus. The inspection team noted that the plans of the
Republic of Belarus to transition the station to year-round operation
are at a high level.
In 2021 – 2024 in accordance with the Final CEIA submitted by the
Republic of Belarus to ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia
(Bulgaria), and also taking into account the recommendations of the
Australian inspection team, the Belarusian Antarctic Station was
equipped with new environmental protection and technological
equipment - a press for recycling barrels and metal waste, an
incinerator plant, a station for primary processing.
The plans of nature protection activity of the Republic of Belarus in
the Antarctic for the period up to 2025 envisage equipping the
station with a system of domestic sewage treatment and other
nature protection, scientific and technological equipment.
Scientific activity and participation in the development of
international scientific co-operation in the Antarctic
At present, researches by the Republic of Belarus in Antarctic are
carried out in accordance with the subprogram “Development of the
activities of the Belarusian Antarctic Station” of the State Program
“Scientific and Innovative Activities of the National Academy of
Sciences of Belarus” for 2021–2025. The responsible Customer of
the program is the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus (NAS of
Belarus), the customer is the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection of the Republic of Belarus.
Scientific programs in Antarctic are carried out with the
participation of research institutes of the National Academy of
Sciences of Belarus (Institute of Physics, Institute of Environmental
Management, Scientific and Practical Center for Bioresources,
Geophysical Monitoring Center, Institute of Physiology, Institute of
Microbiology, Research Institute of Radio Materials, Institute of
Mechanics of Metal-Polymer Systems, etc.) and the Belarusian State
University. Scientific organizations, scientists and specialists from
other countries party to the Antarctic Treaty also take part in the
research.
Long-term goals and plans for research work include the following
set of studies and monitoring of the state of the Antarctic natural
environment:
- studies of spatiotemporal changes and trends in the characteristics
of atmospheric aerosol, snow and ice cover, and water surface in
the area of the Vechernyaya Mountain station according to
measurement data from ground-based and satellite optical systems;
- study of the relationship between the vertical distribution of ozone
and other trace gas components of the atmosphere with
meteorological parameters;
- geological and geophysical research;
- monitoring of energy and mass transfer in the active layer of the
Earth’s surface to assess changes in temperature conditions and the
development of negative geocryological processes
- seismological monitoring to study modern geodynamic processes
on the Antarctic continent and beyond;
- glaciological and paleogeographic studies;
- study the dynamics of the state of biological diversity,
development of a strategy and action plan for the conservation of
biotic components of the Antarctic environment in the context of
global and regional climate change and anthropogenic impact;
- environmental monitoring of key parameters of the Antarctic
natural environment;
- study of the phytochemical properties of representatives of lichen
biota and bryoflora of the Antarctic using omics technologies;
- medical and biological research and problems of preventing
diseases of polar explorers.
The studies in all directions are provided with modern scientific
equipment and instruments. Below is a far from complete list of
instruments and instrument complexes used at the Belarusian
Antarctic Station for scientific research and measurements:
- spectral albedometer AS-A (manufactured in the Republic of
Belarus) for measuring the reflection spectra of the underlying
surface;
- solar spectral scanning radiometer CE-318N-EBM9 (CIMEL, made
in France) measures the atmospheric transparency spectrum and
angular dependences of the intensity of scattered solar radiation in
the spectral range 340 – 1020 nm. The radiometric sounding station
“Vechernia Hill”, created by Belarusian scientists in Antarctic, is
included in the global radiometric network AERONET;
- multi-wave polarization Raman lidar POLUS A (manufactured in
the Republic of Belarus) for measuring altitude profiles of optical
characteristics and microstructure of aerosol and cloud particles.
According to technical characteristics, the lidar system meets the
requirements for basic multi-wavelength Raman stations of the
European lidar network EARLINET;
- Pion-UV spectroradiometer (manufactured in the Republic of
Belarus) for simultaneous measurements of the spectral distribution
of surface solar radiation (spectral illumination) and the total ozone
column according to the Stamnes method;
- PION-UV spectroradiometer (manufactured in the Republic of
Belarus). Inference of total ozone and cloud effects from spectral
irradiance measurements;
- filter photometer Pion-F (manufactured in the Republic of
Belarus). Two-channel filter photometer PION-F for measuring
levels and doses of biologically active surface solar UV radiation
(BIOEFFECT CIE);
- filter-ozonometer M124-M (modernized in the Republic of
Belarus) for measuring the total ozone column using direct solar
measurements, as well as zenith measurements;
- Pion-PO device for measuring surface ozone concentrations
(manufactured in the Republic of Belarus);
- MAX-DOAS MARS-B device for monitoring atmospheric gases in
Antarctica based on the Oriel MS257 imaging spectrograph
(manufactured in the Republic of Belarus). Also measures the
stratospheric distribution of nitrogen dioxide and ozone;
- automatic actinometric station “Peleng SF-06”, (manufactured in
the Republic of Belarus). Used to monitor the intensity of total and
reflected solar radiation and the duration of sunshine;
- submersible four-channel UV system PION-AQUA (manufactured
in the Republic of Belarus). to measure the UV irradiation of
aquatic environments and the concentration of dissolved oxygen in
order to determine the effect of UV radiation on aquatic ecosystems;
- automatic meteorological station M-49M (manufactured in the
Russian Federation) is used for meteorological support of aviation
flights;
- unmanned aerial vehicle hexocopter A-20-X (manufactured in the
Republic of Belarus) for aerial monitoring of natural plant biotopes,
habitats of marine mammals and nesting birds, reconnaissance of
ice conditions in the coastal sea zone, laying out safe routes and
conducting search and rescue operations;
- automatic weather station VAISALA MAWS 310 (manufactured in
Finland). The recorded meteorological values are transmitted
automatically four times a day by the Iridium satellite
communication terminal to the database of the National Academy
of Sciences of Belarus;
- Overhauser magnetometers MMPOS-1 (manufactured in the
Russian Federation) for measuring the geomagnetic field modulus.
MMPOS-1 magnetometers can be used both for pedestrian surveys
and as a stationary variation station;
- LCD temperature monitoring system (manufactured in the Russian
Federation) consisting of 4 thermometric streamers with loggers for
monitoring the temperature regime of the ice cover in the active
layer of the Earth’s surface;
- hardware and software complex for seismological monitoring
(manufactured in the Republic of Belarus) for continuous round-the-
clock recording of the seismic field in a wide frequency and
dynamic range in order to create a database of seismicity in the
observation area and ensure the scientific participation of the
Republic of Belarus in international seismological monitoring of the
Antarctic continent.
In addition to modern instruments and instrument systems,
scientists at the Belarusian Antarctic Station have at their disposal
separate specialized laboratories (biological, atmospheric physics,
meteorological bureau, etc.), thermometric sites on the moraine and
Hayes glacier, a research site on ice dome for measuring reflection
spectra of the underlying surface, meteorological and actinometric
sites, two hydrological posts on freshwater bodies, three monitoring
sites in areas of moss-algae ecosystems with Open top chamber
(OTC) installations for conducting an experiment to study the
impact of global climate change on microinvertebrates of Antarctic.
Since 2022, to expand the geography of research within the
framework of the next Belarusian Antarctic expeditions, multi-day
scientific trips to the interior little-studied areas of Antarctic are
annually organized, during which the comprehensive scientific
research is carried out, sampling and sample collection of natural
materials and measurements of various parameters of the Antarctic
natural environment using modern instruments and instrument
systems developed in scientific organizations of the Republic of
Belarus.
The Republic of Belarus and Belarusian research organizations have
14 agreements on scientific and technical cooperation in Antarctic
with Governments and organizations from 9 countries party to the
Antarctic Treaty (Bulgaria, Germany, Great Britain, New Zealand,
Republic of Turkey, Russia, Finland, France, Ukraine).
The results of Belarusian Antarctic research were summed up at
four international scientific conferences “The Natural Environment
of the Antarctic: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Study” held in the
Republic of Belarus. Based on the results of scientific research in
Antarctic, Belarusian scientists have published more than 300
scientific articles, of which 110 in peer-reviewed scientific journals,
191 articles and abstracts of reports published in collections of
proceedings of international scientific conferences held in different
countries, of which 89 publications were published in English. 46
articles were published in journals with a high scientific rating
(impact factor more than 1.3), 39 articles were published with the
participation of foreign scientists (France, Great Britain, Russian
Federation, Turkey, etc.). The number of publications co-authored
with specialists from other countries is 68. 9 data sets have been
created and are available to the scientific community. More than 80
public lectures on Antarctic topics were given. 7 national
exhibitions were held on the activities of the Republic of Belarus in
Antarctic. 10 documentaries have been created covering the
activities of the Republic of Belarus and international scientific
cooperation in Antarctic. Since 2024, the Republic of Belarus has
begun publishing the annual scientific and information bulletin
“Belarusian Polar Research”, the first issue of which will be
presented to the participants of the current ATCM.
A detailed description of all scientific research programs and
activities carried out by the Republic of Belarus in Antarctic from
2006 to 2023 is presented in Appendix 1 to the Request of the
Government of the Republic of Belarus to the Depositary
Government of the Antarctic Treaty of December 1, 1959 (USA) for
granting the status of a Consultative Party.
The National Antarctic Program of the Republic of Belarus
recognizes the importance of intergenerational communication for
the transfer of experience and is open to communication with
interested representatives of civil society of the Republic of Belarus,
especially youth.
Final provisions
The Republic of Belarus fully complies with all provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty of December 1, 1959, the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of October 4,
1991 with five Annexes, and the Recommendations and Measures of
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings that have entered into
force and expresses its readiness, as before, to follow basic
principles of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the 1991 Antarctic Treaty.
We note that not every Party to the Antarctic Treaty can
demonstrate such significant scientific and technical potential, the
breadth of research coverage of priority problems and areas for
Antarctic, as well as high scientific productivity and provision of
research with the necessary infrastructure, modern instruments and
highly qualified scientific personnel. The Republic of
Belarus uses all these opportunities within the framework of the
principle of international cooperation in the interests of the entire
Antarctic community.
Based on the above, we believe that the current activities of our
government in Antarctic meet the necessary criteria for Consultative
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
We express confidence that in assessing the activity of our country
in Antarctic, the Consultative Parties will demonstrate a
constructive approach and objectivity in accordance with the spirit
and principles of the Antarctic Treaty.
