Practices of the Korean Program to Prevent Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Practices of the Korean Program to Prevent Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Summary
This Paper provides information on the measures implemented by
the Korean Antarctic program to prevent the introduction and
spread of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in Antarctica.
The Korean program has prepared a comprehensive manual
outlining countermeasures that can be adjusted to the severity of
HPAI in the region. Additionally, it has prepared and distributed
documents with preventive guidelines for Antarctic researchers,
accompanied by pre-deployment training. As a specific precaution
to further mitigate the risk of transmission, changing room facilities
have been installed at the King Sejong Station, where bird and
mammal research is conducted periodically.
Introduction
The rising number of the outbreaks of HPAI has led to an increased
risk of its transmission to Antarctica. Confirmed cases in birds and
mammals have been reported in the sub-Antarctic region, and the
first case in the Antarctic peninsula region was reported in February
2024. Responding to these concerns, the last Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting recommended the National Antarctic
programs to implement preventive measures against HPAI. The
Republic of Korea takes this opportunity to provide information on
practices implemented during the 2023-24 season to prevent the
introduction or spread of HPAI in Antarctica.
Efforts include the production and distribution of HPAI prevention
pamphlets and testing kits to those who will be participating in
Korean Antarctic expedition. Additionally, research teams in close
contact with Antarctic wildlife were equipped with quarantine gear
and had access to specialized facility to change and disinfect
clothing and equipment to prevent cross-contamination. The Korean
program prioritizes preventing the spread of the virus, while
safeguarding the health of Antarctic wildlife and the research and
operation personnel working in the region.
Distribution of Guidelines and Quarantine Facilities
Drawing on data and guidelines from the National Institute of
Wildlife Disease Control and Prevention (NIWDC) of the Ministry of
Environment of the Republic of Korea, and the Antarctic Wildlife
Health Network (AWHN) of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR), the Korean Antarctic program has put together a
detailed guidance on how to respond to High Pathogenic Avian
Influenza (HPAI) across its transmission stages, and established
specific Avian Influenza protocols for Antarctic visitors, taking into
account the COMNAP Guidance on Avian Influenza. This guide
includes preventative measures, how to handle suspected cases, and
correct usage and disposal of quarantine suits.
To further mitigate the risk of HPAI transmission in the Antarctic
Peninsula, a mobile changing facility has been introduced at the
King Sejong Station for researchers who may come into contact
with wildlife during their field study. A 20ft dry container, adapted
for this purpose (see Figure 1 and 2), is equipped with a high-
pressure washer, dryer, and essential quarantine items such as
quarantine suits, disinfectants, gloves and masks. This setup not
only minimizes environmental impact but also enhances the safety
of researchers against the influenza.
Figure 1. Quarantine facility for sanitizing field outfit and
equipment
Figure 2. Quarantine facility equipped with high-pressure washer/
dryer and other items for disinfection
