IAATO Antarctic Ambassador Expedition Program
IAATO Antarctic Ambassador Expedition Program
Information Paper Submitted by (IAATO)
Summary
Education and outreach have been a cornerstone of IAATO since its
inception in 1991, both through targeted learning and training
opportunities for field staff, and in the communication of Antarctic
Treaty System and IAATO information to would-be Antarctic
visitors.
It is IAATO’s belief that expeditions with responsible and robust
environmental practices at their core create among visitors a
greater understanding of Antarctica’s value to global science and
how environmental changes to the region can impact us all. This
ethos became the foundation of the Antarctic Ambassadors concept.
Further information on the background to Antarctic Ambassadors is
available in ATCM XLV (2023) IP054 IAATO Education, Outreach
and Ambassadorship.
IAATO’s formal definition of an Antarctic Ambassador is someone
who:
Loves and respects the region;
Educates others by sharing their Antarctic experiences;
Advocates for Antarctica when opportunities arise, and;
Protects Antarctica by making positive changes at home.
The LEAP acronym is designed to empower everyone to leap into
action as ambassadors, using their knowledge and enthusiasm in
support of Antarctica.
In 2023, IAATO’s Antarctic Ambassadorship Committee (AAC),
evolved from IAATO’s Education and Outreach Working Group,
established in 2015.  This Committee, consisting of IAATO
Operators and Associate members, has a remit to develop the
Antarctic Ambassador concept. 
At the start of the 2023-24 Antarctic season, the AAC released a
suite of materials to help polar field staff continue to create
Antarctic Ambassadors. These formed the Antarctic Ambassador
Expedition Program Foundation Pack, which is reviewed in this
paper.
Background to creation of program materials
Building on previous resources outlined in ATCM XLV (2023) IP054
IAATO Education, Outreach and Ambassadorship, IAATO’s
Antarctic Ambassadorship Committee began developing the
Antarctic Ambassador Expedition Program foundation pack in 2023
with the following objectives:
To create ready-to-use program materials which can be reviewed,
easily interpreted, and delivered by polar field staff to their guests.
Flexibility within the materials to enable IAATO Operators to adjust
the program for specific settings, i.e., lectures, re-caps.
Consistency of message across the membership about the Antarctic
Ambassador concept and its aims.
The resulting materials were given a soft launch at the start of the
2023-24 Antarctic season, enabling field staff to test the materials
and provide feedback and ideas to broaden the program in 2024-25.
These materials are as follows:
Program Presentation
The Antarctic Ambassador Expedition Program presentation
provides a selection of slides, some of which are editable, from
which field staff can pick and choose depending on whether they
are sharing with guests as a standalone lecture or part of an evening
re-cap.
The slides cover the Antarctic Ambassador definition, real-world
profiles of Antarctic Ambassadors to create relatable examples of
ambassadorship activities for guests, suggestions for guests on
continuing their ambassadorship at home and signposting for
further resources on the IAATO website, and to the ambassador
social media community.
Notes for each slide are included within the presentation. There is
also a document containing the notes which can be used for
translation purposes.
 
Expedition Challenge
The expedition challenge is a smaller version of the 24-task
Ambassadorship Challenge (released by IAATO in 2021) and seeks
to engage guests in six small acts of ambassadorship during their
time with IAATO Operators. Examples include attending
educational lectures, making mindful meal choices, and turning off
lights in their accommodation when not in use. In addition, there
are three challenges for guests to complete at home including
signing up to the Ambassadorship World Map and inspiring others
by posting about their acts of ambassadorship on Antarctic
Ambassadors social pages.
By joining IAATO’s online Antarctic Ambassador community, guests
returning home will also be able to access new tasks and challenges
such as taking part in at-home citizen science projects, picking up
trash at beaches and parks and choosing to cycle or walk on short
journeys rather than using a car.
 
Certificate of Antarctic Ambassadorship
The certificate of Antarctic Ambassadorship is designed to recognize
those who have taken part in the Expedition Challenge.
 
These materials, as well as a webinar introducing the program and
available resources, ‘Your Questions Answered’ reference sheet, and
Program Presentation notes, were made available to IAATO
Members and Field Staff through a dedicated Antarctic Ambassador
Resources page on IAATO’s website.
 
The IAATO Antarctic Ambassadorship Committee will be
developing further tools for the 2024-25 season to build the
capacity of polar field staff and guests, create additional
opportunities to participate and evolve the post-expedition
community.
