Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on Antarctic researchers
Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on Antarctic researchers
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Belgium, Chile, Korea
(ROK), the Netherlands, New Zealand, SCAR
Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected Antarctic research and
operations. This paper summarises some of the research results from
a survey of 406 Antarctic researchers. The research results show
that the pandemic has affected women more adversely (92%) than
men (79%), and early-career researchers were disadvantaged more
than their mid- or late-career colleagues. Indeed, the impacts of the
COVID-19 were perceived as more extreme by early career
scientists. A third of the research participants reported at least one
major negative impact from the pandemic on their mental health.
The full extent to which the pandemic affected Antarctic science,
funding structures and the Antarctic research community is likely to
become evident over the long term but can already be addressed
and moderated now. Suggestions on how Parties could mitigate the
most serious adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on
Antarctic research communities are provided in this paper.
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant implications for the
facilitation of scientific research and international scientific
cooperation in Antarctica (Liggett et al. 2024), as highlighted, e.g.,
in Resolution 5 (2021). Information sharing has allowed the
Antarctic Treaty system to manage risks arising from SARS-CoV-2 to
people and wildlife in the Antarctic during the pandemic and
continues to support the management of any future similar risks
(ATCMXLIII/WP63).
Reports on the responses to the pandemic from various Parties,
Observers and Experts included the development of a "COVID-19
Protocol for control and monitoring passengers and cargo transit
between Punta Arenas and the Antarctic Peninsula" (ATCM XLIII/
IP42), recommendations from COMNAP (ATCMXLIII/IP138),
sustained management measures (e.g., vaccination, testing and
quarantining prior to travelling to the Antarctic or entering stations,
and strict managed isolation with medical care and treatment)
(ATCMXLIII(BP8, ATCMXLV/IP24), the preparation of an
emergency operation plans that includes consultations with
neighbouring Antarctic programmes (ATCM XLIII/IP36), the
vulnerability of Antarctic wildlife to novel viruses (and the potential
risks posed by human activity on the Antarctic continent) (ATCM
XLIII/IP55), and closing research stations for tourist traffic (ATCM
XLIII/IP86). Important as they were, these measures also impacted
negatively on the mental health of scientists and expeditioners
doing field work. Self-imposed quarantine pre-deployment periods
can have a heavy toll on the mental health of Antarctic researchers,
with psychological adaptation and self-leadership being positively
correlated across the field work campaign (Marques-Quinteiro and
Leon 2023). More broadly, COVID-19 affected the productivity of
Antarctic researchers, their career prospects and their mental
wellbeing (Liggett et al. 2023).
COVID-19 impacts on Antarctic researchers
A total of 406 responses to a survey of the Antarctic research
community were obtained (Liggett et al. 2023). Field researchers
were adversely affected by cancelled, postponed or altered field
seasons due to severely restricted logistics in most national
Antarctic programmes. The pandemic also affected researchers
whose work did not rely on fieldwork.
Women appeared to have been affected more adversely (92%) than
men (79%), especially in relation to mental health, and early-career
researchers were disadvantaged more than their mid- or late-career
colleagues. A total of 85% of early-career scientists indicated that
their work had been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
(Liggett et al. 2023). Moreover, although the pandemic also affected
established researchers (Figure 1), early-career researchers reported
more extreme impacts – in terms of career progression and outlook,
funding, livelihoods and mental well-being (see Figure 2) than
established researchers (Liggett et al. 2023).
A third of the survey participants reported at least one major
negative impact from the pandemic on their mental health. On a
positive note, approximately half of the participants also perceived
that the COVID-19 pandemic had some benefits, especially in terms
of the advantages that working from home brought and
opportunities to attend events, network or benefit from training
workshops online (Liggett et al. 2023).
Figure 1. Negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic by career
stage showing the proportion of those indicated that they had been
highly impacted by the pandemic, compared to all other answers.
ECR = early-career researcher (from Liggett et al. (2023)).
Figure 2: Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on mental wellbeing
by career stage showing the proportion of those who indicated an
‘extreme impact’ compared to all other answers. ECR = early-
career researcher researcher (from Liggett et al. (2023)).
Parties are encouraged to consider how they can assist in mitigating
the most serious adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, or
other similar future events, on Antarctic research communities.
Potential approaches to reduce negative impacts include:
assessing how Antarctic programmes can prepare for future crises
(e.g., by developing support networks, especially for early-career
researchers and women);
ensuring access to mentors for personal and research advice,
especially for early-career researchers;
facilitating networking and the creation of new research
collaborations – both online and in person;
providing research support (e.g., reliable internet access, financial
support and psychological support); and
Supporting the development of more robust international
collaboration among researchers and Antarctic programmes as
impacts of COVID-19 are likely to be different in different countries
and Antarctic research stations (Liggett et al. 2023).
In addition, Parties are also encouraged to consider how larger
structural inequities that were accentuated by the pandemic can be
addressed by facilitating greater gender equality and protecting
early-career researchers.
References
Liggett, D., A. Herbert, R. Badhe, G. E. Charnley, K. Hudson, I.
Kelman, W. S. Lee, C. Lorenzo, P. Marques-Quinteiro, and M. Nash.
2023. Researchers on ice? How the COVID-19 pandemic has
impacted Antarctic researchers. Antarctic Science 35:141-160.
Liggett, D., Frame, B., Convey, P., & Hughes, K. A. (2024). How the
COVID-19 pandemic signaled the demise of Antarctic
exceptionalism. Science Advances 10 (9): eadk4424. https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adk4424
Marques-Quinteiro, P., and G. Leon. 2023. Psychological adaptation
in Antarctica amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. The Polar Journal
13:105-125.
