Report on the Presentation of the Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation for the Renovation of Petrel Base,
Dundee Island, Antarctica
English version provided by the author
Report on the Presentation of the Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation for the Renovation of Petrel Base,
Dundee Island, Antarctica
Information Paper presented by Argentina
Summary
On November 8, 2023, the Argentine Antarctic Program submitted
the Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the
renovation of Petrel Base, Dundee Island, Antarctica, to the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, in compliance with the
provisions of Paragraph 6 of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In accordance
with this Paragraph, on 9 November the Secretariat of the Antarctic
Treaty, by Secretariat Circular 23/2023, circulated the Final
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation to all Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty.
Chronological overview
The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat circulated the notification on the
availability of the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
(CEE) for the renovation of Petrel Base to all Parties by Secretariat
Circular number 4, dated 30 January 2023. The Chair of the
Committee for Environmental Protection informed this by CEP
Circular number 3, dated January 31, 2023. In addition, the
Secretariat made available to the members of the Committee, in the
CEP workspace on its website (https://www.ats.aq/devAS/EP/
CEPWorkspace), both the Non-Technical Summary and the
complete package of files that compose the Draft CEE.
In accordance with the Procedures for Intersessional CEP
Consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 3 to the Final Report of the
20th CEP Meeting), an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG),
coordinated by New Zealand, was established to review the Draft
CEE. ICG correspondence was made available to CEP Members and
Observers through the CEP Discussion Forum, which also provided
the Non-Technical Summary.
During the 45th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the 25th
Meeting of the CEP, which took place between May 29 and June 8,
2023, in the city of Helsinki, Finland, the parties made
contributions and comments and cleared up doubts about the Draft
CEE presented by Argentina, in an interactive dialogue with the
Argentine Delegation.
As required by Paragraph 6 of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, for the
preparation of the Final CEE Argentina examined, included,
summarized and responded to the comments and contributions
made by the parties in the ICG and in the meetings mentioned in
the previous paragraph.
Argentina appreciates all the comments and contributions made, as
they helped to enrich the Final CEE.
On November 8, 2023, the Argentine Antarctic Program submitted
the Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the
renovation of Petrel Base, to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty,
in compliance with the provisions of Paragraph 6 of Article 3 of the
Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. In accordance with this Paragraph, on November
9 of that year the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, by Secretariat
Circular 23/2023, circulated the Final Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation to all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
