Optimizing Antarctic National Programs Assets on the Antarctic
Peninsula
Optimizing Antarctic National Programs Assets on the Antarctic
Peninsula
Summary
This Information Paper presents the results of the coordination and
cooperation exercise carried out among the National Antarctic
Programs of Spain, Korea (ROK), Chile, Poland and Türkiye,
developed under the umbrella of COMNAP, in planning and using
their national logistics’ assets in the Antarctic Peninsula area during
several Antarctic summer seasons. The results of this cooperation
suggest a new coordination model that relies on a balance of points
without involving monetary exchange.
Background
During the 2018 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM), the
creation of a “Task Force” within the Peninsula Regional Group was
suggested to discuss possible ways to optimize the use of national
resources in logistics during the summer season around the
Antarctic Peninsula area.
From that moment on, the national programs of Chile, Korea, Spain,
Poland and Türkiye have been working together to develop a
points-based system for the exchange of the resources they mobilize
during their Antarctic summer campaigns.
Barter system
The first part of the work carried out consisted of identifying those
infrastructures and assets that the five National Antarctic Programs
made available for their activities in the Antarctic Peninsula Region,
such as planes, vessels, stations, etc.
The proposed system for cooperation was a barter system, where
available infrastructures are “valued” with points and that value is
used for exchanges instead of monetary means. This system allows
the cooperation for the usage of infrastructure to not be governed
by values converted monetarily, but as a prearranged value points
by each infrastructure being exchanged. This has been a traditional
form of exchange system and has worked very well between two
partners. The novelty in the proposal is that it is not only an
exchange between two, but there are five Antarctic programs that
are involved in exchanging their infrastructures based on this
model.
Based on the value that each National Antarctic Program gave to
their assets, a specific value was agreed upon for each type of
exchange and infrastructure. This was crucial for achieving a
harmonized exchange among all members of the group. The
following table illustrates the different infrastructures and the point
value allocated:
Flights
Point Value
Flight seat / pax (PUQ-KGI-PUQ one way)
1
Cargo/Kg
0.020
Helicopter/h
6.700
Twin-otter
4.530
Ships
R/V Araon (full day operation)
20
R/V Hespérides (full day operation)
20
R/V Sarmiento de Gamboa(full day operation)
20
Karpuj / 5pax/ day / CTD/ Acoustics
10
Stations
Day/pax
0.5
Camp day/pax
1
Preliminary Findings of the Task Force exercise
As the test exercise was affected by the COVID pandemic, the
availability of resources to be shared decreased significantly. With
the exception of the 2019–2020 summer season, last Antarctic
summer campaigns saw the average of points exchanged between
the five National Antarctic Programs was approximately 400 points
per season. This is indicative of an important coordination effort,
and also implies a huge exercise to optimize and maximize the use
of the resources through sharing of available assets.
The system has been reviewed and shared with all of the National
Antarctic Programs during the last COMNAP AGM 35 (2023). In
total, the number of assets exchanged among the group was over
800 points distributed in two Antarctic summer seasons (2021–
2022 and 2022–2023). This number shows the excellent support
and exchange that has been developed among the five Antarctic
programs, and also allows for subsequent interaction towards better
and more efficient coordination in the use of infrastructure.
These five National Antarctic Programs believe that is significant to
show the Antarctic Treaty Parties that the National Antarctic
Programs make efforts to optimize. Contributing to improving
efficiency in operations, reducing overlapping human activity
optimizing available resources/assets and reducing carbon
footprint, in their operational and scientific activity in Antarctica.
This is an example of developing systems and partnerships in order
to use their infrastructures in a more efficiently and sustainable
manner without exchange of funding. In particular, we would like
to highlight the the novelty and difference of this “barter system”,
and inform the Antarctic Treaty Parties of the efforts of the National
Antarctic Programs in enhancing logistic coordination.
Conclusions
The validity of the system has been demonstrated during the last
Antarctic summer seasons. This was reflected in the last COMNAP
annual general meeting held in Hobart (Australia) in 2023 where
the participating National Antarctic Programs presented their
conclusions and results, expressing the fulfillment of the task
entrusted by COMNAP to see possible new ways of coordination
and cooperation.
As a new system, there remains some improvements to be made,
but it is the intention of the five Programs to identify lessons
learned to expand this systems’ functionalities and, in particular, to
work on better advanced planning that will improve the efficiency
in the use of assets and infrastructures.
It is also the intention of the five Parties to establish themselves as a
stable working group project within COMNAP and extend the
system to other National Antarctic Programs that want to join
together in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula. The Parties will
continue to report their progress on the implementation of the
system and improvements to the work model.
