Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
Summary
Following the publication of the Southern Ocean Action Plan in
April 2022, SCAR was approved as the Decade Collaborative Centre
for the Southern Ocean Region (DCC-SOR), with the Southern
Ocean Task Force acting as the Advisory Board. Announced on UN
World Oceans Day, 8th June 2023, the DCC-SOR will endeavour to
connect Southern Ocean science with global ocean science,
reinforcing cooperation and collaborations by Parties and NGO
stakeholders between the Antarctic region and adjacent regions,
and complementing Article III of the Antarctic Treaty. Relevant
activities in support of these aims over the last year are reported
and future plans outlined.
The Southern Ocean in the UN Ocean Decade
The 2017 United Nations proclamation of the Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development 2021-2030 (hereafter referred
to as the UN Ocean Decade) called for international scientific
cooperation to improve and sustain global ocean health. In response
to the call, the SCAR-coordinated Southern Ocean Task Force (refer
to ATCM XLIII IP136 ATCM XLIII IP136 The Southern Ocean
contribution to the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development), comprised of key members of the
international Southern Ocean stakeholder community, developed
the Southern Ocean Action Plan (SO-AP) which was published in
April 2022 (refer to ATCM XLIV IP107 ATCM XLIV IP107 Update
on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations Decade
of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development). This work built on
contributions from a wide range of Parties, Experts, and Observers
participating in a series of Southern Ocean Decade Workshops,
Open Surveys and Working Groups, and UN Ocean Decade
Laboratories, focussed on the key Societal Outcomes for the UN
Ocean Decade (see The Southern Ocean Process).
Better understanding, management and protection of the Southern
Ocean is a key contribution to achieving the UN Ocean Decade
goals and addressing its challenges. The SO-AP guides Southern
Ocean and wider stakeholders in identifying and developing
tangible actions and deliverables to achieve the UN Ocean Decade
vision.
In June 2023, the UN Decade approved the Decade Collaborative
Centre for the Southern Ocean Region (hereafter referred to as the
DCC-SOR), which has since then been coordinated by SCAR.
Relevant coordination activities of the DCC-SOR in 2023 and 2024
As noted in ATCM XLIV IP107, the launch of the SO-AP was
followed by an introductory webinar targeted at the community
(see recording here), two dedicated sessions at the 2022 UN Ocean
Conference in Lisbon, Portugal (see recordings here and here) and a
presentation at the All-Atlantic Ocean Research Alliance Ministerial
Meeting in Washington, DC in July 2022 (see recording here).
In November 2023 a meeting was held with all relevant Decade
Actions identified as having an interest in the Southern Ocean with
a view to formally coordinating within the UN Ocean Decade
structure.
Within the UN Ocean Decade these Decade Actions are described as
primary and secondary attachments, and for the DCC-SOR the
proposed primary attachments are:
Antarctica InSync:
[see ATCM XLV IP59 ATCM XLV IP59 International Science &
Infrastructure for Synchronous Observation (Antarctica InSync) and
ATCM XLVI IP091 Update 2024: International Science &
Infrastructure for Synchronous Observation (Antarctic InSync)]
Antarctica International Science & Infrastructure for Synchronous
Observation (Antarctica InSync) addresses the need for large,
collaborative and synchronous observation, to generate data and
knowledge to understand, protect and sustainably manage the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica including ocean, land and
atmosphere.
SoFlux: (Also a working group of the Southern Ocean Observing
System (SOOS))
The core aim of the Southern Ocean Fluxes (SOFLUX) Capability
Working Group is to reduce uncertainties in our understanding of
air-sea and air-sea-ice exchanges.
AnMap: (Also a SCAR Expert Group)
The principal function of AnMAP is to facilitate sufficient and
reliable chemical observation data from the Antarctic region, in
order to advise international chemical policy. AnMAP was a
founding objective of the SCAR ImPACT group, and the two SCAR
bodies will work closely to facilitate standardised, quality-assured,
continuous chemical observation data is generated and synthesised
for policy.
BIOPOLE:
Project BIOPOLE will quantify the dependence of the Earth system,
and humanity, on the natural supply and global redistribution of
polar nutrients. The project will link many of the major
environmental research institutes in the UK, who will work with
national and international partners to research nutrient supply and
ecosystem processes at both poles.
Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) Symposium, August
2023
The inaugural SOOS Symposium 2023 “Southern Ocean in a
Changing World” was held in Hobart, Australia, from the 14-18th
August 2023. This milestone event for the Southern Ocean
community and beyond concluded with a crucial joint statement.
300 scientists from 25 nations called for an urgent expansion of
Southern Ocean science amidst the climate crisis.
The UN Ocean Decade was strongly represented at the Symposium
through both plenary and parallel sessions.
In the “Southern Ocean in the Global UN Ocean Decade” Plenary
session, Southern Ocean Task Force members Sian Henley
(University of Edinburgh, UK), Renuka Badhe (European Polar
Board, Netherlands), Anton Van de Putte (Royal Belgium Institute
of National Sciences, Belgium) and Stuart Corney (University of
Tasmania, Australia) were joined by Alison Clausen
(Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO) and
Karen Evans (CSIRO, Australia). The complementary parallel
session of contributed presentations “Southern Ocean in the Global
UN Ocean Decade” provided a forum for identifying and advancing
SOOS contributions that will contribute to implementation of the
Action Plan (SO-AP).
White paper process in UN Ocean Decade
In 2023 the UN Ocean Decade launched a process titled “Vision
2030” to “take stock of current trends, gaps, and priority user needs
and identify key targets and milestones to measure progress and
enhance collective impact of the Ocean Decade”. In practical terms
there will be a series of 10 White papers developed and structured
around the 10 Ocean Decade Challenges. The DCC-SOR has helped
coordinate a series of activities to ensure the Southern Ocean
priorities are fed into this process.
In early 2024 the UN Ocean Decade opened the White Papers for
feedback from individuals and this was shared with the Southern
Ocean Task Force. In order to coordinate feedback from the
organisations involved a session was held on Thursday 22 Feb on
"Long-term Collaborations in the Polar Regions: Upcoming
initiatives for the next decade" at the Polar Symposium held in
Monaco. That session and the following workshops in Monaco were
designed so that the outputs could be built on at the UN Ocean
Decade Conference in Barcelona in April 2024. In this context the
DCC-SOR has planned participation at the Barcelona Conference
through two side events.
The first side event is titled “Long-term engagement in the Polar
oceans: a decade of international action” and is jointly hosted by
the DCC-SOR, Antarctica InSync, SOOS and the Integrated Climate
and Ecosytem Dynamics (ICED) project and supported by the
European Polar Board, Alfred Wegener Institute and SCAR.
The format of the session was devised keeping in mind the white
paper that will be produced identifying future priorities from the
Southern Ocean towards the UN Ocean Decade, and so building on
the discussions held in Monaco, and including speakers from the
hosts and supporters as well as the World Economic Forum.
The second side event is titled “Supporting a global collective vision
for Ocean science by matching regional priorities” coordinated by
the European Marine Board which also had representation from the
Arctic, through the International Arctic Science Committee, and
allows the regional priorities for the Southern Ocean to be placed in
the context of the other regional representation within the UN
Ocean Decade.
Outlook
In 2023 the UN Ocean Decade contributed to high-level climate
negotiations through sharing a pavilion with OceanX and partnering
with the Ocean Pavilion. This resulted in opportunities for the DCC-
SOR to nominate speakers at both Pavilions. SCAR will help
facilitate this participation in future COPs through its observer
status with UNFCCC.
In 2022, SCAR and its sister body in the Arctic, the International
Arctic Science Committee (IASC), announced their intent to
collaborate and participate in the proposed International Polar Year
(IPY) 2032-2033 (see also ATCMXLVI IP122 Plans for a fifth
International Polar Year 2032-33), and in October 2023 a Concept
Note was released. As the IPY is envisioned to be the culmination of
many years of dedicated activities, it will have partially-overlapping
timelines with the UN Ocean Decade. Expanding the DCC-SORs
operational reach will include thematic collaboration with the IPY,
with the goal of amplifying science outcomes and public awareness
about the importance and impact of this science. The IPY will
provide an opportunity to ensure that the progress achieved by the
UN Ocean Decade is maintained and enhanced further.
The DCC-SOR will actively monitor new Decade Actions for
Southern Ocean interest and encourage other SCAR activities and
groups to consider engagement with the DCC-SOR and UN Decade
more generally.
In the longer term, it is hoped that the DCC-SOR will support future
endorsed Decade Actions relating to the Southern Ocean with
capacity development, communications, tracking of progress and
resource mobilisation. The DCC-SOR will also act as a hub for
catalysing new partnerships and initiatives as part of the Decade
and build on the existing solid foundation of the SO community. To
ensure engagement of the community, a dedicated workshop will be
held during the 2024 Open Science Conference in Pucón, Chile, in
August.
