Eradicating the Non-native Fly, Trichocera maculipennis, at the
King Sejong Station: Outcomes and Insights
Eradicating the Non-native Fly, Trichocera maculipennis, at the
King Sejong Station: Outcomes and Insights
Summary
Since 2006, non-native flies (Trichocera maculipennis) have
colonized several sewage treatment facilities at various research
bases on King George Island. The infestation began at the King
Sejong Station on Barton Peninsula in 2013. In response, the Korean
Antarctic Program has dedicated extensive resources to eliminating
these flies at the Station, incorporating eradication strategies into
its environmental monitoring initiatives since 2017. These efforts
have been successful, as evidenced by the absence of any non-native
fly since July 2022. Throughout this endeavor, we have compiled
an eradication manual, which serves as a comprehensive guide
offering practical tools for detection, management, and removal of
the flies. This manual was created leveraging insights gained from
years of monitoring. The Republic of Korea is keen to share our
knowledge and experiences with other Parties and members,
contributing to our collective understanding and management of
non-native species.
Introduction
The initial detections of the non-native winter crane fly (Trichocera
maculipennis) on King George Island were reported about 15-20
years ago (Volonterio et al. 2013, Potocka and Krzmińska 2018).
The majority of this fly populations on King George Island have
colonized sewage treatment plants at various research bases on the
Island. The Republic of Korea, Uruguay, Chile, and the United
Kingdom had recommended that the CEP encourages the Parties to
jointly develop co-ordinated standardized monitoring and
eradication programmes to effectively control the spread of the
flies, and join the collaborative research project (ATCM XL– WP26).
Subsequently, during the Antarctic summer season 2017/2018,
Uruguay, the Republic of Korea, Chile and the Russian Federation
started a pilot monitoring programme with support from Germany.
This initiative aimed to trace and prevent the spread of T.
maculipennis on King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo (ATCM XLI –
IP50). More recently, updates on the progress and strategic
planning for the eradication of the fly on King George Island were
presented to the CEP (ATCM XLIII– IP35). This ongoing
commitment underscores the international partners’ dedication to
addressing non-native species challenges through cooperative
research and action.
The Republic of Korea takes the opportunity to provide information
about the successful eradication of the fly at the King Sejong Station
on King George Island.
Outcomes and Insights
In response to the introduction of non-native fly at the King Sejong
Station, the Korean Antarctic Program has dedicated extensive
resources to eliminating these flies, incorporating eradication
strategies into its environmental monitoring initiatives since 2017.
These efforts have been successful, as evidenced by the absence of
any non-native fly since July 2022. Throughout this endeavor, we
have compiled an eradication manual which serves as a
comprehensive guide offering practical tools for detection,
monitoring, controlling, and removal of the flies from the King
Sejong Station (see Attachment). Through diligent monitoring,
strategic intervention, and collaborative efforts, we have been able
to address this environmental challenge.
However, a new introduction of the non-native winter crane fly
from the inside and outside of Antarctica is concerning (Kang et al.
2024). Stringent quarantine measures at inter-base, national, and
intercontinental levels are imperative for the National Antarctic
Programs to preserve the unique biodiversity of the Antarctic
region.
In the face of climate change, Antarctica is increasingly vulnerable
to the challenges posed by alien species. The early detection of non-
native species by continuous surveillance, coupled with efforts to
suppress their propagation and expansion, are crucial steps in
preventing the infestation of these species in the Antarctic bases.
Conclusions
The Republic of Korea would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to the collaborating Parties and is keen to share our
knowledge and experiences with other Parties and members,
contributing to our collective understanding and management of
non-native species.
We emphasize that continuous cooperation and vigilance are key to
the successful elimination of the non-native fly from King George
Island, highlighting the significance of shared responsibility and
action in addressing such environmental challenges.
Supporting documentation
Kang S, Kim S, Park KC, Petrasiunas A, Shin H, Jo E, Kim JH (2024)
Molecular evidence for the multiple origins and high genetic
differentiation of non-native winter crane fly, Trichocera
maculipennis (Diptera: Trichoceridae), in the maritime.
Environmental Research 242 (2024) 117636. https://doi.org
/10.1016/j.envres.2023.117636
Potocka M and Krzemińska E 2018. Trichocera maculipennis
(Diptera)—an invasive species in Maritime Antarctica. PeerJ 6:
e5408.
Volonterio O, Ponce De Leon R, Convey P, Krzeminska E (2013)
First record of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in the maritime Antarctic.
Polar Biology, 36: 1125-1131.
