Tourism monitoring in Antarctica – status and preliminary findings
on developing a concept for the analy-sis of the impacts of tourism
on the assets to be protected
in the Antarctic
Tourism monitoring in Antarctica – status and preliminary findings
on developing a concept for the analysis of the impacts of tourism
on the assets to be protected in the Antarctic
Information Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Despite a growing knowledge base on the impacts of Antarctic
tourism, knowledge on the cumulative and long-term impacts of
Antarctic tourism and other non-governmental activities remains
limited. The continuous growth and diversification of Antarctic
tourism therefore raises concerns about the sustainability of
Antarctic tourism. Coordinated efforts are needed to establish a
monitoring system which builds a solid basis for discussions on
effective management and regulation of tourism. In 2021, the
German Environment Agency (UBA) initiated a research project to
develop a comprehensive concept for monitoring the environmental
impacts of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica. This IP provides an overview of the main findings of this
project to date.
Background
Antarctic ecosystems are highly sensitive to human impacts due to
the extreme conditions for sustaining life and the evolution of flora
and fauna. Most touristic and other non-governmental activities are
concentrated in the Antarctic peninsula area, which is characterised
by high rates of biodiversity. Moreover, the visiting season
coincides with the breeding season in the Antarctic summer. With
increasing visitation and new activities emerging, there are
concerns that the carrying capacity of some sites frequently used by
tourism operators will be exceeded in the future, leading to
environmental degradation. These changes are not necessarily
linear but can occur rapidly with only limited potential for
recovery.
Tourism has been on the agenda of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties (ATCPs) for many years, but the discussions
have so far not resulted in a comprehensive approach to regulate
and manage tourism and other non-governmental activities.
Knowledge on the cumulative and long-term impacts of tourism
should form the basis to manage and regulate tourism effectively
and proactively. However, the knowledge of the impacts of tourism
and other non-governmental activities is limited to only some
impacts, which have been researched extensively, such as potential
effects on penguin and seabird populations. Other impacts have not
received sufficient attention and remain widely unknown. This
applies in particular to the long-term and cumulative impacts of
tourism and other non-governmental activities. Therefore, the
German Environment Agency (UBA) commissioned a research
project with funding from the Federal Ministry for the Environment,
Nature Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection to
develop a monitoring concept for the analysis of the impacts of
tourism and other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic.
Aim and scope of the project
This project aims to develop a comprehensive long-term monitoring
system to systematically detect the impacts of touristic and other
non-governmental activities on the assets to be protected as defined
in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(the Protocol, Article 3, para. 2 b). The results of this monitoring
system will help to establish a comprehensive knowledge base to
manage and regulate touristic and other non-governmental
activities.
The project has started in September 2021 and will end in
September 2024. Germany will make the outcomes of this project
available to the community of Antarctic Treaty Parties and other
stakeholders and thus contribute to the advancement of
international environmental protection in the Antarctic.
Approach and preliminary findings
The development of the monitoring concept primarily builds on a
review of scientific literature and existing monitoring systems,
including citizen science projects. In a first step, documents on the
impacts of touristic activities on the Antarctic environment and, in
particular, on the assets to be protected according to Art. 3 (para. 2
b) of the Protocol have been systematically compiled. The
documents were then used to identify indicators and monitoring
methods along the elements of the DPSIR (Drivers, Pressures, State,
Impacts and Responses) concept, which was developed by the
European Environment Agency (EEA) in 1999 and has been widely
used since then. This model aims to reflect the relations between
the environmental and the human system through simple causal
relations.
Experts from different domains (science, competent authorities,
tourism industry, NGOs) were involved in the development of the
monitoring concept from the beginning. Two stakeholder
workshops were held for this purpose. Information on these
workshops, including recordings, presentations and the workshop
reports, are available at https://tourism-monitoring-
antarctica2.fresh-thoughts.eu/.
The first workshop was held as a side-event to the ATCM 2022 in
Berlin and focused on defining general requirements for the
monitoring concept, discussing potential challenges, and agreeing
on an approach for the development of the monitoring concept. The
workshop reflected upon earlier discussions within CEP/ATCM and
clearly indicated the need for an overarching monitoring system in
Antarctica. The development of such a concept is a demanding task
due to multiple anthropogenic pressures, uncertainties regarding
the causalities between pressures and impacts, and the lack of
indicators and methods for some pressures and impacts. Overall, the
knowledge of the environment is limited, and there is no baseline
data from which any subsequent changes can be measured. The
monitoring system therefore should have built-in mechanisms to
adequately account for these knowledge gaps and uncertainties.
The second workshop, which was held online over three days in
October 2023, focused on discussing the possibilities for monitoring
the impacts of tourism in more detail. The discussions highlighted
the numerous approaches and methods to monitor specific impacts
of human activities in the Antarctic. To avoid duplication, existing
approaches should form the basis for monitoring. Exploiting
synergies facilitates the efficient use of resources and thus the
implementation of the monitoring system.
One key finding of the workshops is the need for a new
organizational unit within the Antarctic Treaty System which has an
overview of ongoing research and monitoring projects and is
responsible for coordinating data collection and analysis. This
organisational unit should maintain close relations with all relevant
stakeholders, such as tourism operators, tourists, and national
competent authorities, and in particular to the Antarctic scientific
community to encourage applied research at the interface between
science and tourism. Another key finding –
or challenge – is the clear need for funding the implementation of
monitoring concepts, the monitoring projects themselves, as well as
the necessary administration. However, the challenges related to
the increasing interlinkage of science and tourism activities should
be subject of further separate studies.
Outlook
The publication of the final report is envisaged for autumn 2024.
The results of the project will contribute to the efforts to create a
comprehensive, long-term monitoring framework for ongoing and
future tourism and other non-governmental activities in the
Antarctic.
We thank all parties and stakeholders for their valuable
contributions in the process of developing the monitoring concept
and look forward to working together to strengthen environmental
protection in the Antarctic in the future development of tourism
and other non-governmental activities.
References
European Environment Agency (EEA). (1999). Environmental
indicators: Typology and overview. Technical report No 25/1999.
Hughes, K. S. & Convey, P. (2020). Implications of the COVID-19
pandemic for Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 32(6), 426–439.
https://doi.org/10.1017/s095410202000053x
IAATO. (2022). Report of the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators 2021-22. Information Paper for the XLIV
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
Mayer, M., Lange, B., Lucke, K., Schuster, M., von Juterzenka, K.,
Reinthaler, H.-P. (2017). Nutzung aktueller Erkenntnisse aus der
Polarforschung für die Antarktis-Umweltschutzaufgaben- UBA-Texte
76/2017.
Tejedo, P., Benayas, J., Cajiao, D., Leung, Y., De Filippo, D., &
Liggett, D. (2022). What are the real environmental impacts of
Antarctic tourism? Unveiling their importance through a
comprehensive meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental
Management, 308, 114634. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jenvman.2022.114634
Trathan, P. N., García-Borboroglu, P., Boersma, D., Bost, C.-A.,
Crawford, R. J. M., Crossin, G. T., Cuthbert, R. J., Dann, P., Davis,
L. S., De La Puente, S., Ellenberg, U., Lynch, H. J., Mattern, T., Pütz,
K., Seddon, P. J., Trivelpiece, W., & Wienecke, B. (2015). Pollution,
habitat loss, fishing, and climate change as critical threats to
penguins. Conservation Biology: The Journal of the Society for
Conservation Biology, 29(1), 31–41. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.12349
Verbitsky, J. (2018). Ecosystem services and Antarctica: The time
has come? Ecosystem Services, 29, 381–394. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.10.015
Vöneky, S., Wisehart, D. (2016). Analyse und Weiterentwicklung
vorhandener rechtlicher Instrumente – Handlungsbedarf zur
Anpassung an die aktuellen Entwicklungen des Tourismus in der
Antarktis. UBA-Texte 05/2016.
Walton, D. W. H., & Shears, J. (1994). The Need for Environmental
Monitoring in Antarctica: Baselines, Environmental Impact
Assessments, Accidents and Footprints. International Journal of
Environmental Analytical Chemistry, 55(1-4), 77–90. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03067319408026210 https://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/nutzung-aktueller-
erkenntnisse-aus-der
