Antarctic Environments Portal
Antarctic Environments Portal
[Information Paper submitted by SCAR]
Summary
The Antarctic Environments Portal continues to be an important
vehicle for SCAR to provide impartial and up-to-date information,
based on the best available science, to support informed
engagement and discussion on issues of relevance to the work of the
CEP.
The Antarctic Environments Portal is recognised as an important
contribution to the delivery of strategic science support in the SCAR
Strategic Plan (2023-2028).
This Information Paper provides an update on the publications,
management and operation of the Portal, in support of issues of
priority interest for the CEP.
SCAR encourages the CEP to continue to support the Antarctic
Environments Portal, and invites Parties to consider mechanisms to
support its ongoing provision of independent and objective
information to the Antarctic Treaty System.
Background
The Antarctic Environments Portal (the Portal; environments.aq)
was launched in 2015 and was endorsed by the ATCM in Resolution
3 (2015).
The Portal ensures that the current state of knowledge on key issues
in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean is easily available to all CEP
Members, Antarctic Treaty Parties and the public. The Portal aims
to:
Meet the urgent and increasing need for science information to
support Antarctic policy.
Provide reliable, policy-relevant summaries on priority issues.
Raise awareness of emerging issues.
Support informed discussions and informed decision-making.
Make information available to all Parties irrespective of their
Antarctic investment.
The Portal website organizes its Information Summaries (IS), into
six categories: Marine, Terrestrial, Human Activities, Inland Aquatic
Environments, Atmosphere, and Cryosphere.
SCAR’s commitment to developing the Portal is recognised in the
SCAR Strategic Plan 2023-2028 which specifies that:
“To improve and enhance provision of scientific advice to policy-
makers, SCAR will:
Manage and expand the content of the Antarctic Environments
Portal and continue to deliver concise science summaries for policy-
makers.
To improve communications with wide and diverse audiences,
SCAR will:
Manage and update the Antarctic Environments Portal aiming to
provide impartial ‘state-of-knowledge’ reports that address specific
issues catered not only towards policy-makers but also SCAR
researchers and the general public”.
Operation of the Portal
The Portal Editor oversees the production of Information
Summaries, under the guidance of SCAR’s Portal Management
Board which oversees the Portal’s operations. SCAR will begin the
process of recruiting a new Portal Editor in mid-2024, as the
current Editor, Dr Keith Reid, will step down following the SCAR
Delegates Meeting in August 2024. SCAR thanks Dr Reid for his
excellent service.
To ensure that all information published on the Portal is quality
controlled, all summaries are reviewed by the Portal Editorial
Group (see https://environments.aq/about/) as well as undergoing
review by experts in the relevant subject area.
Recent publications and use of the Portal
The Portal showcases its work through the website
(www.environments.aq), which receives around 1,100 users per
month. The Portal was accessed by users from 150 different
countries in 2023, with the top 10 countries (by number of users)
indicated in the figure below.
Figure 1 – Top 10 countries accessing the Portal in 2023
Additionally, content and news are shared through a mailing list
(188 subscribers), a Facebook page (1,125 followers) and through
SCAR’s Twitter/X account (9,500 followers).
Information Summaries published since ATCM XLV, and in the
pipeline for 2024, are detailed in the next section. Popular
Information Summaries at the Portal include articles on Antarctic
sea ice, the recovery of baleen whales, Antarctic krill, and terrestrial
non-native species in Antarctica. Infographics to accompany
Information Summaries are produced by the SCAR Secretariat in
collaboration with authors, to provide an accessible summary of the
content. The infographics have been very positively received by
users.
Portal business plan
SCAR is developing a business plan for the Portal, in line with the
objectives set out in SCAR’s Strategic Plan. The goals for the coming
five-year period include increasing:
the amount of content (both number of Information Papers and
range of different outputs (e.g. infographics));
timeliness and relevance of content to target audience
(policymakers of the ATS);
awareness amongst the target audience;
awareness amongst wider audiences; and
accessibility and functionality of the Portal.
The Business Plan also sets out SCAR’s aim to have all Information
Summaries available in the official languages of the ATS. SCAR
expresses its gratitude for the in-kind support for
translations generously provided by France and Spain, and is
looking into ways of developing translation processes further. SCAR
also recognises the importance of maintaining diversity in the
authorship of information provided in the Portal.
The Portal budget is approximately $20,000 USD p.a. to run at the
current level of output, and compensation for the editor accounts
for most of this amount. SCAR provides in-kind support (in the form
of Secretariat staff time). Running costs can broadly be expected to
scale with the amount of content produced. To date, funding has
generously been provided by Australia, the United Kingdom, New
Zealand, the Netherlands, Türkiye, and Korea, to support SCAR’s
management of the Portal. SCAR thanks all of these countries that
have financially supported the Portal.
The Business Plan sets out proposals for long-term funding for the
Portal, for consideration by the SCAR Delegates in August 2024.
These proposals are centred on the premise that the optimal future
funding model would be a combination of a regular annual
financial contribution from SCAR supplemented by contributions
from the Parties.
Supporting the work of the CEP
Information Summaries published on the Portal website aim to
provide impartial ‘state-of-knowledge’ reports that address specific
issues that the CEP has on its agenda and work programmes, with
an emphasis on the science knowledge and information needs that
are included in the CEP’s Five-year Work Plan. In delivering on this
aim, the Portal contributes to fulfilling one of the CEP’s core
functions of advising the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the State of the
Antarctic Environment (Article 12(1)(j) of the Protocol).
The preparation of Information Summaries continues to be guided
by the issues and environmental pressures identified in the CEP
Five-year Work Plan. A selection of the Information Summaries of
relevance to the priority topics identified by the CEP in the
outcomes of the Informal CEP Workshop on Strategic Priorities
(ATCM XLV IP 150 Informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities
and 5-year work plan – convener’s preliminary report) and the
subsequent list of strategic priorities for the Five-year Work Plan
(ATCM XLV WP 62 CEP strategic priorities and the 5-year work
plan: Outcomes and recommendations from the intersessional
discussions and workshop) are listed below:
Management of non-native species and wildlife disease
Terrestrial non-native species in Antarctica: introduction, impact
and management response (Updated 2023)
Marine non-native species (New IS, planned for 2024)
Highly pathogenic avian influenza in the Antarctic (New IS,
planned for 2024)
Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities
Tourism in Antarctica: Facts, concerns, and challenges (New IS,
planned for 2024)
Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Antarctic Sea Ice#1: Physical Role and Function
Antarctic Sea Ice #2: Biological Importance
Antarctic Sea Ice #3: Trends and Future Projections
The warming of the Southern Ocean and its significance
Emperor Penguins (new IS, planned for 2024)
Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage
Clean-up of past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites in
Antarctica
Environmental remediation
Response to Long-range and local Pollution
Micropollutants in Antarctic waters
Microplastics in the Southern Ocean
Persistent organic pollutants in Antarctica
Sources, dispersal and impacts of wastewater in Antarctica
It is important that CEP Members (as a key user community)
continue to have input to identifying specific needs for content on
the Portal. Comments and suggestions on the status of current
content and proposals for new Information Summaries are
welcomed and can be provided during discussions at the CEP
meeting or at any time to the Portal Editor
(editor@environments.aq).
Next steps and recommendations
SCAR will continue to support the Antarctic Treaty System by
providing independent and scientifically rigorous Information
Summaries through the Antarctic Environments Portal.
SCAR invites the CEP and its Members to:
Continue to support the publication of Information Summaries on
the Antarctic Environments Portal, recognising its value in
contributing to the work of the CEP, and
Communicate with SCAR on suggestions for new or updated
Information Summaries and potential mechanisms to support
SCAR’s future funding of the Antarctic Environments Portal.
