Australian Antarctic Science Program Highlights 2023-24
Australian Antarctic Science Program Highlights 2023-24
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In 2023-24 the Australian Antarctic Program (AAP) celebrated its
75th year of scientific endeavour with an outstanding season,
supporting 43 projects across multiple disciplines and through
strong collaboration involving Australian and international research
programs and institutions. Research highlights include: the
multidisciplinary Denman Terrestrial Campaign at the Bunger Hills;
the successful execution of ICECAP-EAGLE flights; resumption of
the seabird ecological field campaign; the consolidation of the
underway science capability of Australia’s ice-breaker RSV Nuyina;
and field work supported by Australia’s three continental stations to
support ongoing climate science, wildlife monitoring, and
environmental protection and management.
Overview
The Australian Antarctic Science Program (AASP) is comprised of
Australian Government agencies and Australian and international
universities and research institutions. In 2023-24 there were 43
science projects included in the program across multiple disciplines.
Well over 50 per cent of these projects included international
collaborations across 21 countries including the UK, USA, NZ,
France, China, Germany and others. The AASP continues to benefit
enormously from national and international research and
operational collaborations.
The program has a strong focus on research designed to inform the
protection and management of the Antarctic region. This includes
research that contributes to understanding and addressing regional
and global issues through international organisations such as the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM), the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the
International Whaling Commission (IWC), and the Agreement on
the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of the Department of
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water leads,
manages and coordinates Australian government investment in the
AASP with oversight provided by the Australian Antarctic Science
Council. The AASP comprises over 40 Australian research
institutions, including University of Tasmania, Monash University,
University of NSW and Australian National University that
coordinate two Australian Research Council Special Research
Initiatives (ARC-SRI) projects: Australian Centre for Excellence in
Antarctic Science (ACEAS); and Securing Antarctica’s
Environmental Future (SAEF) as well as the Australian government
funded Australian Antarctic Program Partnership (AAPP). Research
is conducted in conjunction with government agencies (e.g.
Commonwealth Science and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO), Geoscience Australia, the Bureau of Meteorology and the
Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency
(ARPANSA)) and over 80 international institutions. Public
summaries of all science projects, past and present, are available on
the AAD website.
A decadal plan for the AASP, aiming to establish a strategically
prioritised, integrated and collaborative program, is being finalised
and will:
articulate the priority science outcomes and policy needs to be
addressed by Australian Government supported research over the
next 10 years;
identify the research programs that will be conducted to address
these priorities; and
assess the existing and required capabilities to address these
priorities, identify any gaps, develop plans to fill these gaps, and set
out agreed deliverables, timelines, performance measures and
responsibilities.
In 2023-24, Australia celebrated 75 years of scientific endeavour in
the Antarctic, from humble beginnings as the Australian National
Antarctic Research Expeditions (ANARE) in 1947 to today's modern
AAP.
Research Highlights 2023-24
Denman Terrestrial Campaign (DTC)
In 2023-24 the ambitious multi-year Denman Terrestrial Campaign
(DTC) completed its major research year studying the Denman
Glacier, the Shackleton Ice Shelf and surrounding areas. In 2022-23,
a remote field camp was established at Australia’s Edgeworth David
base in the Bunger Hills, 450 km from Australia’s Casey research
station. This camp formed the base for the DTC where 27 scientists,
15 support personnel, two helicopters and fixed wing aircraft
completed a wide-ranging multidisciplinary science program to
address:
Glacial composition – understanding the structure and processes of
the Denman Glacier and Shackleton Ice Shelf
Glacial dynamics – understanding past, present and future change
Geology – understanding the geology of the Bunger Hills region
Regional biodiversity – understanding the biodiversity and impacts
of change in the Denman Glacier/Bunger Hills region.
The work conducted was highly collaborative and involved 12
different projects across multiple funding streams, including: the
AAD; ARC-SRIs ACEAS and SAEF; and the AAPP. The work
undertaken to achieve these objectives included:
drilling and analysis of ice core records
analysis of subglacial hydrology and composition
collection / analysis of sediments to understand environmental
histories
geological studies of the deeper-earth
ocean circulation and biogeochemical analysis
remote sensing and airborne radar
wildlife, microbial and biodiversity surveys
landscape and ocean mapping
deployment of autonomous monitoring stations
The DTC will continue in 2024-25 to conduct further research,
remediate the camp site and retrieve instrumentation deployed this
year. Further information is available on the AAD website about the
DTC and the successful 2023-24 season.
The Edgeworth David camp in the Bunger Hills, site of the DTC
(Photo: Adam Darragh)
ICECAP-EAGLE
The ICECAP-EAGLE project (Investigating the Cryospheric Evolution
of the Central Antarctic Plate - East Antarctic Grounding Line
Experiment) is a long running international collaborative effort to
study the stability of the Antarctic ice sheet, fringing ice shelves and
glaciers, and the associated consequences for global sea-level rise.
In 2023-24, Australian scientists teamed up with Danish and
American collaborators to fly geophysical surveys between Casey
station and the Shackleton Ice Shelf, and at the French/Italian
Concordia station, in a Basler BT-67 fitted with instruments and
sensors, including an ice-penetrating radar, laser altimeter, camera,
gravimeter and magnetometer. The team were able to test and
calibrate a new radar system for the European Space Agency (ESA),
to collect additional data over the Million Year Ice Core (MYIC)
project site and to deploy more than 60 oceanographic instruments
in front of key locations such as the Shackleton Ice Shelf and the
Vanderford and Totten Glaciers. The international collaborative
effort has so far mapped more than 700,000 kilometres of survey
lines, and contributed to more than 3500 publications, including
more than 100 that have informed IPCC reports. Further
information about the successful 2023-24 season can be found on
the AAD website.
Environmental Stewardship and Human Impacts
The AAP has a multi-year, multi-disciplinary human impacts and
environmental stewardship program researching and applying
Antarctica-appropriate techniques and methods for assessing
environmental risk from, and the remediation of, contaminants and
waste in polar regions. In 2023-24, a team of scientists and
engineers continued environmental risk mitigation and remediation
of three contemporary fuel spills and one unoccupied station in the
Casey station region, conducting scientific research on:
contaminant migration in frozen ground using novel passive soil
vapour samplers to delineate fuel migration under multi-year snow
and ice
mapping of ground surfaces, waste and contamination using of un-
crewed aerial vehicle (UAV) mounted ground penetrating radar
development and use of biological assays (toxicity tests) utilising
native Antarctic terrestrial biota to assess risk associated with
contaminated soils and inform return of remediated soil to the
station environment
contaminant containment
remediation efficacy.
This work informs Australia’s environmental stewardship strategies,
methods and tools to reduce the impacts of human activities and
contamination events on the Antarctic environment, with results
shared with National Antarctic programs via the ATCM/CEP
(including the Antarctic Clean-up Manual) and COMNAP.
Trialling UAV mounted ground penetrating radar to conduct site
and waste mapping at Casey station (Photo: Adam Darragh)
Million Year Ice Core (MYIC) project
The Million Year Ice Core (MYIC) project undertook a successful
traverse to the MYIC drill site at Little Dome C (1200 km inland
from Casey station at an elevation of 3200 m) to deliver 36.5 tonnes
of essential cargo. Drilling is anticipated to commence in the
2024-25 season. The MYIC project was also supported by the
ICECAP-EAGLE team who conducted a number of survey flights
over the area. This project will provide new information to test
climate models and resolve long-standing questions about the
timing of ice ages. Further information about the project is
available on the AAD website.
Seabird Monitoring
Long term monitoring of key seabird species by Australia near
Casey, Davis and Mawson stations is critical to decisions made by
CCAMLR, in managing krill fisheries and in considering the
protection of marine areas. The seabird teams looked for signs of
the new highly pathogenic strain of the avian influenza virus (HPAI
H5N1) in penguins, petrels and skuas breeding near each of the
three stations and at the remote Bunger Hills site. In addition to
ground-based field work, the Australian program maintains a series
of remote camera installations to monitor Adélie and emperor
penguins, Cape and Antarctic petrels, and southern fulmars
throughout the year. These cameras are supported by field visits by
seabird ecologists to ground truth and ensure the integrity of the
data collected. Data download and maintenance of cameras in
remote locations was successful this year.
The major focal site for the seabird ecologists this season was in the
region surrounding Mawson station. Population assessments of
seabirds including Adélie and emperor penguins, south polar skuas
and Wilsons, Cape and snow petrels were conducted as well as
attaching GPS and satellite loggers to understand foraging and
diving behaviour. Biological samples, including
scat and blood were also collected. A particular focus was the
highly successful months-long visit on Béchervaise Island
continuing work conducted at this Adélie penguin colony for over
30 years. A second team went to the Bunger Hills as part of the DTC
campaign to provide environmental guidance for activities, conduct
seabird surveys and to collect mumijo samples of snow petrels to
understand the history of snow petrel occupation over thousands of
years.
RSV Nuyina - Underway Science Observations
The science capabilities of Australia’s new icebreaker RSV Nuyina
continue to be expanded allowing continuous observations while
sailing to and from the Antarctic continent. Key achievements for
2023-24 include:
Deployment of the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) as part of
the decades-long, multinational science program surveying plankton
of the Southern Ocean (SO-CPR).
Collection of water samples for environmental DNA (eDNA) and
plankton, including using the dedicated wet well system to enable
the sampling and return of live krill back to the krill aquarium at
the AAD
Installation of a permanent, automated suite of instruments that
take continuous measurements of the ocean, sea ice, snow cover
and atmosphere (Ocean–Sea Ice–Atmosphere OSIA underway
observatory). These instruments add to almost 30 years of ocean,
sea-ice, snow and atmosphere observations undertaken from other
ships and through field work and remote sensing (satellites) by the
international expert group on Antarctic Sea-ice Processes and
Climate (ASPeCt).
Bathymetric mapping with the multibeam echosounder including
the discovery of a 2100 metre-deep, 9000 metre-wide canyon,
extending more than 46 kilometres off the Adams glacier near
Casey station.
Deployment and/or retrieval of a number of moorings including
Moored Acoustic Recorders (MAR), Krill Observational Moorings for
Benthic Investigation (KOMBI) and a Mooring for the Epipelagic
Echosounding of Krill (MEEK) to continue the acoustic and visual
monitoring for krill and krill predators including whales.
Medical
The AAD has partnered with the US-based Translational Research
Institute for Space Health (TRISH) at Baylor College of Medicine’s
Center for Space Medicine to conduct research in Antarctica to
better understand and manage astronaut health on future space
missions. There are similarities in the conditions and challenges
faced in supporting the health and well-being of Antarctic
expeditioners and astronauts. This makes Australia’s Antarctic
Program an excellent analogue for understanding the risks to
humans in space and for testing and developing technologies and
methodologies to reduce these risks (see AAD website).
Sea Ice
After a record decline in winter sea-ice extent this year, AAP
scientists are part of an international effort to help understand if
this was a likely one-off occurrence or the transition to a climate
tipping point. AAP scientists worked with a University of
Canterbury, New Zealand team on a joint project to measure sea-ice
thickness in the Ross Sea as part of ongoing efforts to measure,
analyse and understand sea-ice changes around Antarctica.
Ice sheet modelling
A new Antarctic ice shelf-ocean model, developed by AAP scientists,
will provide more accurate projections of future sea level rise, to
assist decision-making by urban planners and policy-makers. The
model is the most detailed of its kind and predicts how Antarctic ice
sheets will respond to warmer oceans. The model was developed
with the help of the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI)
supercomputer at the Australian National University. It is the first
to include tides, state-of-the-art estimates of the shape of the
cavities beneath ice
shelves, and a spatial resolution of two kilometres, which allows
visualisation of small-scale ocean processes that transport heat to
ice shelves. The research is part of an international effort for the
IPCC known as the Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison Project to
improve the way models simulate the Earth’s climate system.
Fisheries and Bycatch Identification
Australian scientists from the AAD and the Institute for Marine and
Antarctic Studies (IMAS) joined a commercial Patagonian toothfish
fishing vessel working around Heard Island and McDonald Islands
(HIMI) spending 97 days at sea. During the voyage the scientists
contributed to multiple research projects including: the collection of
benthic invertebrates; the collection of Patagonian toothfish otoliths
for ageing studies; and the tagging of toothfish and deep-sea skates
with pop-up satellite tags to study the fate of released individuals.
This collaboration aims to conduct research that informs sustainable
toothfish and icefish fishing around HIMI (see AAD website).
Australian scientists at the AAD have developed new genetic
methods using DNA from feathers for identification of seabird
bycatch to understand the impacts of fisheries on threatened species
of albatrosses and petrels. In 2023, the team submitted working and
information papers to the ACAP Seabird Bycatch Working Group
meeting to share information about these methods. Incidental
bycatch of seabirds in fisheries is a significant global threat and
effective mitigation requires precise information about which
species are affected. Application of this method will augment
existing bycatch monitoring and improve confidence in our
understanding of species-level fishery impacts.
Long-term monitoring
Long-term monitoring continued to be supported by the AAP
through automated and field-based data collection in the following
projects:
maintenance of seismic, radionuclide and infrasound stations as
part of Australia’s commitments under the Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty at two Antarctic stations and one sub-Antarctic
station.
cosmic ray monitoring using neutron monitors and muon telescopes
at Mawson station and Kingston, Tasmania, to contribute to
international databases and space weather warning systems.
collection of year-round and multi-year datasets using a network of
GPS and seismic monitors to provide information on the internal
structure of the solid earth deformation and structure in East
Antarctica.
sea level determination using tide gauges deployed at all three
Australian continental stations and one sub-Antarctic station.
greenhouse gas monitoring at two Australian continental stations
and one sub-Antarctic station to contribute to the most extensive
atmospheric composition observational network in the region.
seabird monitoring (as described previously) in the field and via
automated nest monitoring cameras.
Publication Highlights
A number of significant manuscripts across a wide range of
disciplines were published during the period that celebrate the
collaborative approach of the AAP:
Kawaguchi S, Atkinson A, Bahlburg D, Bernard KS, Cavan EL, Cox
MJ, Hill SL, Meyer B and Veytia D (2024) Climate change impacts
on Antarctic krill behaviour and population dynamics. Nature
Reviews Earth & Environment 5: 43–58.
A review of decades of published Antarctic krill research has shown
that krill populations and habitats have shifted south in the
‘Southwest Atlantic sector’ of the Southern Ocean, off the Antarctic
Peninsula as ocean warming and sea-ice changes alter their habitat.
This movement of krill may have a negative impact on predators
like whales, seals and penguins, and alter broader ocean ecosystem
functions.
Heil, P, Stevens C, Lee WS, Eayrs C, Shin HC, Alexander SP and
Rack W (2023) Bridging the gap for ice–ocean–ecosystem processes:
integrated observing system for the Ross Sea-far East Antarctic
Region. Frontiers in Marine Science. 10:1206119. doi: 10.3389/
fmars.2023.1206119.
A new ocean–sea ice–atmosphere observing system is proposed
between the Ross Sea and Casey station to monitor changes in this
understudied part of Antarctica’s ice-covered marine environment.
This review of recent studies in the region and its governance
requirements helped to refine the focus and design of a Ross Sea-far
East Antarctic Region (RSfEAR) observing system.
Clarke LJ, Shaw JD, Suter L, Atalah J, Bergstrom DM, Biersma E,
Convey P, Greve M, Holland O, Houghton MJ, Hughes KA, Johnston
EL, King CK, McCarthy AH, McGaughran A, Pertierra LR, Robinson
SA, Sherman CDH, Stark JS, Stevens MI, Strugnell JM, von Ammon
U, Wilson NG, Zaiko A, MacDonald AJ (2023) An expert-driven
framework for applying eDNA tools to improve biosecurity in the
Antarctic Management of Biological Invasions 14(3): 379–402.
This paper examines how environmental DNA (eDNA) can be used
to bolster biosecurity surveillance in East Antarctica through the
detection of DNA shed into the environment from a range of
organisms including potentially alien species.
Stark, JS, Johnstone GJ, King C, Raymond T, Rutter A, Stark SC and
Townsend AT (2023) Contamination of the marine environment by
Antarctic research stations: Monitoring marine pollution at Casey
station from 1997 to 2015. PLoS ONE 18(8): e0288485. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0288485
Contamination of the marine environment surrounding coastal
Antarctic research stations is poorly understood in terms of its
extent, persistence, and characteristics. This study investigated the
presence of contaminants in marine sediments near Casey station,
from 1997 to 2015 and identified that Antarctic research stations
such as Casey are likely to pose a moderate level of long-term
ecological risk to local marine ecosystems through marine pollution.
Brown KE, Wasley J, King CK (2023). Assessing risks from fuel
contamination in Antarctica: Dynamics of diesel ageing in soil and
toxicity to an endemic nematode. Ecotoxicology and Environmental
Safety 249: 11345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2022.114345.
This paper describes experiments to investigate the toxicity of diesel
contaminated Antarctic soil to a common Antarctic terrestrial
nematode Plectus murrayi. It provides critical information on the
ecological risk of diesel fuel spills, the dynamics of fuel chemistry
under Antarctic conditions, and how the sensitivity of soil biota
changes with fuel weathering and degradation over time.
Viola B, Wienecke B, Green C-P, Corney S, Raymond B, Southwell
C, Sumner MD, Virtue P, Wotherspoon S and Emmerson L (2023)
Marine distribution and habitat use by Snow Petrels Pagodroma
nivea in East Antarctica throughout the non-breeding period. Front.
Mar. Sci. 10:1278229. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2023.1278229.
Adult Snow Petrels from two large breeding colonies in East
Antarctica were tracked during the Austral winter (non-breeding
period) and this study showed habitat use was most associated with
bathymetry (> 5000 m), low sea-surface height, relatively close
distance to the southern boundary of the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current, relatively close distance to the ice-edge, relatively high
sea-ice concentration, and low sea-surface temperature.
Andrews-Goff V, Gales N, Childerhouse SJ, Laverick SM, Polanowski
AM, Double MC (2023) Australia’s east coast humpback whales:
Satellite tag-derived movements on breeding grounds, feeding
grounds and along the northern and southern migration.
Biodiversity Data Journal 11: e114729 https://doi.org/10.3897/
BDJ.11.e114729.
This paper analyses and provides access to all long-term,
implantable tag deployments on humpback whales along the coast
of Eastern Australian and into the Southern Ocean.
Maschette D, Wotherspoon S, Ziegler P, Thanassekos S, Reid K,
Kawaguchi S and Welsford D (2023) Grym: A new open-source
implementation of the generalised yield model for flexible stock
assessments. CCAMLR Science 24: 1-26.
The Grym can be used as the underlying package for a range of
stock assessment and management strategy evaluation applications
to facilitate assessments run by either non-specialist programmers
or assessment scientists. It will underpin Australia’s engagement on
krill stock assessment in SC-CAMLR.
Gonzalez A, Vihervaara P, MacDonald AJ, McGeoch M + 87 others
(2023) A global biodiversity observing system to unite monitoring
and guide action. Nature Ecology and Evolution 7: 1947-1952.
The article highlights the need to unite biodiversity monitoring at
the global level and outlines the idea of an interconnected
worldwide system of observation networks — a global biodiversity
observing system — to coordinate monitoring worldwide and
inform action to reach international biodiversity targets.
Shackleton S, Seltzer A, Baggenstos D and Lisiecki LE (2023)
Benthic δ18O records Earth’s energy imbalance. Nature
Geoscience 16: 797–802.
The δ18O of foraminifera, one of the oldest and most widely used
paleoclimate proxies, is influenced by changing seawater δ18O and
temperature. This paper shows that in terms of energy gain/loss it
does not matter whether d18O changes due to seawater or
temperature which enables the reconstruction of Earth’s heat
content and variability on paleoclimate timescales.
Jackson SL, Vance TR, Crockart C, Moy A, Plummer C, and Abram
NJ (2023) Climatology of the Mount Brown South ice core site in
East Antarctica: implications for the interpretation of a water
isotope record. Climate of the Past 19: 1653–1675.
Ice core records favour recording climate conditions at times when
snowfall occurs, which are often associated with warmer-than-usual
temperatures. This paper shows the Mount Brown South ice core
record has preserved a temperature record biased to climate
conditions that exist during extreme events, rather than a
temperature record that reflects the mean annual climate.
Henley SF, Cozzi S, Fripiat F, Lannuzel D, Nomura D, Thomas DN,
Meiners KM, Vancoppenolle M, Arrigo K, Stefels J, van Leeuwe M,
Moreau S, Jones EM, Fransson A, Chierici M and Delille B (2023)
Macronutrient biogeochemistry in Antarctic land-fast sea ice:
Insights from a circumpolar data compilation. Marine Chemistry
257: 104324.
This study presents an international compilation and meta-analysis
of nutrient concentration data from Antarctic fast ice, and describes
key biogeochemical processes in cycling of nitrogen, phosphorus
and silicon within the ice matrix, and the exchange of nutrients
between fast ice, surface waters and snow cover.
Wille JD, Alexander SP, Amory C, Baiman R, Barthélemy L,
Bergstrom DM + 48 others (2024) The extraordinary March 2022
East Antarctica “heat” wave. Part I: observations and
meteorological drivers and Part II: Impacts on the Antarctic ice
sheet. Journal of Climate 37: 757–778 and 779-799.
East Antarctica experienced an exceptional heatwave with
widespread 30-40° C temperature anomalies across the ice sheet.
Here we focus on describing those
temperature records along with the intricate meteorological drivers
that led to the most intense atmospheric river observed over East
Antarctica and analyzing the widespread and diverse impacts
including widespread rain, surface melt and high snowfall
accumulations.
Zhang L, Vance TR, Fraser AD, Jong LM, Thompson SS, Criscitiello
AS and Abram, NJ (2023) Identifying atmospheric processes
favouring the formation of bubble-free layers in the Law Dome ice
core, East Antarctica. The Cryosphere 17: 5155–5173.
Physical features preserved in ice cores may provide unique records
about past atmospheric variability. This paper imaged ice cores
from Law Dome, East Antarctica using an intermediate layer core
scanner (ILCS) and found that thin bubble-free layers (BFLs) occur
multiple times per year at this site.
