Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Government Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20
Year Action Plan update of 2022 (Strategy and Action Plan) affirms
Australia’s commitment to the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS) and to
Antarctic science, protection and environmental stewardship. This
paper highlights new measures and reports on the progress of major
initiatives, including: the state-of-the-art icebreaker, RSV Nuyina;
Australia’s traverse capability to support drilling for a million-year
ice core; and krill research. The updated Strategy and Action Plan
identifies a number of activities to further strengthen opportunities
for Antarctic science.
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan update
of 2022
The Strategy and Action Plan, released in 2016 sets out Australia’s
Antarctic interests and vision for Australia’s engagement in
Antarctica. The 2022 update further strengthens Australia’s logistic
and scientific capabilities in the region, and reaffirms Australia’s
strong commitment to the ATS to ensure Antarctica remains valued,
protected and understood. Measures in the 2022 update include:
an expansion of Australia’s scientific capabilities, including:
research focused on Antarctic ice sheet science to build global
understanding of climate change impacts
new research to improve our understanding of Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean’s role in the global climate system supported by
logistical capability, including new long-range helicopters
logistical shipping support to allow Australia’s new icebreaker, RSV
Nuyina, to focus on extended scientific voyages, and
marine science in the Southern Ocean and a new krill aquarium in
Hobart.
greater support for Australia’s environmental management
including a ‘Cleaner Antarctica Strategy’, and
support for Hobart as a gateway to East Antarctica.
The 2022 Strategy and Action Plan can be found on the AAD
website.
Updates on major initiatives
Consistent with the updated Strategy and Action Plan, Australia is
continuing with major initiatives, including: making use of
Australia’s new, state-of-the-art icebreaker, RSV Nuyina; long-term
planning for infrastructure upgrades to our Antarctic and sub-
Antarctic research stations; contributing to the international efforts
to retrieve a million-year ice core; and development of a state-of-
the-art krill research facility in Hobart. Highlights specific to the
Australian Antarctic Science Program in 2023-24 are outlined in a
separate Information Paper.
RSV Nuyina
Figure 1: RSV Nuyina. Photographer: Peter Harmsen
The ice-breaker RSV Nuyina is the Australian Government's
centrepiece of the Australian Antarctic Program (AAP). A $1.9
billion commitment provided for the design, build and 30 year
operational and maintenance lifespan of the icebreaker,
representing the single biggest investment in the history of
Australia’s Antarctic program. Nuyina, pronounced noy-yee-nah,
means ‘southern lights’ in palawa kani, the language of Tasmanian
First Nations people.
The RSV Nuyina is the main lifeline to Australia’s Antarctic and
sub-Antarctic research stations and the central platform of our
Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientific research. The vessel enables
us to cross thousands of kilometres of the world’s stormiest seas,
navigate through Antarctica’s formidable sea ice barrier, and live
and work for extended periods on the coldest, driest and windiest
continent on earth.
The 2023-24 season marked the first full operational season of the
RSV Nuyina following a period of maintenance and commissioning.
RSV Nuyina’s key achievements supporting Antarctic science for
2023-24 include:
deployment of the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) as part of
the decades-long, multinational science program surveying plankton
of the Southern Ocean (SO-CPR)
collection of water samples for environmental DNA (eDNA) and
plankton, including using the dedicated wet well system to enable
the sampling and return of live krill back to the krill aquarium at
the AAD
installation of an automated suite of instruments that take
continuous measurements of the ocean, sea ice, snow cover and
atmosphere (Ocean–Sea Ice–Atmosphere OSIA underway
observatory). These instruments add to almost 30 years of ocean,
sea-ice, snow and atmosphere observations undertaken from other
ships and through field work and remote sensing (satellites) by the
international expert group on Antarctic Sea-ice Processes and
Climate (ASPeCt)
bathymetric mapping with the multibeam echosounder including
the discovery of a 2100 metre-deep, 9000-metre-wide canyon,
extending more than 46 kilometres off the Adams glacier near
Casey station, and
deployment and/or retrieval of a number of moorings including
Moored Acoustic Recorders (MAR), Krill Observational Moorings for
Benthic Investigation (KOMBI) and a Mooring for the Epipelagic
Echo sounding of Krill (MEEK) to continue the acoustic and visual
monitoring for krill and krill predators including whales.
Further information is available from the AAD’s RSV Nuyina
website.
Enhanced traverse capability and million-year ice core
The Traverse and Inland Station Project supports Australia’s
involvement in the collaborative Million-Year Ice Core Project to
recover a million-year ice core to aid climate research. The first
traverse to Little Dome C, and site of Australia’s ice core drilling
activities, was successfully completed in early 2023, as well as
initial ice core test drilling and ice core transport to gas analysis
laboratories in Hobart, verifying the cold supply chain for the
project.
Figure 2: Traverse convoy. Photographer: Sharon Labudda
In December 2023, a traverse team of nine people, five tractors and
two snow groomers spent about 20 days moving 500 tonnes of
infrastructure and cargo – including a large drill tent, foundations
and structure, and an inland station accommodation module – from
Casey research station over 1200 kms to the drill site at Little Dome
C in preparation for recommencement of ice core drilling in
2024-25. The team spent about a week on the ground, before
making the return journey. Commencement of ice core drilling for
the 2023-24 season was deferred due to Covid-19 challenges.
Australia also deployed a field camp at Edgeworth David base in the
Bunger Hills, 450 km from Casey station. This camp formed the
base for the Denman Terrestrial science campaign where 27
scientists, 15 support personnel, two helicopters and fixed wing
aircraft completed a wide-ranging multidisciplinary science
program, with further details presented in the separate Information
Paper on Australian Antarctic Science Program Highlights 2023-24.
Further information about the Traverse and Inland Station Project
and Million-Year Ice Core Project is available from the AAD’s
website.
Modernising Antarctic research stations
Figure 3: Australia’s Davis research station. Photographer: Greg
Stone
Long-term planning work is underway to sustain Australia’s
Antarctic research stations, including summer facilities at Wilkins
Aerodrome. Sustainment works aim to improve safety, operations,
enable our science programs, and improve environmental
sustainability, including:
construct new fuel storage, water supplies, energy provision, and
communication technology
upgrade the heavy vehicles and mobile equipment that maintain
our daily operations
provide Antarctic doctors with access to cutting-edge medical
technology
enhance the environmental sustainability of Australia’s research
stations, including pathways to lower greenhouse gas emissions
improve operational assets such as boats, field huts, and
aerodromes, and
provide new science equipment to support leading-edge research
and development.
Masterplans are being developed to deliver sustainable world-class
facilities to support Antarctic science and operations, as well as
addressing the challenges of living and working in Antarctica and
supporting diversity, equity and inclusion in the AAP.
Southern Ocean research aquarium (SOra)
Figure 4: Nuyina’s first krill catch. Photographer: Peter Harmsen
In 2022, Australia launched a 10-year Flagship ‘Krill and Krill
Ecosystem (KaKE)’ Project to inform the sustainable and ecosystem-
based management in the Southern Ocean and to quantify impacts
of climate change on krill and the krill ecosystem.
The updated Strategy and Action Plan commits to ensuring the
sustainable management of the Southern Ocean krill fishery, and
building research infrastructure in Hobart to establish Australia as
the world’s leader in krill research. Construction of the Southern
Ocean research aquarium, in collaboration with the University of
Tasmania, is progressing as planned and will provide improved krill
research facilities. Our current krill research aquarium, the only one
of its kind, has long been recognised as an international hub for
experimental krill biology.
In addition, the ‘wet well’ system in RSV Nuyina allows the
collection and maintenance of live krill and plankton in perfect
condition without the need to trawl or stop the vessel. This new
concept in sampling is a step change that allows major advances in
experimental research. During Voyage 3 in 2023/24, the wet well
and containerised aquarium system were used to collect and return
to Australian 5000 krill and 6 different types of invertebrates, some
of which have never been collected alive before. These systems
have delivered a significant improvement in the health of collected
invertebrates over previous methods.
More information on krill research is available from the AAD
website.
