Information on the implementation of the Nutec Plastics Initiative
in the Argentine Antarctic Programme
Information on the implementation of the Nutec Plastics Initiative
in the Argentine Antarctic Programme
Summary
This document reports the January 2024 launch of the Nutec
Plastics Initiative by the Argentine Antarctic Programme. The
Initiative is based on two axes for the study of microplastic
pollution in the Antarctic environment. The first is developed on a
local scale from the Carlini Base and examines abiotic and biotic
matrices. The second axis is developed on a regional scale from the
Irízar icebreaker and focuses on monitoring sub-surface marine
waters. Being attentive to the need to standardise microplastic
monitoring procedures in Antarctica, Argentina offers the practice
and knowledge acquired in this Initiative to Parties looking to adopt
similar initiatives.
Background
Through the Argentine Antarctic Institute (PAA/IAA), the Argentine
Antarctic Programme has carried out research related to chemical
pollution in the Antarctic environment for years. Starting in 2020,
the IAA began studies with the so-called emerging contaminants
and in particular with microplastics. In late 2022, the Argentine
government signed a scientific cooperation agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Organization (IAEA) for the study of
Microplastics in Antarctica, through the implementation of the
Nutec Plastics Initiative (INTP).
The INTP has been developing in all the seas of the world with the
participation of 63 countries, but for the first time it extends to
Antarctica, associated with the PAA/IAA.
In order to plan the start of activities, a meeting was held in April
2023 at the headquarters of the IAEA Environmental Laboratories,
in Monaco, involving scientists from both institutions. As a result of
this meeting, it was agreed to begin the study of monitoring
microplastics in Antarctica along two axes: one at a local scale from
the Carlini station, and another at a regional scale from the ARA
Almirante Irízar icebreaker. In January 2024, the INTP was
launched from the Esperanza station in the presence of the
President of the Argentine Republic, Javier Milei, and the Director
General of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi.
Activities developed in 2024
The first of the axes, developed from the Carlini Base, aimed to
examine the existing levels of microplastics and characterise their
polymeric structure of abiotic and biotic matrices. The selected
abiotic matrices were surface sea waters, surface marine sediments,
waters from melting lagoons, sediments from lagoons, beaches and
discharges of treated liquid effluents. The biotic matrices selected
were barnacles (Nacella concinna), bivalves (Laternula elliptica)
and penguin droppings. These tasks began at the end of January
and ended the first week of March 2024. They were carried out by
IAEA and IAA personnel.
The second of the axes, developed from the icebreaker ARA
Almirante Irízar, had the objective of examining the levels of
microplastics in sub-surface marine waters (8 metres deep), with
special interest in analysing and characterising the fraction smaller
than 100 microns. In this way, samples were collected, every 200
km, from approximately 22,000 km of the icebreaker's route, which
included the Argentine Sea, the Drake Passage, the northern region
of the Antarctic Peninsula and the Weddell and Bellingshausen seas.
For this initial stage of the INTP, all samples obtained will be
analysed in the IAEA Environmental Laboratory, with the
participation of IAA personnel in training in Raman microscopy and
FTIR microscopy techniques.
Proposal
The great variability in the levels of microplastic contamination
reported by different researchers is well known. This is clearly due
to the different sampling procedures and analytical methods.
The INTP provides an important tool to avoid this variability in the
results and, therefore, to improve their interpretation. This is
because it makes it possible to establish standardised methods for
sampling, analysis and expression and interpretation of results.
Additionally, it has training programmes on analytical techniques
such as Raman microscopy and FTIR microscopy, while facilitating
the obtaining of laboratory supplies and equipment.
Based on the above and considering the need to standardise
microplastic monitoring procedures in Antarctica, Argentina offers
the practice and knowledge acquired within the framework of the
INTP to Parties looking to adopt similar initiatives.
