‘Safety together culture’ using a holistic approach to expeditioner’s
safety and wellbeing
‘Safety together culture’ using a holistic approach to expeditioner’s
safety and wellbeing
Summary
The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has sought to integrate physical
health and safety, mental health, and social well-being into one
framework to align with the growing understanding of how the
interconnectedness of these elements promotes mental health and
safe operations. This in turn contributes greatly to organisational
success. This holistic approach embraces the concept of
‘psychological safety’ to give our Antarctic communities the best
culture to guard against both psychosocial and physical hazards.
Introduction
BAS has a good safety record and to keep it that way we need
to continually learn and improve. The COVID pandemic has
highlighted the importance of mental health in our communities. At
the same time there’s also been the strong focus on equality,
diversity and inclusion (EDI) (See ATCM45 WP010 Promoting
Diversity and Inclusion among Antarctic operators and expeditions
for further information). It became clear that there is a crucial
factor to address for all these elements. Psychosocial hazards have
the potential to cause harm to mental and physical health. They
include harassment, bullying, poor social environment and
organisational factors such as work overload, poor communication
and poor management of change. The International Organisation
for Standards (ISO) provide a full definition and detailed examples
of psychosocial hazards though their publication ISO 45003.
For BAS we reflected on how best we can address these
complexities for both physical hazards (e.g. polar operations,
glacier travel) and psychosocial hazards (e.g. social culture whilst
living and working in Antarctic). We decided to tackle them both
under the same framework to allow a more holistic approach to
safety (physical safety, mental health and social wellbeing).
BAS Safety Together Campaign
The BAS ‘Safety Together’ campaign was created to allow BAS to
structure various conversations and objective for improving
operational safety, mental health and EDI under one simple
strategic topic. Utilizing well established risk techniques for
prevention and resilience for physical and psychosocial hazards
allowed us to apply mitigations holistically which can benefit all
areas. By combining these topics and placing mental health and
social wellbeing on the same level as physical safety we have been
able to reduce the stigma often associated with mental health
concerns. This integration promotes a culture where all aspects of
safety and health are openly discussed and addressed. The
campaign does not undermine the importance of physical safety but
enhances it by increasing the organisational awareness of how
human factors (e.g. human error, poor team dynamics, low
situational awareness) are influenced by mental health which in
turn can contribute to dangerous conditions or accident that occur
in our operations.
Psychological safety
An important foundation for BAS has been the fostering for a
number of years the concept of psychological safety within the
organisation. BAS senior managers have made intentional
efforts to create a psychological safe environment across BAS. Some
of the strategies have been:
Encouraging open communication by creating channels for safe
communication where BAS staff feel encouraged to speak up, share
their ideas, concerns, and feedback.
Valuing diversity and inclusion by fostering a culture that ensures
individuals from different backgrounds, experiences, and
perspectives feel respected and included.
Clarifying BAS expectations around behaviour, performance, and
decision-making processes to reduce ambiguity and promote trust.
Embracing failure as a learning opportunity by creating a culture
where human error is acknowledged as an inevitable natural part of
being human and seeking blame fixes nothing.
Promoting psychological safe space for participation in meetings by
setting ground rules for respectful communication, encouraging all
voices to be heard, and ensuring that everyone has an opportunity
to contribute without fear of interruption or criticism.
Recognition and reward contributions which acknowledges and
celebrates the efforts of individuals and teams who demonstrate
psychological safety behaviours, such as speaking up, sharing
innovative ideas, or supporting their colleagues.
The role of ISO 45003 in our plans
ISO 45003 was published in 2021 and provides a universal guide
and framework for organisations to develop strategies to manage
employee mental health. BAS has already achieved certification to
ISO 45001 (Health and Safety) and ISO 14001 (Environmental
Management System) therefore it was natural for BAS to adopt the
ISO 45003 guidelines and incorporate the activity of our Safety
Together Campaign into existing safety management arrangements.
For example, our Safety Assurance Boards regularly review
psychosocial hazards alongside physical hazards and sets objectives
where improvements are identified. BAS has also begun to risk
assess the likely psychosocial hazards that could arise in
forthcoming Antarctic deployments and activities.
The role of safety management to support EDI
BAS has established that our safety management system (SMS) can
positively support EDI by incorporating the principles of risk
management. For example, when conducting risk assessments, an
SMS can consider the unique safety challenges faced by individuals
from diverse backgrounds and identities. This can involve
identifying the potential for psychosocial hazards that can
disproportionately affect certain deployed groups, such as
harassment, isolation or micro aggressions. The act of getting staff
and managers together to discuss these issues with candour ahead
of a deployment to Antarctica is a vital step and mitigation.
Advice for implementation from experience at the British Antarctic
Survey
The initial step is to consider how psychologically-safe the
organisation is and what is required for improvement.
Psychological safety is not about being nice to each other but about
openness throughout the organisation. Accountability for
psychological safety lies at all levels. Staff must be able to join a
remote Antarctic community and feel at ease. This message needs to
be frequently repeated to managers and all staff.
ISO 45003 provides detailed guidelines for employers to help them
manage psychosocial risks in the workplace.
The programme takes time to develop and gain support from staff.
Committing to manage mental health, social wellbeing and physical
safety in a holistic way is an important step forward to ensuring
safer and more productive communities in Antarctica.
