An update on the regional RINGS survey in Dronning Maud Land
and Enderby Land
An update on the regional RINGS survey in Dronning Maud Land
and Enderby Land
Summary
ATCM XLV WP 39 provided information on a regional initiative in
Dronning Maud Land and Enderby Land inspired by the SCAR
RINGS initiative aiming to facilitate complementary and
comprehensive airborne surveys in the coastal zone of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet. This effort is an important contribution to the
development of our knowledge on how the Antarctic Ice Sheet and
Southern Ocean will behave in the warming world in the coming
centuries, including sea-level change. In this paper we provide an
update on the Dronning Maud Land and Enderby Land regional
RINGS project, a project in which Australia, Belgium, China,
Germany, India, Japan, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, and USA are
participating nations.
Background
Many coastal regions in Antarctica remain inadequately surveyed or
totally un-surveyed (Matsuoka et al., 2022), which really hampers
the development of our knowledge on how the Antarctic Ice Sheet
and Southern Ocean will behave in the warming world in the
coming centuries. ATCM XLV WP 39 provided information on a
regional initiative in Dronning Maud Land and Enderby Land
inspired by the SCAR RINGS initiative aiming to facilitate
complementary and comprehensive airborne surveys in the coastal
zone of the Antarctic Ice Sheet.
While SCAR RINGS Action Group is developing the guidelines for
regional RINGS surveys, an initiative has been taken to develop
some early efforts in Droning Maud Land (DML) and Enderby Land.
DML have many active countries which provides a foundation for
collaboration in implementing a survey to fill the data gaps in this
region. Existing data are adequate enough to guide further surveys.
Enderby Land is completely different from DML; it has the largest
data gaps in terms of bed topography data near the grounding line
collected with GPS positioning, it is out of normal logistics coverage
of any National Antarctic Programs, and it requires new efforts
between nations that do not work regularly in this field. Therefore,
RINGS surveys in DML and Enderby Land are close to end-members
of possible future regional RINGS surveys. These projects can also
serve as useful examples and test-cases for the wider Antarctic
needs. It is a necessary step to best implement RINGS overall
guidelines into active missions.
ATCM XLV encouraged Parties to:
take note of the important SCAR RINGS initiative and its role in
increasing the science community’s ability to constrain the
uncertainties relating to Antarctica’s contribution to future sea-level
rise;
make appropriate efforts to enable regional surveys and
supplemental ground-based and vessel-based work in an
internationally coordinated manner, looking at the Dronning Maud
Land RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS initiatives as useful
examples; and
support and contribute to the Dronning Maud Land RINGS and
Enderby Land RINGS as appropriate.
In this paper we provide an update on the DML and Enderby Land
regional RINGS project, a project in which Australia, Belgium,
China, Germany, India, Japan, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, and
USA are participating nations.
Figure: DML/EL RINGS project flights completed in the 2023-24
season using German Neumayer III, Norwegian Troll, Belgian
Princess Elisabeth Antarctica, Australian Mawson, and Chinese
Zhongshan Stations as an international cooperation of ten nations.
Western and central DML
Despite the challenges posed by unfavourable weather conditions, 7
RINGS flights in total were conducted from Norwegian Troll
Station, Belgian Princess Elisabeth Antarctica, and German
Neumayer Station using Alfred Wegener Institute’s Polar6 aircraft.
The primary ring from 10W to 26E was successfully completed,
marking a significant milestone in the first RINGS regional survey.
In addition, targeted surveys over Jutulstraumen, a large outlet
glacier, were carried out both landward and seaward of the primary
ring. Two flights were made over two ice core sites drilled by
National Center for Polar and Ocean Research to constrain recent
surface mass balance.
Enderby Land and Eastern DML
Weather was a large factor for this mission, like any other Antarctic
field campaigns, which prohibited us to make planned surveys
along the coast of Enderby Land from Chinese Zhongshan Station to
Belgian Princess Elisabeth Antarctica with re-fueling at Australian
Mawson Station. Therefore, Polar Research Institute of China’s
Snow Eagle made a ferry flight directly to Belgian Station and
carried out three local flights between 25E to 45E, and two more
local flights from Zhongshan Station later between 55E and 75E.
Enderby Land has no modern bed topography data with GPS
positioning so this is truly pioneer work with strong international
collaboration. We keep working to fill the remaining gap between
the two local flights (45E – 55E) and guide further flights using this
initial data.
Figure: International field team for western DML flights using Alfred
Wegener Institute’s Polar6 and for eastern DML and Enderby Land
using Polar Research Institute of China’s Snow Eagle.
Overall
As an international collaboration both in science and logistics, the
first RINGS survey was carried out in Dronning Maud Land and
Enderby Land. Despite bad weather, this survey reached the
primary goal in most regions. In the years to come, the Dronning
Maud Land / Enderby Land RINGS project continues our efforts to
fill the remaining data gap and enrich data density for better
assessment of sea level rise today and in the future.
References
Matsuoka, K., R. Forsberg, F. Ferraccioli, G. Moholdt, and M.
Morlighem (2022), Circling Antarctica to unveil the bed below its
icy edge, Eos, 103 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2022EO220276. Published on 15 June
2022.
