Actions in Response to Heightened Risk of High Pathogenicity
Avian Influenza (HPAI) in Antarctica
A summary of activity by COMNAP and the National Antarctic
Programs
Actions in Response to Heightened Risk of High Pathogenicity
Avian Influenza (HPAI) in Antarctica
A summary of activity by COMNAP and the National Antarctic
Programs
Summary
In 2021, HPAI rapidly spread through the northern hemisphere,
then, in 2022 spread south into South America and South Africa
with the increase in cases in seabirds resulting in mass mortality
events. Mammals were also infected. At ATCM XLV (2023),
COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR jointly submitted IP101 Heightened
Risk of Avian Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area to alert the
community to this disease and its likely arrival through natural
migration to the Antarctic in the 2023/24 season.
Preparation for, and understanding of, the arrival of HPAI viruses to
the Antarctic in migratory wildlife has been, and continues to be, a
highly collaborative community effort (see ATCM XLVI (2024)
WP047). That community effort involves component actions
through various individual organisations. This paper showcases the
range of actions taken by COMNAP as an organisation and by
COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs to contribute to our
understanding of HPAI in the Antarctic, to protect human life, and
to enhance biosecurity protocols to ensure that the natural spread
of the disease is not assisted through direct human actions/
activities. This paper summaries actions to date and notes
preparations are underway for the 2024/25 Antarctic season. HPAI
in the Antarctic will likely be an issue for many seasons to come. As
a community we should apply lessons learned to be prepared for
the heightened risks the virus presents.
COMNAP Actions
During the July 2022 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM)
XXIV, those with Arctic operations including non-governmental
IAATO operators, reported their concerns about the massive
mortality of sea birds in the northern hemisphere from a highly
pathogenetic strain of avian influenza. Discussions in the AGM’s
Peninsula Regional Group resulted in a recommendation to all
programs to review their biosecurity procedures, especially if they
operated in both the Arctic and Antarctic, noting that pathogens
could be transferred by vessel, aircraft, on cargo and by
expeditioners from infected Arctic species/areas to Antarctic
species/areas, so vigilance was warranted. Programs were advised
to remind all expeditioners to avoid all direct contact with all
Antarctic wildlife and to remind scientists that had permission to
come into close or direct contact with wildlife to follow all
protocols to protect that wildlife and themselves.
COMNAP began a collaboration with IAATO to share information
on avian influenza.
In August 2022, Dewar, et al published preprint The Risk of Avian
Influenza in the Southern Ocean: A practical guide Now, preprint
version 7 at https://doi.org/10.32942/osf.io/8jrbu. , which said
that “advice from Avian Influenza experts suggests that there is a
high risk that Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza will arrive in the
Southern Ocean 2022/23-2024/25 austral summers.”
COMNAP then began actively working with IAATO and SCAR,
through the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Network (AWHN), to
understand the heightened risk and what that risk meant for
National Antarctic Programs for the 2022/23 Antarctic season.
COMNAP prepared and shared initial guidance on the heightened
risk of avian influenza with our Members on 14 October 2022.
Further guidance was issued to National Antarctic Programs on 16
February 2023. Fortunately, at the close of the 2022/23 Antarctic
summer season, there were no reports of suspected or confirmed
cases of HPAI in the Antarctic.
At ATCM XLV (June 2023) in Helsinki, Finland, COMNAP, IAATO
and SCAR jointly presented IP101 Heightened Risk of Avian
Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area (submitted 28 April 2023).
At COMNAP AGM 35 (2023) held in Hobart, Australia (25–29
June), the Joint COMNAP/SCAR Expert Group on Human Biology &
Medicine (JEGHBM) reviewed their information on infectious
disease in Antarctica and made initial recommendations to the AGM
plenary session in regard to HPAI and infection potential in
mammals, noting the importance of protection of human life. A key
outcome of their review was that “All stakeholders are
recommended to develop a medical response plan and model which
is appropriate to the environment in which contact with HPAI could
be reasonably expected to occur.” The COMNAP Environmental
Expert Group and the JEGHBM referred to the drafted COMNAP
guidance tabled at the AGM and reviewed the recommendations in
preparation for the 2023/24 Antarctic season. SCAR AWHN
guidance on HPAI surveillance, monitoring, and response to
suspected HPAI outbreaks in Antarctica was also shared with
COMNAP Member programs invited to send comments on the
AWHN information by 21 July 2023.
National Antarctic Programs shared information on their biosecurity
protocols and their preseason plans for monitoring and sample
collection. Some programs announced their intentions to set-up PCR
testing equipment at their Antarctic stations in the Peninsula to test
for HPAI from wildlife sample collection. Information from
Argentina and Chile was shared in relation to their deployment
biosecurity protocols. Lessons learned, communications, training,
safety, testing, and monitoring information was shared by Canada
based on Arctic HPAI outbreaks and program responses. Several
National Antarctic Programs had already begun preparations for
HPAI arrival and had protocols in place. COMNAP established the
HPAI Working Group as a COMNAP Project.
The COMNAP Executive Secretary and the COMNAP Environmental
Protection Expert Group Leader participated in the SCAR AWHN
Avian Influenza Workshop (30 July 2023) on the margins of the
SCAR Biology Conference, Christchurch, New Zealand. A workshop
presentation authored by the SCAR AWHN with presenting author
Meagan Dewar, Risk of Avian Influenza in Antarctica, identified the
“Antarctic Peninsula and Palmer Archipelago” as the area with the
highest area vulnerability score for the Antarctic Treaty region.
On 30 August 2023, COMNAP distributed its Guidance for Member
National Antarctic Programs, set up a public website See https://
www.comnap.aq/heightened-risk-of-hpai-in-antarctica. to share
information and announcements, and widely distributed a one-page
summary on avian influenza. The Guidance and the website remain
under regular review based on circumstances and are updated as/
when needed.
National Antarctic Programs’ Actions
The National Antarctic Programs, especially those operating in the
Antarctic Peninsula Region, developed biosecurity protocols based
on guidance provided by COMNAP and SCAR. Pre-deployment
training for expeditioners began to include information on HPAI.
The Antarctic scientific community recognised early on that
“surveillance and monitoring of the [HPAI] situation are essential to
monitor the spread of HPAI in the region but also to understand its
impacts”. See https://scar.org/library-data/avian-flu.
National Antarctic Programs facilitate this surveillance and
monitoring through support to their scientific community and
through a range of activities. Surveillance and monitoring were
strengthened through reporting, sample collection, and testing. At
time of writing, the Antarctic season 2023/24 is still underway, so
we do not yet have full understanding of all the actions taken by
National Antarctic Programs in readiness for HPAI arrival in the
Antarctic. The following information represents a range of actions
taken to date:
As of 19 March 2024, there were 48 entries in the SCAR AWHN
HPAI data portal. Forty of these reports were from sub-Antarctic
areas and eight were from areas below 60S. Seven of the eight
(88%) Antarctic reports were submitted by National Antarctic
Programs.
An informal survey of the 33 COMNAP Member National Antarctic
Programs on 20 March 2024 returned the following:
Eleven programs indicated that they did sample collection related
to HPAI during the 2023/24 Antarctic summer season. In total, over
1000 HPAI-related samples were collected, with some programs
continuing their Antarctic campaigns at time of writing so sample
collection numbers may go up.
Seven of the 11 (64%) of the programs that undertook sampling for
HPAI did not have testing equipment/expertise at their Antarctic
station. Of the seven, 5 returned their samples back to their home
country for testing and 2 programs sent their samples to other
National Antarctic Programs for testing in the Antarctic.
The National Antarctic Programs of Chile (INACH), the Republic of
Korea (KOPRI), and Spain (CPE) set up testing laboratories at their
Antarctic stations, Professor Julio Escudero & O’Higgins, King
Sejong, and Gabriel de Castilla, respectively, and accepted samples
from other National Antarctic Programs for testing. France’s IPEV
had a testing station in the sub-Antarctic.
Other comments of significance:
National Antarctic Programs regularly carry out monitoring and
biological research sampling of wildlife in their area of operations,
so this is not a new activity for many of the programs. All programs
responded that they maintained heightened vigilance for visual
signs and symptoms of avian flu in birds and mammals in their area
of operations.
All National Antarctic Programs included information on
heightened risk of HPAI in their pre-deployment training and
instructions. Some also added on-site (in Antarctica) briefings.
National Antarctic Programs developed heightened biosecurity
protocols following guidance from COMNAP and the JEGHBM.
Many also developed protocols for reporting of suspected cases.
At least one program reported including international researchers
on their vessel to carry out marine-based observations and sampling
for HPAI. Several programs reported that their scientists were
members of the SCAR AWHN and the SCAR Expert Group-Birds and
Marine Mammals (EG-BAMM) and contributed to those groups’
projects and publications.
Early in the season, much of the activity related to the heightened
risk of HPAI was focused on the sub-Antarctic area due to the
natural migration of wildlife and the global distribution of HPAI at
the start of the Antarctic summer season 2023/24.
Communications and Information Sharing
Open information sharing and regular communications is the key to
success in Antarctic operations. To support this, especially in the
context of the evolving HPAI situation, as a community we relied
upon already established networks and also established new
mechanisms to convey information.
On 26 September 2023, the COMNAP Secretariat emailed
representatives from the CCAMLR, IAATO, and SCAR Secretariats,
and from the COMNAP/SCAR JEGHBM and the SCAR AWHN, with
an invitation to form an HPAI Forum and all accepted.
Establishment of a high-level forum was a suggestion from the
SCAR AWHN HPAI Workshop. The HPAI Forum then held regular
online meetings on 27 October 2023; 16 November 2023; 13
December 2023; 7 February 2024; and 11 March 2024. The goal of
the HPAI Forum is to look across the global situation and the
reports from Antarctica from a multidisciplinary perspective and
provide situation awareness to better inform practical guidance, to
prepare science-informed statements for the community and the
media as the situation evolves, and to ensure that critical
information when received (such as confirmed positive cases in
mammals) is distributed in a timely manner. Through the Forum,
and in response to the announcement of the first suspected cases
identified in the Antarctic Treaty Area on 22 December 2023, a
joint Statement was released by COMNAP, IAATO, SCAR and the
CCAMLR Secretariat on 27 December 2023. The Forum remains
convened.
Through the IAATO Secretariat, two WhatsApp Chat Groups were
set up on 27 September 2023. Open to all operators, one focused on
rapid, informal, information exchange between those operating in
the Antarctic Peninsula region. At time of writing, the group had 45
members from 17 different countries. This WhatsApp Chat Group
proved to be a highly effective way to share information of unusual
wildlife behaviour and mortality events.
The COMNAP Secretariat provides “HPAI Updates” emailed to the
Membership to share all reports received from National Antarctic
Programs on suspected and confirmed cases and urgent information
or statements. The COMNAP HPAI Updates were (at time of
writing):
1 September 2023, COMNAP Guidelines.
24 October 2023, Confirmation of first sub-Antarctic cases (British
Antarctic Survey; Skuas).
11 November 2023, SCAR AWHN Monitoring Project & WhatsApp
Chat Group information.
26 December 2023, Report of first suspected cases in the Antarctic
Treaty Area (Instituto Antártico Argentino; Skuas).
7 February 2024, Report of suspected cases (Instituto Antártico
Argentino; Skuas).
22 February 2024, Report of suspected cases (Instituto Antártico
Argentino; Skuas & Gulls).
25 February 2024, Confirmation of first cases in the Antarctic
Treaty Area (Severo Ochoa Center for Molecular Biology of the
CSIC, Spain, from samples collected by Instituto Antártico
Argentino; Skuas).
7 March 2024, Report of suspected cases (Czech Antarctic Research
Programme; Skuas).
14 March 2024, Confirmation of cases (reported as suspected on 7
March 2024 by Czech Antarctic Research Programme, confirmed
through testing by Instituto Antartico Chileno; Skuas).
The HPAI Updates will continue as reports of suspected and
confirmed cases are received.
An Expert Group on HPAI in the Antarctic Peninsula Region was
formed by the National Antarctic Programs of Chile and Spain on
22 January 2024, and now joined by the programs of Argentina,
Republic of Korea, and Uruguay. The Terms of Reference for the
Expert Group stated the objective as “to discuss technical issues
related with the detection and monitoring of
HPAI in Antarctic fauna” and noted the main purpose of the Expert
Group was to share “knowledge, experiences, data, technologies
and … samples”.
In a statement on 12 July 2023, the World Health Organization
(WHO) released situation analysis and advice from the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), WHO, and World Organisation for
Animal Health (WOAH) entitled “Ongoing avian influenza
outbreaks in animals pose risks to humans”. See https://
www.who.int/news/item/12-07-2023-ongoing-avian-influenza-
outbreaks-in-animals. The COMNAP Secretariat and the JEGHBM
continues to monitor the WHO site for updates of importance
related to human infection.
The WOAH considers avian influenza a “listed disease” and
provides 3-weekly situational reports on its global status. The
WOAH HPAI Situational Report, 17 November 2023 to 7 December
2023, mentions “Antarctica” for the first time in its Key Messages
section saying, “WOAH is also paying close attention to the
situation in the sub-Antarctic region and is calling on the animal
health community to monitor the situation and the potential spread
to Antarctica, as experts fear that the consequences for wildlife
could be devastating in this region.” See https://www.woah.org/
app/uploads/2024/02/hpai-situation-report-20231211.pdf. The
COMNAP Secretariat continues to monitor the WOAH site for
updates of importance to the global tracking of the virus in wildlife.
Preparation for Antarctic season 2024/25
At time of writing, many National Antarctic Programs have
completed their Antarctic summer campaigns and are out of the
area or have their stations in “winter-over” mode. Some programs
continue with their summer season operations, especially those in
the Peninsula. They remain vigilant for signs of HPAI in wildlife in
their areas of operations. The scientific community notes there is a
risk of further spread to other regions (beyond the Peninsula) of
Antarctica. See for example, FAO WOAH OFFLU ad-hoc group on
HPAI H5 in wildlife of South America and Antarctica Statement, 21
December 2023, Continued expansion of high pathogenicity avian
influenza H5 in wildlife in South America and incursion into the
Antarctic region, OFFLU-wildlife-statement-no.-II.pdf. Planning is
underway for a joint HPAI session of the SCAR AWHN and the
COMNAP/SCAR JEGHBM at the SCAR Open Science Conference
(August 2024). COMNAP will also discuss the situation as part of
the COMNAP AGM 36 (August 2024). Sharing lessons learned and
any new information on HPAI will be important to inform our
guidance for the next season and beyond. We note that, there are
confirmed cases from samples from what appeared to be healthy
individual animals and from colonies with no signs of infection. The
guidance will be reviewed with this in mind in preparation for the
2024/25 Antarctic season.
There is work globally on vaccination for poultry. There are
advancements with testing including a low pathogenicity (LP) AI air
sampling test trialled by New Zealand scientists in the Ross Sea
Region in austral summer 2022/23. We must keep under review
advances with testing and vaccines and their application to
Antarctic conditions and wildlife.
There can be long time periods between reporting of suspected
cases, sample collection, and ultimately receiving the results from
testing. This is due to several factors, including needing to send
samples out of Antarctica back to home testing facilities. In many
instances, sample collection and testing are not possible due to
limitations of access, equipment, or expertise in Antarctica.
Monitoring and sample collection is only possible in areas where
National Antarctic Programs are operating and supporting science-
so there will be gaps in our knowledge of timeframes for, and the
pathways of, the disease spread.
Competent Authorities are urged to work with their scientific
community and National Antarctic Programs on this issue, to
request information from the Expert Group and to join in sharing of
information on the AT Competent Authority Forum.
