POLARIN – Polar Research Infrastructure Network
POLARIN – Polar Research Infrastructure Network
Summary
POLARIN (Polar Research Infrastructure Network) is an
infrastructure project recently funded by the European Union under
HORIZON EUROPE Framework Programme with 14,6 M€
addressing the access to polar research infrastructures.
POLARIN will provide fully funded access to 64 polar research
infrastructures of European interest and their services, with the aim
of tackling the scientific challenges of the polar regions. The
network integrates a wide array of complementary and
interdisciplinary top level research infrastructures: Arctic and
Antarctic research stations, research vessels and icebreakers
operating at both poles, observatories (on land and at sea), data
infrastructure and ice and sediment core repositories.
Introduction
The polar regions play a key role in the Earth’s system. They are
essential for our climate and are sentinels of climate change, human
expansion, and the hunt for new resources. The polar regions are
losing ice, and their oceans and land are changing rapidly. The
consequences of this polar transition extend to the whole planet and
are affecting people in multiple ways. Evidence-based policy
recommendations are needed, but the polar regions are difficult to
reach, and research infrastructure able to operate in these regions is
scarce. To understand and predict key processes in the polar regions
and provide evidence-based information, the polar research
community needs access to world-class research infrastructure
operating in these regions.
The recently EU funded project POLARIN (Polar Research
Infrastructure Network) will provide fully funded access to 64 polar
research infrastructures (RIs) of European interest and their
services, with the aim of tackling the scientific challenges of the
polar regions. The network integrates a wide array of
complementary and interdisciplinary top level RIs: Arctic and
Antarctic research stations, research vessels and icebreakers
operating at both poles, observatories (on land and at sea), data
infrastructures and ice and sediment core repositories.
Access to and integration of RIs are key for strengthening European
research, and for increasing the observing and modelling capacities
to address the grand challenges that these regions are facing.
POLARIN brings together 50 partners representing most of the
European Member States and Associated Countries either operating
unique infrastructures in polar regions and/or with well-established
Polar Programmes. In addition, 7 international partners from
Canada (ULAVAL, ARI); USA (UAF, UICS), UK (UKRI), Ukraine
(NASC), and Chile (INACH) offer access to their unique
infrastructures (see lists at the end of the document).
POLARIN is coordinated by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar
and Marine Research, in Germany, and the project is set to run for
five years, from March 2024 to February 2029.
Objectives
POLARIN’s overall aim is to provide efficient and customised RI
services to address the scientific challenges of the polar regions,
including fully funded “transnational access” “Transnational access”
can be (i) in-person, or (ii) remote (remote access to the
infrastructure’s facilities). Research teams may only apply for
transnational access to research infrastructures operated from
different countries than the country where the Principal
Investigator and the majority of the users are based.. User teams
where all or the majority of users work in third countries (not based
at EU or Associated countries) can be supported as long as the
cumulative access provided to them is below 20% of the total
amount of units of access provided under POLARIN. to a
wide portfolio of complementary and interdisciplinary top level RIs.
Building on past EU-funded projects that offered access to terrestrial
research stations (INTERACT) and research icebreakers (ARICE) in
the Arctic, POLARIN will further integrate and combine the access
to Arctic and Antarctic research stations, polar vessels (including
icebreakers), observatories (on land and at sea), data infrastructures
and ice and sediment core repositories.
Challenge driven calls for proposals will ensure that the funded
projects address the understanding and predicting of key processes
in polar regions, contribute to larger European and international
initiatives and support policy making. Successful research teams
will be granted the access to their selected research infrastructures
fully funded by POLARIN.
Access to RI through POLARIN is open to research teams where the
Principal Investigator and the majority of the research team work in
countries other than the country where the infrastructure is located.
POLARIN will also provide “virtual access” “Virtual Access” ensures
free of charge access to e-infrastructure, such as data in repositories,
databanks, including the publication of new data or data previously
not available. to data and data products, improve online services,
data access and interoperability by enabling the connection
between initiatives, improving workflows, and reducing data
fragmentation. POLARIN will ensure that the new generations of
scientists are trained to exploit the leading edge RIs.
POLARIN has the following six specific objectives:
Enable science for understanding and predicting key processes in
polar regions.
Provide efficient challenge-driven transnational access to top level
RIs in the polar regions.
Improve data services and provide customised data products.
Provide virtual access to data and data services.
Provide training for infrastructure users.
Advertise RI services and engage RI users.
Work Packages
POLARIN comprises the following Work Packages:
WP No
Work Package Title
WP Lead
Short Name
1
Enabling science for understanding and predicting key processes in
polar regions
CNRS CNRS - National Centre for Scientific Research, France
2
Proposal management service
UOULU UOULU - University of Oulu, Finland
3
RIs offered for transnational access
AWI AWI - Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research,
Germany
4
Improvement of data services and customised data products
CNR CNR - National Research Council, Italy
5
Provision of virtual access to data
SIOS SIOS - Svalbard Integrated Arctic Earth Observing System,
Norway
6
RIs offered for virtual access
AWI
7
Training for infrastructure users
UCPH UCPH - University of Copenhagen
8
Outreach, engagement, and impact
EPB EPB- European Polar Board, The Netherlands
9
Project management
AWI
WP1 will establish the background of research challenges to ensure
that access to POLARIN RIs contributes to the specific challenges
identified by international organisations and programmes such as
ESA European Space Agency, https://www.esa.int , SCAR Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research, https://www.scar.org , IASC
International Arctic Science Committee, http://iasc.info , UNDOS
United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development, https://oceandecade.org , and past and ongoing EU
Polar Cluster projects. This WP will oversee the scientific evaluation
of proposals (by an external board) and will assess the contribution
of the projects and the infrastructure capability towards addressing
the challenges.
WP2 will implement an easy access portal (one-stop shop) to
POLARIN RIs to allow researchers to apply for any (or a
combination of several) RI(s) in support of excellent
multidisciplinary research. For that, the INTERACCESS proposal
management system developed and implemented in the EU-funded
project INTERACT, will be modified to allow the management of
multiple infrastructures that, due to their nature, require specific
information in the application. Challenge-driven calls for proposals
will be launched to invite researchers to apply for transnational
access to RIs. This WP is the link between the scientific frame
(challenges, evaluation in WP1) and the RI operators. It will
perform the logistic evaluation of proposals recommended by WP1.
WP3 comprises all infrastructures offered for transnational access
(either in-person or remote), including their description of work,
outreach to new users and review procedure.
WP4 is dedicated to improving the access to data, development of
online services and data products. It will improve the accessibility
and interoperability of the data management landscape and it will
establish a hub to find data suiting the user’s needs. This WP will
also create data products from raw data to facilitate the
consumption of data generated by the RIs.
WP5 will create a gate to the virtual access of data offered within
POLARIN, periodically monitoring the access through an external
assessment board.
WP6 comprises all infrastructures offering virtual access of data,
including their description of work and outreach to new users.
WP7 will implement training for infrastructure users in different
formats. It will implement 1) online seminars for a broad audience
on scientific tools and equipment, land and sea expedition planning,
and safety and sustainability. 2) online training on data
stewardship, and 3) an in-person safety training in compliance with
the Polar Code, to ensure selected expedition leaders are trained to
guide their team to survive at least 5 days in extreme conditions.
WP8 will support all services as the Outreach, Engagement, and
Impact work package to ensure that the services offered by
POLARIN reach and engage a large audience. It will create the
project website, regular newsletters and will advertise the
opportunities opened by POLARIN. It will engage the community of
users in an ambassador programme and evaluate the
communication and engagement activities and the impact of
POLARIN on multiple stakeholders.
WP9 will ensure a smooth project management and implementation
of the project. It will enable synergies across the consortium,
managing the information and communication flow, and with
other projects and entities such as the EU Polar Cluster and ESA. It
will implement an Advisory Board with relevant stakeholders to
enhance the connection with international partners and
organisations as well as with other European initiatives and
projects.
Work plan
POLARIN will integrate polar RI capacities to facilitate science for
understanding and predicting key processes in polar regions in the
context of climate change, to enhance the society’s problem-solving
capacity and to support evidence-based policy making. The services
offered by POLARIN are:
Challenge driven transnational access (in person and remote) to
selected polar RIs of European interest,
Data access, data products and data services
Virtual access to multidisciplinary polar data
Training for infrastructure users
The project activities are organised in three pillars (integration,
implementation, and assessment) to ensure a smooth service
provision. The project methodology aims at ensuring that:
a) The integration of RIs and multidisciplinary science are achieved.
b) The services are implemented efficiently and improve the current
landscape.
c) The project services contribute significantly beyond the lifetime
of the project.
The Consortium
To fulfil this goal, POLARIN has assembled a consortium consisting
of 50 partners from all over Europe and beyond offering access to
64 infrastructures from multiple domains. By that, POLARIN
represents a joint international cooperation network which ensures
excellent research contributing to identified research challenges in
polar regions. The uniqueness of this set of complementary polar
RIs, both on land and at sea, will open new research opportunities
for European and international scientists.
Project partners:
Austria: UGRAZ - Graz University
Bulgaria: BAI - Bulgarian Antarctic Institute
Canada: ULAVAL - Laval University
ARI - Aurora College
Chile: INACH – Chilean Antarctic Institute Pending Participant
Identification Code (PIC) validation.
Denmark: AU - Aarhus University
UCPH - University of Copenhagen
DTU - Technical University of Denmark
DMI - Danish Meteorological Institute
Faroe Islands: SAVN - Faroese National Heritage Pending
Participant Identification Code (PIC) validation.
Finland: UOULU - University of Oulu
UTU - University of Turku
UH - University of Helsinki
FMI - Finnish Meteorological Institute
France: CNRS - National Centre for Scientific Research
IPEV - French Polar Institute Paul-Émile Victor
PONANT - Compagnie Du Ponant
TARA - Fondation TARA
Germany: AWI – Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for
Polar and Marine Research
FLPO - Fl Polar Operation Gmbh Pending Participant Identification
Code (PIC) validation.
GFZ – Helmholtz Centre Potsdam - GFZ German Research Centre for
Geosciences
Greenland: GINR - Greenland Institute of Natural Resources
Ireland: MI - Marine Institute
Island: HAFRO – Marine and Freshwater Research Institute
SSLC - Sudurnes Science and Learning Center
RIF - Rannsoknarstodin Rif
CAFF - Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna
Italy: CNR – National Research Council
OGS – National Institute of Oceanography and Applied Geophysics
INKODE - Inkode Societa Cooperativa
ETT - ETT Spa
Netherlands: EPB - European Polar Board
Norway: UIT – The Arctic University of Norway Incl. APECS
(Association of Polar Early Career Scientists)
SIOS - Svalbard Integrated Arctic Earth Observing System
NILU - Climate and Environmental Research Institute
NPI – Norwegian Polar Institute
Poland: AMU - Adam Mickiewicz University
IGF PAS - The Institute of Geophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences 
UMK - Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń
Portugal: IGOT-UL - Instituto De Geografia E Ordenamento do
Territorio da Universidade Delisboa
Spain: CSIC - Spanish National Research Council
MICN - Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation
Sweden: INPA - Interact-International Network for terrestrial
Research and Monitoring
ULUND - Lunds University
SPRS - Swedish Polar Research Secretariat
SU - Stockholm University
Ukraine: NASC - National Antarctic Scientific Center
United Kingdom: UKRI - United Kingdom Research and Innovation
United States of America: UAF - University of Alaska
UICS - Uic Science, Llc
Challenge driven access to RIs
POLARIN will offer access to 64 research infrastructures in both
poles:
38 research stations (11 Antarctic and 26 Arctic stations)
12 research vessels including icebreakers, seven of which are
operating around Antarctica
1 deep-sea observatory, 2 observational networks, 7 data
infrastructures and 15 key observatories associated to research
stations
4 Ice and sediment core repositories
Access to RIs can be:
transnational access (TA), access in person, or remote
virtual access (VA), access to data or samples
List of Antarctic Research Infrastructures offered through POLARIN
Terrestrial stations in the Antarctic Peninsula:
Akademik Vernadsky Station (NASC, Ukrania)
Bulgarian Antarctic Base St. Kliment Ohridski (BAI, Bulgaria,)
Captain Arturo Prat Navy Station Laboratories (INACH, Chile)
Professor Julio Escudero Station (INACH, Chile)
Spanish Antarctic Station “Gabriel de Castilla” (MCIN, Spain)
Juan Carlos I Antarctic Station (CSIC, Spain)
Terrestrial stations elsewhere in Antarctica:
Concordia Station (CNR, Italy & IPEV, France), East Antarctic
Plateau, Antarctica
Mario Zucchelli Station (CNR, Italy), Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica
Neumayer Station III (AWI, Germany), Ekstroem Ice Shelf,
Antarctica
Troll Research Station (NPI, Norway), Dronning Maud Land,
Antarctica
Wasa Station (SPRS, Sweden), Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica
Research icebreakers and research vessels
CCGS Amundsen (ULAVAL, Canada)
MV Le Commandant Charcot (PONANT, France)
RV Kronprins Haakon (NPI, Norway)
RV Hesperides (MCIN, Spain)
RS Karpuj (INACH, Chile)
RVIB Laura Bassi (OGS, Italy)
Icebreaker “Noosphere” (NASC, Ukraine)
PRV Polarstern (AWI, Germany)
Sediment and ice core repositories
Ice core repository (AWI, Germany)
Sediment core repository (AWI, Germany)
UK Polar Sediment Core Facility (UKRI-BAS, United Kingdom)
Core repository and geological laboratories (UiT, Norway)
Data infrastructures
ARICE Data infrastructure (ETT, Italy)
Italian National Antarctic Data Center (CNR, Italy)
POSEDA (GFZ, Germany)
For further information, please contact:
the POLARIN Project Coordinator:
Dr Nicole Biebow,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut,
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar und Meeresforschung,
Am Handelshafen 12, 27570 Bremerhaven
Tel: +49 (0)471 4831 1011,
Email: Nicole.Biebow@awi.de
or the POLARIN Project Manager:
Dr Verónica Willmott,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut,
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar und Meeresforschung,
Am Handelshafen 12, 27570 Bremerhaven
Tel: +49 (0)471 4831 2148,
Email: veronica.willmott@awi.de
