Report on the 26th edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol -
2023/2024
English version provided by the author
Report on the 26th edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol -
2023/2024
Summary
This Information Paper, drafted jointly by Chile and Argentina,
provides information on the activities carried out during the 26th
edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol in the 2023/24 Antarctic
Campaign.
Background
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) began in 1998, when Chile
and Argentina recognised the need to coordinate their efforts in the
Antarctic SAR areas of responsibility of both Parties, established in
the “International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue” of
1979 (SAR Convention), which also requires cooperation and
coordination among neighbouring States.
Since its creation, the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol has performed its
activities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System
(ATS). For this reason, both countries have included the
participating vessels in their respective pre-season information,
notifying other Parties of its configuration.
Likewise, both Parties have permanently informed the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings about the PANC’s activities through
Information Papers (IP), providing details on support and rescues
carried out each season.
Mission, organization and assignments
The directive issued by both states establishes the following
mission:
“To form a Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol, between November 15 and
March 31 of each year, to conduct activities and exercises of search
and rescue and pollution control, with the purpose of providing
safety to navigation and human life at sea, and contribute to
keeping the waters free of pollution in the Antarctic Treaty area,
south of the 60º S parallel, between the meridians 010º W and 131º
W.”
In order to execute the SAR missions in the area of the PANC
deployment, the SAR Coordination Centers (MRCC) in Ushuaia and
Punta Arenas have both Service and Antarctic support vessels and
other means at their disposal, so as to handle the emergencies that
might arise. Likewise, the secondary SAR Coordination Center
(MRSC) in Puerto Williams also provides support for ongoing
operations.
Aside from the fundamental purpose of the PANC, the Antarctic
Service Vessel performs the following complementary activities,
which are carried out insofar as they do not interfere with the
purpose of the patrol:
• Aid to navigation: Meteorological support to the vessels and ships
navigating in the patrol area. As a mobile weather station, it
contributes with data for the elaboration of the area´s forecast
through the meteorological services of both countries.
• Maintenance of maritime signaling for both countries within the
PANC area.
• Medical assistance at sea: the units that integrate PANC have the
capacity to provide sanitary support of low level complexity, and
have a physician on board to take care of medical emergencies.
• Support to the Antarctic scientific community through the
transport of personnel and/or scientific equipment between
facilities or stations.
• Logistics: through the resupplying of facilities and stations of both
countries or from third Parties.
The “Southern Naval Area Command” (Comando del Área Naval
Austral), based in the city of Ushuaia, and the “Third Naval Zone
Chief Command" (Comandancia en Jefe de la Tercera Zona Naval),
located in the city of Punta Arenas, have the responsibility of
managing the Antarctic Joint Patrol in stages of approximately 34
and 35 days.
The efforts of the PANC during the 2023-2024 period were oriented
towards the following aspects:
A. Maritime safety:
1. Safety of navigation.
2. Observations on Antarctic cartography.
3. Maintenance, installation and updates for navigation aids.
4. Updates on radio communications and capabilities of the GMDSS.
5. Signals and false alarms COSPAS – SARSAT.
6. SAR cases and maritime assistance.
7. Presentation of maritime safety information (MSI), including
weather forecasts and meteorological and glaciological conditions
in real time.
B. Pollution
1. Observations on special prescriptions for the use or
transportation of fuels in the Antarctic area (Rule 43 of MARPOL).
2. Pollution resulting from normal operations or from a collision,
stranding or sinking of vessels and platforms:
2.1 Pollution from hazardous bulk liquid substances.
2.2 Pollution from waste waters.
2.3 Pollution from solid wastes from vessels.
3. Atmospheric pollution generated by vessels.
4. Monitoring of pollution in shipwreck areas.
5. Exercises in pollution countermeasures.
6. Use of dispersants, absorbant materials, skimmers and
containment barriers.
II. Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol 2023/2024
The 26th edition of the PANC took place between 15 November
2023 and 31 March 2024, carrying out the following relevant
activities in each of the periods of Antarctic service and support.
During the aforementioned period, the MRCC of both navies
permanently maintained an “Antarctic Service Vessel” with Search
and Rescue capabilities and the necessary elements to control and
combat pollution, in addition to another vessel with similar
characteristics as back-up.
The stages of the 26th PANC where as follows:
A. ALPHA (between November 15th and December 18th 2023)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “ESTRECHO DE SAN
CARLOS” – 15 Nov. - 18 Dic. 2023
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “GALVARINO” - 15 Nov. - 18 Dic.
2023
Highlighted activities:
1. Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
2. Support to Antarctic stations and operators, including transport
of personnel and general logistics.
3. Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility.
B. BRAVO (between December 19th 2023 and January 22nd 2024)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “GALVARINO” – 19 Dic. al 22 Ene.
2024
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “ESTRECHO DE SAN
CARLOS”
Highlighted activities:
1. Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
2. Support to Antarctic stations and operators, including transport
of personnel and general logistics.
3. Maintenance work conducted on the existing maritime signalling
in the area of responsibility
C. CHARLIE (between January 23rd and February 26th 2024)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “ESTRECHO DE SAN
CARLOS”.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “GALVARINO” – 23 Ene. al 23 Feb.
2024.
ATF “JANEQUEO” – 24 Feb. al 26 Feb. 2024.
Highlighted activities:
1. Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
2. Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
3. Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility.
D. DELTA (between February 27th and March 31st 2024)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “JANEQUEO” – 27 Feb. al 01 Mar.
2024
ATF “GALVARINO” – 02 al 31 Mar. 2024.
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “ESTRECHO DE SAN
CARLOS”.
Highlighted activities:
1. Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
2. Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
3. Maintenance work conducted on the existing maritime signalling
in the area of responsibility
III. Results of joint effort:
• Total nautical miles navigated: 14,272.2 NM
• Time at sea: 138 days.
• Total assistances: 10 stations
• Maritime traffic: Radio contact was established with 93 vessels in
SAR area, providing support to navigation and meteorological
information.
This joint effort by Chile and Argentina allows for the completion of
PANC and at the same time, contributes to a rational use of both
countries’ resources.
The intention of both countries is to continue conducting PANC
annually, thus contributing to the safeguarding of life at sea, safety
of navigation and the preservation of the Antarctic environment.
IV. Final remarks
The tasks carried out during the 26th PANC have once again shed
light on the importance of the joint efforts of Argentina and Chile in
support of the international Antarctic community that operates in
the aforementioned area of responsibility.
