Report from the management group for Antarctic Specially
Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 Deception Island for the period
2023/24
Report from the management group for Antarctic Specially
Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 Deception Island for the period
2023/24
Summary
This paper highlights ongoing discussions in the Deception Island
Management Group (DIMG) and provides an overview of activities
and actions that have taken place over the last year relevant for the
management of ASMA No. 4 – Deception Island.
Background
Deception Island (latitude 62°57’S, longitude 60°38’W), South
Shetland Islands, is a unique Antarctic island with important
natural, scientific, historic, educational and aesthetic values. An
area of 98.5 km2 encompassing Deception Island, Port Foster, and
several small outlying islands was formally adopted as Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). The
Management Plan has been revised by Measure 10 (2012) and
Measure 10 (2019). The next review of the current ASMA No. 4
Management Plan shall commence by 2024.
The Management Group is formed by representatives from the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties of Argentina, Chile, Norway,
Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States. The Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and the International Association
of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) act as advisors to the group.
Norway is currently chairing the group.
A brief overview of Deception Island activities in the 2023/24
austral summer season
Scientific activities
Both Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain) and Base Decepción
(Argentina) were operational during the season (from January 1st
to March 24th and January 19th to March 23rd, respectively) and
supported a number of ongoing research and monitoring projects.
Gabriel de Castilla Station, hosted 10 national projects and 4
international projects by Chile, the Netherlands and Portugal. Spain
also monitored in the long-term series the permafrost grids in the
island. Moreover, both countries monitored the seismological and
volcanic status of the Deception volcano, from seismological,
geothermal, geochemical and geodesic approaches. (For more
information see IP 117 submitted by Spain and Argentina and IP 65
submitted by Argentina).
.
Tourism
Cruise visits and landings are still numerous at Deception Island,
being among the most visited sites in Antarctica. Spain identified
more than 60 vessels (both touristic and scientific) entering port
Foster from January 1st to March 25th. Approximately 45 000
passenger landings took place during the 2023/24 austral season,
where approximately 29 000 were in Whalers Bay and 10 000 in
Telefon Bay All numbers are preliminary at the time of writing. .
Pendulum Cove and Baily Head also had passenger landings
throughout the season. No IAATO operator incidents were reported
during the season.
Volcanic monitoring
The traffic light code has been in green all season, indicating that
no eruption is anticipated.
Due to problems with logistic planning of the scientific team from
the Geological and Mining Survey of Argentina (SEGEMAR), the
scientific team from Instituto Geográfico Nacional (IGN) Spain
collaborated with SEGEMAR in the repair of two damaged
monitoring stations (PEN and PFT) which were lost during late
December 2023, due to solar panels destruction caused by heavy
winds and storms.
All stations were repaired, and the network became fully
operational again. Also, the geodetic network was recovered. (For
more information see IP 117 submitted by Argentina and Spain).
Spain (IGN): During the 2023/24 Antarctic campaign, IGN has
complemented the IGN-SEGEMAR Joint Volcanic Monitoring
System in Deception Island with the following facilities:
IGN 2 new broadband seismic permanent stations with WiFi real-
time transmission to BAEGdC. The total number of seismic stations
after campaign in the current monitoring network are: 7 (IGN) + 3
(SEGEMAR).
IGN 2 new GNSS permanent stations with WiFi real-time
transmission to BAEGdC. The total number of GNSS stations after
the current monitoring network are: 6 (IGN) + 2 (SEGEMAR).
IGN 2 new downhole seismic sensor installation (2m deep). The
total number of downhole installations after the seismic network
are: 5 (IGN).
IGN reinforcement of the solar panel structures at the SEGEMAR
stations: BFU, PEN and PFT.
IGN new solar panels installation at the SEGEMAR stations: BFU
and PEN.
IGN vertical thermometry profile permanent installation in Caliente
Hill, with temperature sensors at 10, 20, 30 and 40cm depth and
LoRa real-time transmission to BAEGdC.
IGN visual camera installation at BAEGdC (provided by SEGEMAR)
with 1 image/min storage.
IGN new STARLINK satellite communications system installation at
BAEGdC (1 TB bandwidth) for all IGN volcanic monitoring network
data transmission in real-time to Madrid and Buenos Aires.
Deception Island Management Group Actions
Review of the ASMA Management Plan
The Deception Island Management Group has initiated a review of
the management plan for ASMA No. 4 with the aim to update the
plan if and as appropriate. At this stage the group has identified
elements of the plan that potentially merits a closer review,
including maps, volcanic surveillance information, pollution
management, etc. It is expected that if it is concluded that a
revision is necessary, then the revised plan will be submitted for the
CEP’s consideration in 2025.
Deception Island web page
The Deception Island ASMA website (www.deceptionisland.aq) was
launched in December 2005. The website is now very out of date
and has not been updated for a long time. The Deception Island
Management Group has over the last year discussed options for the
future updating and management of the website. The Members of
the Deception Island Management Group considered three options:
1) delete the website and leave interested parties to find
information about Deception Island from other existing sources; 2)
keep the website and current structure but update the content; 3)
keep the website but simplify the website structure and content
significantly. The Deception Island Management Group agreed that
the website has value as a tool to communicate about the
Management Plan to potential visitors and tour operators, but
thought that it required a lot of work to maintain and keep up-to-
date. The Deception Island Management Group therefore agreed
option 3) keep the website but simplify the website structure and
content significantly. The Deception Island Management Group has
started to consider some ways of simplifying the website and will
discuss these further over the next intersessional period, with the
aim of agreeing and implementing changes to the website by ATCM
47.
Volcanic surveillance
During 2023 a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between
SEGEMAR (Argentina) and IGN (Spain) was signed for the exchange
of real-time monitoring information and the generation of a
binational volcanic monitoring network for Deception Island. In this
context, during the beginning of 2024, work has been underway on
the exchange of information in real time, with both countries being
able to simultaneously receive information on all instruments in
their respective processing centres in Buenos Aires (SEGEMAR-
OAVV) and Madrid (IGN) (for more information see IP 117
submitted by Spain and Argentina).
The Argentine volcano monitoring network installed in Deception
Island in March 2023, operated by the Observatorio Argentino de
Vigilancia Volcánica - Argentine Volcanic Monitoring Observatory -
(OAVV) from the Geological and Mining Survey of Argentina
(SEGEMAR) had an excellent performance along the year, recording
almost continuously seismic and visual information, but having
some issues with the geodetic network, where a problem with some
factory configuration affected the equipment installed, which
recorded until June 2023. The first major problem noticed with the
network was detected late December, when electric power was lost
in two of the multiparametric monitoring stations (PEN and PFT),
which were later recovered at the end of January 2024 during the
austral summer season, thanks to the support of the Spanish
technical team.
The seismic real-time data acquired in Deception Island by the
Volcanic Monitoring Network, has been included in the automatic
and reviewed 24h/365d processing system at the Spanish
National Seismic Network of IGN in Madrid. During the 2023/24
Antarctic campaign, from December 31, 2023, to March 24, 2024,
426 earthquakes between magnitudes 0.2 and 2.6 (ML) have been
located by the IGN system. The main 2.6 (ML) earthquake was
located on the 19/03/2024 at 19:17 (UTC) with epicenter located
17 km northeast of Deception Island.
At the IGN vertical thermometry profile in Caliente Hill, from
installation date on March 7 to April 10, the average temperatures
recorded ranged from 44.4ºC (min) to 60.5ºC (max).
The GNSS data provided baselines and coordinates time series for
all the permanent stations. During the 2023/24 Antarctic campaign,
none of them shows significative surface deformation associated
with volcanic activity. Neither deformation maps generated by
Radar Interferometry technique from Sentinel 1 images, shown
significant deformation.
Compendium of Deception Island cartography
The available Deception Island cartography is quite limited and in
some cases mismatching. To improve and produce a new
cartography, both for scientific and management purposes, some
parties have agreed to obtain new data and prepare a unified,
including both bathymetric charts and above water map. The
cartographic service of the Spanish Army has agreed formally to
take the task, together with the Instituto Hidrográfico de la Marina
(Spanish Navy). The UK and Argentina have expressed their
intention to collaborate in the task of producing an updated high-
resolution map. For that purpose, flights will take place acquiring
high resolution images to fill the cartographic gaps in the island. It
is expected that following this cartographic effort other thematic
products will be generated, such as thermal regime at the surface,
vegetation, landforms, and volcanic risk charts, among others,
taking advantage of the excellent data acquired last decades on the
island.
Oil spill contingency assessment
Port Foster is one of the most visited areas in Antarctica and the
entry of vessels, both tourist and research (in 2024 from January
1st to March 25th at least 60 vessels have entered the caldera). This
maritime traffic increases the risk of serious fuel spills. Although all
vessels operating in Antarctica, as well as the stations, should have
a contingency plan to face a fuel spillage, the particular
characteristics of the caldera may require a special contingency
plan for this part of the island. Argentina and Spain have started
conversations regarding the necessity of this contingency plan, and
have agreed to start a series of meetings, involving different
experts, to identify the necessity and the mechanism, if needed, to
face an eventual large oil spill.
Pollution management in Port Foster
New papers published in the scientific literature warn about the
chemical pollution at Port Foster, mainly of pharmaceuticals,
organic compounds and other pollutants. Spain has initiated an
analysis of the residence time of compounds in the caldera, and has
this past season done work that will support the development of a
detailed hydrodynamic scheme for Port Foster including the
retention time. The work will potentially lead to management
advice relevant for pollution control on the island and as such form
a part of a revised version of the ASMA management plan. It is
expected that an updated value for retention time in the caldera
will be generated in next weeks and with that number we will be
able of modelling the fate of potentially deployed pollutants within
Port Foster. This tool will allow to understand the dynamics of
pollution in the caldera and perhaps to arrive to new management
tools for a better conservation of the island. When those scientific
data become available, the DIMG may develop tools for a better
conservation of Port Foster.
