Tourism and the growth of air-cruising in the Antarctic Peninsula
Tourism and the growth of air-cruising in the Antarctic Peninsula
Summary
King George Island (KGI) has become an important hub for air-
cruise operations. As operations on KGI grow, there will be a need
for more logistical support and infrastructure, leading to increased
human pressure on the surrounding land and marine areas. During
the 2023-2024 season, researchers from the PT-REPAIR program on
Antarctic tourism conducted participant observation and interviews
with key stakeholders on KGI. Field observations and interviews
showed how the rise in air-cruise operations is changing the uses
and dynamics of KGI, raising questions about the environmental
implications of this growth. ASOC has several concerns regarding
these developments. ASOC believes that this information should be
used to inform discussions on the management of air-cruise tourism.
ASOC recommends that this issue and its associated environmental,
logistical, safety and regulatory implications be included in the
dedicated process towards a comprehensive regulatory framework
for Antarctic tourism.
Introduction
The air-cruise modality, sometimes referred to as fly-sail operations,
has been increasing in Antarctica in recent years. For the season
2022-2023, IAATO reported a total of 6,114 tourists visited
Antarctica through this modality, up from 3,935 from the season
2018-2019. IAATO (2023). IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism:
The 2022-23 Season, and Preliminary Estimates for 2023-24. IP 56
submitted to ATCM 45. IAATO (2019). IAATO Overview of
Antarctic Tourism: 2018-19 Season and Preliminary Estimates for
2019-20 Season IP 140 rev. 1 submitted to ATCM 42. There may be
additional air-cruise operations related to non-IAATO pleasure craft
and sailing yachts. The air-cruise modality enables tourists to fly
into, or out of, the Antarctic Treaty area (currently predominantly
King George Island) by aircraft to board a cruise vessel, pleasure
craft, or sailing yacht from there. The increasing popularity of this
modality relies on avoiding navigation through the Drake Passage
and, therefore, resulting in a more time-convenient and comfortable
operation for tourists and tour operators. It saves the operator, as
well as the passengers, two ocean crossings of two days each. Air
cruising holds economic advantages as it saves shipping fuel costs,
it reduces risks, and enables the operation of more frequent and
shorter itineraries. The increase in the air-cruise modality raises
questions about environmental, logistical, safety, and regulatory
aspects that are currently just partially addressed and managed.
Research project findings
As part of the ANTARC-SHIP project, a component of the PT-
REPAIR program on Antarctic tourism funded by the Dutch
Organization for Scientific Research, researchers conducted a series
of observations and interviews at King George Island (KGI) during
December 2023 and January 2024. The aim was to better
understand the uses and dynamics of interrelated tourism and
science operations at this site. ANTARC-SHIP is one of the projects
of the PT-REPAIR program. The results of fieldwork provided
interesting insights about the operations at KGI, which are
summarized below.
The structure of air-cruise operations at KGI
The air-cruise modality, with flights departing from Punta Arenas,
Chile, and transferring passengers and baggage from aircraft to
vessel at KGI, has been increasing rapidly. Maxwell Bay (located in
the Southern shore of KGI) has become a key entry point to the
Antarctic
Peninsula. The ‘Teniente R. Marsh’ airstrip on KGI serves
researchers and National Antarctic Programmes (NAPs) based on
the South Shetland Islands and beyond, and has become a
commercial gateway for the air-cruise modality.
Currently, 85% of landings and take-offs on the KGI airstrip
correspond to commercial movements, mostly for connecting
tourists with cruises, and some for conducting land-based tourism
activities (e.g., site seeing, gcamping). The remaining 15% were
attributed to NAP’s operations. As reported by the Chilean Civil
Aviation Authority (DGAC, Spanish acronym) a total of 808 flight
operations occurred in 2022-2023 (806 departures AND arrivals, 2
overflights), compared to 1024 flight operations (986 departures
AND arrivals, 38 overflights) for 2023-2024 (status until March 19,
2024). As reported by IAATO (2023), 14 vessels were involved in
the air-cruise modality in the last two seasons, but there are plans
for more companies to operate under this modality for the next
seasons (pers. comm, 2024).
To facilitate the air-cruise operations, during the Austral summer,
the air carrier accommodates increasing numbers of personnel
(currently around 15 persons) on the island on the station of one
particular NAP, and makes use of facilities and infrastructures
provided by the NAP. Some facilities have been renovated to be
used for tourism purposes, while others are directly hosting and
providing lodging to company staff. The air carrier has taken over
and redeveloped a temporary structure into a passenger waiting
area with a capacity of 180 tourists. As part of the COVID
precautionary measures, a small fleet of vehicles, which includes
four small buses, has been brought to KGI and now serve the air-
cruise modality, transporting passengers and baggage from the
aircraft to the landing beach and back.
Management concerns
Even though a small proportion of the air-cruise modality is
facilitating access for researchers and logistical personnel, questions
emerge concerning the environmental, operational, and safety
aspects of the growth of commercial tourism operations under this
modality. Some local measures have been introduced concerning
aircraft maneuvers to minimize for example disturbances on birds
(e.g., take-off and landing procedures). However, the intensification
of these operations is increasing pressure and cumulative impacts
on local ecosystems, with more flights and vessel operations are
taking place every season.
Moreover, the increasing dependence of the air-cruise modality on
particular weather conditions creates pressure both day and night to
make use of available weather windows. This, in turn, reduces the
resting period of birds and wildlife located near the airstrip and
landing beaches (i.e., Ardley Island) due to the increased levels of
noise and pollution. A similar situation occurs in the marine
ecosystems surrounding Maxwell Bay where more vessels make use
of the area hosting air-cruise passengers.
At this moment there is limited information publicly available on
how various aspects of the air-cruise modality are being managed
by different stakeholders (e.g. aviation, cruising and local
arrangements). The emergence of KGI as a new hub for tourist
operations also poses an important legal issue. By utilizing the
infrastructure of an island, which is located within the Antarctic
Treaty area, are tourist operators and vessels bypassing the typical
state control mechanisms over their activities (such as the port state
jurisdiction)?
Conclusion and recommendations
While air-cruise tourists remain a relatively small proportion of the
total tourist numbers visiting Antarctica, the numbers have been
increasing rapidly and raise several questions that the ATCM should
seek to address during regular tourism discussions (WG 2) and
under the discussions towards a comprehensive regulatory
framework for tourism (WG 3). Further increases in this modality -
at KGI and potentially elsewhere - have the potential to alter the
dynamics of tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula, with corresponding
environmental and other management challenges. They also
contribute to increasing cumulative environmental impacts, both at
sites where planes land and where tourists are transferred to
landing beaches, and at nearby visitor
sites, which may see dramatic increases in the number of visitors
due to the shorter itineraries of many air-cruise operations.
If air-cruise operations on KGI continue to grow, there will be a
need for more logistical support and infrastructure, while entailing
increasing human pressure on the surrounding land and marine
areas. This raises questions about the desirability both from an
ecological viewpoint, as well as from operational, safety, and
regulatory perspectives.
ASOC has several concerns regarding these developments and their
effects on the Antarctic environment and ecosystems, including:
the rapid commercial development and growth of the air-cruise
modality and its longer-term impacts and management implications
the status of intertwined relationships and arrangements between
state agencies (including NAPs) and a commercial aviation
company for the use of buildings, facilities, infrastructures and
lodging services
the lack of publicly available information on how the activity and
its impacts are being managed by different stakeholders, such as a
more explicit inclusion of the air-cruise modality in environmental
impact assessments (EIAs) and post-activity reporting
the potential immediate and cumulative impacts on bird life and
marine mammals in Maxwell Bay and adjacent areas, particularly at
ASPA 150 Ardley Island, due to extended and intensifying
operations
the increased numbers of infrastructure, personnel, vehicles, and
equipment needed to run the operations
ASOC therefore recommends that:
The discussions on the dedicated process towards a comprehensive
framework for Antarctic tourism include the expanding air-cruise
modality.
The discussions on the comprehensive framework process examine
the desirability of the air-cruise modality, including immediate,
longer-term, and cumulative impacts and their associated
management implications.
