SCAR Lecture: "Decoding the Intricate Link Between the Tropics and
Antarctica"
SCAR Lecture: "Decoding the Intricate Link Between the Tropics and
Antarctica"
Author: Dr Sheeba Chenoli is a senior lecturer in the Department of
Geography, Universiti Malaya, and a research associate at the
National Antarctic Research Center, University Malaya. Her
research is focused on the atmospheric dynamics, climate and
weather of the tropical and polar regions, and she currently chairs
the SCAR Action Group on Tropical and Antarctic Teleconnection
(TATE). The SCAR Lecture to ATCM46 is on “Decoding the intricate
link between the Tropics and Antartica”
SCAR Lecture Abstract
Antarctica is recognized as a continent of extremes and contrasts,
characterized by climate variability that spans from year-to-year
fluctuations to decadal and multidecadal timescales. Many studies
identified the Antarctica Peninsula (AP) as one of Earth's fastest-
warming regions. It has been experiencing heat waves and the
associated dramatic collapse of major ice shelves in the last sixty
years and a cooling phase since the late 1990s. Antarctic Peninsula
climate extremes are closely tied to the occurrence of moisture from
tropical latitudes that travel to the polar region via a long, narrow
corridor of water vapour transport called atmospheric rivers, which
can weaken ice shelf stability. Recent studies have also highlighted
the importance of tropical linkages, often referred to as tropical
Antarctic teleconnections in Antarctic climate variability on
interannual to decadal timescales. They were found to affect the
climate variability in southern high latitudes non-linearly by
triggering Rossby wave trains that propagate to southern high
latitudes, influencing the Antarctic. The changes in surface
temperature of the Antarctic continent exhibit a zonally asymmetric
pattern with rapid warming over the Antarctic Peninsula and West
Antarctica and insignificant changes over East Antarctica until
2000. However, the asymmetric changes between East and West
Antarctica have reversed since the late 20th century. While the
primary driver of observed climate change is the increase in
greenhouse gas emissions, the distinct zonal asymmetry seen in
these changes can be attributed specifically to tropical Antarctic
teleconnection. The coupling of tropical forcing with the Southern
Annular Mode (SAM) also impacts weather and climate throughout
the Southern Hemisphere, generating extreme weather events and
disasters in subtropical regions resulting from two-interactions
between tropical and Antarctic regions. This talk aims to
demonstrate how these teleconnections played a role in the
observed changes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, including
regional rapid surface warming, the expansion of sea ice before
2015 followed by sudden reduction, alterations in ocean heat
content, and accelerated thinning of most of the Antarctic ice sheet.
Over the last several decades, the scientific understanding of
tropical influences on the Antarctic climate has improved
significantly, which have important implications for understanding
and projecting future changes in Antarctica, particularly ice shelf
stability. However, many aspects of these linkages remain not well
understood and demand additional research by employing a
combination of observational, model, and proxy-based climate
records. Coordinated, internationally collaborative and
transdisciplinary research and observational efforts will be critical
to achieve this.
