Annual Report 2023/2024 for the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
COMNAP Annual Report 2023/2024
June 2023–May 2024
Key Outcomes: COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) 35 (2023)
Our first in-person AGM since 2019 (27–29 June 2023, Hobart,
Australia) with online participation also made possible. In total, 250
representatives from Member and Observer programs and invited
expert organisations participated. Business, Regional, and Expert
Group sessions were the main components. Before the AGM,
COMNAP also convened the 5th Antarctic Search and Rescue (SAR)
Workshop (23–24 June; see IP001), the 20th COMNAP Symposium
“Antarctic Innovations & Collaborations” (26 June; see BP003) and
hosted the meeting of the Joint COMNAP/SCAR Expert Group on
Human Biology and Medicine (25 June). (See Tables 3, 4 and 5).
New Member (Table 1) Portugal’s National Antarctic Program,
under the national lead agency of the Portuguese Fundação para a
Ciência e a Tecnologia, was accepted by consensus as a COMNAP
Member. The AGM recognised the excellent internationally
collaborative Antarctic research and educational projects promoted
and supported by the Portuguese Polar Program (PROPOLAR).
COMNAP is 33 Member and 4 Observer programs.
Expert Groups (Table 2c) Programs freely exchanged and further
developed their expertise during seven Expert Group sessions,
covering: safety, air operations, marine platforms, environmental
protection, critical technologies, education & outreach, science
facilitation, training, diversity & inclusivity, and medicine. National
Antarctic Programs are actively supporting and coordinating their
national strategies and international large-scale projects to provide
globally important data from all Antarctic regions, via land
operations at stations, by way of traverse/field operations, and via
airborne & marine surveys through the expertise of their personnel.
New Projects (Table 2b) 1. Working Group on Equity, Diversity, and
Inclusivity (EDI) & Prevention of Harassment Project, focuses on
people being welcomed, safe and respected in the Antarctic.
Members agreed to create a “hub” with tools, training modules, and
policy examples to improve understanding and prevent harassment
in Antarctica (see WP007).
2. COMNAP RINGS Collaboration Project, complimentary to the
SCAR RINGS Action Group, recognised that no single nation could
carry out complete airborne geophysical surveys Antarctic-wide and
that collection of the data would require international collaboration
that the COMNAP community could provide. The purpose of the
COMNAP Project is to facilitate the exchange of information and to
coordinate and implement the logistics that is approved by
individual National Antarctic Programs through their science
support processes. Lessons learned from the initial RINGS survey in
DML (ATCM XLV WP029) carried out in the 2023/24 Antarctic
season will be shared through the COMNAP Project and will be
applied to future surveys.
The AGM completed work on the Efficiency Task Force (IP051) and
on the Earthquake, Tsunami, and Volcanic Events Awareness
Projects.
Regional Groups (Table 2d) In six regional sessions, National
Antarctic Programs exchanged 2023/24 pre-season information.
National Antarctic Programs are actively supporting and
coordinating international efforts to provide globally important data
Antarctic-wide. It was also noted that some National Antarctic
Programs are at, or exceeding, their normal capacity for Antarctic
support due to the COVID-19 pandemic impacting the previous
three seasons and the number of modernisation of infrastructures’
projects underway.
National Antarctic Programs continue their leadership and
commitment to environment protection contributing to
understanding of Polar Code requirements, starting consideration of
synthetic aviation fuel, and looking at reduction of noise and dust
produced from modernisations while continuing to improve
efficiencies in operations. The AGM agreed that any program that is
monitoring or has data to understand noise and dust generated from
construction activities is encouraged to share that information
through COMNAP.
COVID-19 Global Health Emergency Ends
National Antarctic Programs continued to apply a range of protocols
based on COMNAP guidance during deployment of expeditioners to
Antarctica and while expeditioners were based in Antarctica across
the 2022/23 Antarctic season. On May 6, 2023, when the WHO
declared that the COVID-19 pandemic was no longer a global health
emergency, COMNAP considered the status of our COVID-19 ad hoc
Subcommittee. The COMNAP EXCOM noted the Subcommittee had
admirably achieved its objective to proactively advise the COMNAP
EXCOM for the duration of the emergency and, with the end of the
global emergency declared, the ad hoc Subcommittee was
disbanded.
National Antarctic Programs removed their pre-deployment
quarantine requirements while also implementing a range of
measures to reduce introducing infectious disease to Antarctica and
to support health of expeditioners. COMNAP COVID-19 guidance
remains important generally in understanding preparedness for
infectious disease in the Antarctic and many lessons learned are
now being applied in the context of High Pathogenicity Avian Flu
(HPAI) and human health.
Preparedness, Response, and Increased Collaboration due to the
Heightened Risk of HPAI (see joint WP047 and IP004)
COMNAP prepared guidance and distributed that on 30 August
2023 in time for pre-season preparations. Recognising that the
likely vector would be naturally migrating seabirds into the
Northern Peninsula region, National Antarctic Programs reviewed
and updated their biosecurity protocols to avoid introduction of the
virus to Antarctica through human activity.
As the first suspected and confirmed cases were reported in the sub-
Antarctic region, heightened vigilance was undertaken in the
Antarctic. National Antarctic Programs participated in observation,
collection of samples, testing, reporting and information exchange.
The first confirmed Antarctic cases were reported on 24 February
2024 through a joint statement by Argentina’s and Spain’s
Programs. Programs continue to operate under a heightened
vigilance model and are collaboratively contributing to
understanding how the virus is naturally spreading in Antarctic
wildlife.
International Collaboration
Antarctic work is highly internationally collaborative, such
collaboration is at the heart of COMNAP. Just a few examples from
the COMNAP EXCOM (Table 2a) programs for the 2023/24 season
include:
Bulgaria: RV St. St. Cyril and Methodius (RSV 421) carried 60
scientists and 25 tons of cargo for other programs & provided
support at St. Kliment Ohridski Station for three other programs’
researchers.
Chile: Implemented two real-time HPAI PCR analysis platforms at
their stations and accepted samples from other programs. Provided
support for two other programs’ scientists onboard R/SV Betanzo;
provided on station support for five other programs’ scientists.
Provided logistical support, facilitating 161 passengers via shared
charter ships and planes for 14 other programs.
Czech Republic: Provided on station support for one other
program’s scientists at Johann Gregor Mendel Station and served
the global science community with expedition data and samples.
Japan: Convened 14th Symposium on Polar Science with scientists
from 17 countries participating. Two atmospheric scientists joined
JARE65 at Syowa Station from another program. JARE65
hydrography team deployed marine buoys for another country’s
Bureau of Meteorology. Syowa Station supported RINGS DML
flights, a ten-country collaboration, with weather reporting and
local communications.
New Zealand: Sensitivity of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet to 2
degrees Celsius of warming (SWAIS 2C) research project involved
joint logistics support, including traverse and drilling, and a range
of other support through a collaboration made up of ten programs
and involving 100 researchers. The Christchurch airlink is a long-
standing international partnership. Twelve New Zealand marine
scientists were provided support on the RV Laura Bassi during a late
season Ross Sea Region research voyage.
Spain: Supported scientists at Gabriel de Castilla Station from three
other programs; at Juan Carlos I Station from two other programs.
RV Hesperides transported personnel and cargo from another
program. Implemented a real-time HPAI PCR analysis platform,
with in-situ sequencing protocols, and accepted wildlife samples
from other programs for testing. Spain with Chile co-convened the
HPAI Technical Expert Group for the Peninsula that now also
includes three additional programs.
COMNAP Products and Tools
Database (secure) & Website (public)
The database is populated by Member programs with facility, vessel
and contact point information. Portions of the data is shared with
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Public data available from website
and:
https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-antarctic-
facilities/releases https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/
comnap-antarctic-vessels.
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (e-AFIM)
COMNAP e-AFIM general information
e-AFIM is a handbook (PDF) of aeronautical information published
as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica (ATCM XLIV
Resolution 3 (2022)). Releases were: 22-03 (15 March 2023); 23-01
(27 September 2023); 23-02 (30 October 2023); 23-03 (15
December 2023); & 23-04 (15 March 2024).
Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Operator’s
Handbook COMNAP RPAS Operator’s Handbook
Reviewed and updated, current version is Version 8 (18 December
2023).
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) COMNAP Asset Tracking
System general information
A voluntary information exchange system developed by the
Australian Antarctic Division to display vessel and aircraft
positional information for situation-awareness in the Antarctic
Treaty Area. For 2023/24 we investigated sharing of FlightRadar24
and IAATO Redport data in the system. That work is on-going.
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
Manual of contact details to which ATCM Recommendation X-3
refers. Access is via the COMNAP database and the CATS. Updates
to the ATOM are in real-time via database updates.
SAR SAR Authorities/RCCs As per ATCM Resolution 4 (2013),
COMNAP provides a webpage of all RCC contacts.
www.comnap.aq
@comnap1
YouTube Channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/
UCjzR1uM_ZP62eEy6QLCbHxw
Attachment: COMNAP Additional Information 2023/2024
Formally established in September 1988 to develop and promote
best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the
Antarctic, 2023 marked the 35th year of COMNAP. Our
headquarters, the COMNAP Secretariat, is in renovated offices at
the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand (MOU to
Sept 2027). Guest offices for visitors/short-term stays are always
available.
Table 1: Our Membership
Member programs from 33 Antarctic Treaty and Environmental
Protocol countries:
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Czech Republic
Ecuador
Finland
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Belarus
Republic of Korea
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Türkiye
In addition, four Observer programs from:
Colombia
Malaysia
Switzerland
Venezuela
Table 2: Our Leadership
a. The Executive Committee (EXCOM) is six elected officers plus the
appointed Executive Secretary:
EXCOM Officers
Topic Portfolios
Term
Chair: Antonio Quesada (CPE)
Science Facilitation, Medical
2021–24
Vice Chairs:
Gen Hashida (NIPR)
Environmental Protection, Marine Platforms
2020–24
Pavel Kapler (CARP)
Advancing Critical Technologies, Safety
2023–25
Dragomir Mateev (BAI)
Education, Outreach & Training, Environmental Protection
2021–24
Wendy Rubio Díaz (INACH)
Advancing Critical Technologies, Education, Outreach & Training
2023–26
Simon Trotter (ANZ)
Safety
2023–26
Executive Secretary: Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Air Operations, Medical
to 2027
b. COMNAP Projects:
Project Leaders
Project
Robb Clifton (AAD)
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS)
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Heightened Risk of Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Andrea Colombo
COMNAP Database
Stephanie Short (NSF USAP)
Improving Equity, Diversity & Inclusivity and Preventing
Harassment in Antarctica
John Guldahl (NPI)
COMNAP RINGS Collaboration
Charlton Clark (AAD) & Greg Johnston; Andrea Colombo
Antarctic Search & Rescue (SAR) Workshop 5; SAR RCCs
Information Share
c. COMNAP Expert Groups:
Expert Group Leaders
Expert Group Topic
Özgün Oktar (TÜBITAK) & Julius Rix (BAS)
Advancing Critical Technologies
Rod Arnold (BAS) & Sven Lidström (NPI)
Air Operations - includes the Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) Working Group
Ceisha Poirot (ANZ)
Environmental Protection
Andrea Peña Aguirre (INACH)
Education, Outreach & Training
Giichiro Ohno (NIPR)
Joint Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine
Miguel Ojeda (CPE)
Marine Platforms
Seonung Choi (KOPRI)
Safety
Yan Ropert-Coudert (IPEV)
Science Facilitation
d. COMNAP Regional Break-out Groups:
Regional Group Conveners
Collaboration Region (informal)
Uwe Nixdorf (AWI)
Dronning Maud Land
Charlton Clark (AAD)
East Antarctica
Margaret Knuth (NSF USAP)
High Plateau
Mandi Livesey (AAD)
Larsemann Hills Management Group
Agnieszka Kruszewska (PAS)
Peninsula
Gianluca Bianchi Fasani (ENEA)
Ross Sea
Table 3: Meetings
From 1 June 2023 through 31 May 2024
The COMNAP Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop 5 (hybrid
format), Hobart, Australia, 23 & 24 June 2023.
The joint COMNAP & SCAR EXCOM Meeting (hybrid format),
Hobart, Australia, 25 June 2023.
The 20th COMNAP Symposium “Innovations & Collaborations”
(hybrid format) Hobart, Australia, 26 June 2023.
The 35th COMNAP AGM (hybrid format), Hobart, Australia, 27–29
June 2023.
COMNAP Regional Breakout Group Update sessions (online): Ross
Sea, 17 October 2023; East Antarctica, 18 October 2023; Peninsula,
15 November 2023.
COMNAP EXCOM Meetings: 31 August 2023 (online); 18 September
2023 (online); 2–4 November 2023, Tachikawa, Japan; 18
December 2023 (online); 19 February 2024 (online); 20 May 2024,
Kochi, India (margins of the ATCM).
Upcoming
The 36th COMNAP AGM (2024), hosted by Dirección Nacional del
Antártico, Argentina, 14, 15 & 16 August 2024. Will include two
half day workshops: 1. Education & Outreach; & 2. Traverse for
Science Support.
Joint COMNAP/SCAR Mini-Symposium “A Promising Future for
Antarctic Research: Facilitation of circumpolar initiatives through
science/science support partnerships”, SCAR Open Science
Conference, Pucón, Chile, 20 August 2024.
Table 4: COMNAP representatives/participants in other fora
Antonio Quesada, COMNAP Chair & MNAP Spanish Polar
Committee (CPE), with COMNAP Vice Chair & Bulgarian Antarctic
Institute DMNAP Dragomir Mateev, Invited panellists on
“Observations on Climate Change in Antarctica”, Bulgarian Pavilion
at COP28, Dubai, UAE, 10 December 2023. Invited presenter
“Importance of International Collaboration and the Role of
COMNAP”, One Planet – Polar Summit, Paris, France, 9 November
2023. Quoted in “Bird-flu disrupts Antarctic penguin studies”,
Nature News, Carrisa Wong, 15 March 2024, doi: https://
doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-00807-0.
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore, Executive Secretary, Invited panellist
on “Women in Leadership” forum, International Antarctic Centre,
21 September 2023. Invited speaker “International Collaboration
and the Role of COMNAP”, 28 September 2023. Invited presenter
“Importance of International Collaboration and the Role of
COMNAP”, 4 October 2023. Moderator (virtual) jointly with Yan
Ropert-Coudert (MNAP IPEV), Antonio Quesada (COMNAP Chair &
CPE MNAP) and Jennifer Mercer (USA NSF) for “A singular work in
endangered regions: Statement by polar operators”, One Planet-
Polar Summit, Paris, France, 9 November 2023. COMNAP Delegate
to the IAATO AGM, 22–25 April 2024, Annapolis, USA.
Andrea Colombo, Engagement, Information & Project Manager,
Invited Lecturer, Gateway Antarctica’s Post Graduate Certificate in
Antarctic Studies, “The Role of COMNAP in the Antarctic Treaty
System”, 22 November 2023. Media interview, Buson MBC,
“COMNAP’s role in International Cooperation”, 20 February 2024.
Presentation on COMNAP Award 2024 for Early Career Persons,
APECS Oceania, 25 March 2024.
Andrew Fleming, British Antarctic Survey, COMNAP representative
to the 24th Meeting of the International Ice Charting Working
Group (IICWG), 25 September 2023, Cambridge, England.
Agnieszka Kruszewska, MNAP Polish National Antarctic Program,
COMNAP Representative on the SCAR EDI Action Group.
Dirk Mengedoht, Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for
Polar and Marine Research, COMNAP representative to the Forum
of Arctic Research Operators (FARO) at the Arctic Science Summit
Week (ASSW), presented “COMNAP: An Update”, 21 March 2024,
Edinburgh, Scotland.
Table 5: COMNAP Awards
Rafael Gonzalez-Serrano, Postdoctoral Researcher, Centro de
Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO), Madrid, Spain was
awarded the COMNAP Antarctic Fellowship 2023 to support
Rafael’s project “Viral metagenomics of extant and ancient viruses
from Antarctic soils” in a research project exchange to work at
University of Waikato, New Zealand.
