Competent authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Competent Authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Summary
ATCM XLII in 2019 established a permanent web-based forum for
competent authorities to discuss tourism regulatory activities, and
exchange knowledge and experiences. The meeting agreed that the
forum would be convened by the working group chair responsible
for the tourism agenda item. This paper reports on 2022/23
discussions, including a topic-specific informal online workshop,
hosted by Germany’s competent authority. The paper summarises
the work of the forum since ATCM XLII in 2019, products used to
support the discussions, and options for ongoing work.
2023/24 intersessional period
The forum operated under the mandate provided by ATCM XLII,
and in line with the scope and purpose agreed by participants
(below).
Additional input on the five priority issues previously identified
(listed below) was invited and received. A topic-specific informal
online workshop was arranged to provide for more detailed
discussion of scientific activities associated with tourism activities.
Further views on how to progress discussions and engender
cooperation were shared.
Informal online workshop
At the ATCM in Helsinki (2023) a number of Parties participated in
margins discussions about the work of the Competent Authorities
forum, and noted that it would be useful to have some topic-
specific, informal online workshop sessions, to share information,
experiences, and best practice approaches, to support of the work of
competent authorities and communication between them.
Participants noted that there did not need to be extensive
preparation, and that sessions could be relatively short.
Germany’s competent authority subsequently offered to host an
informal online workshop on the topic of scientific activities
associated with tourism activities, one of the five priority issues
identified by forum participants in previous discussion. The
Convener circulated an invitation to competent authorities,
including a concept note and previously prepared topic summary.
The workshop was held on 5 March 2024, using the WebEx
platform. Around 30 representatives from 15 national competent
authorities participated. The workshop commenced with a scene-
setting presentation from Germany as host, followed by discussion
moderated by the Convener. Consistent with the informal approach,
and the focus on sharing experiences and engendering cooperation,
the workshop did not seek to agree a report, or make
recommendations. Consistent with the agreed scope and purpose of
the forum, participants were encouraged to take the workshop
discussions into consideration in identifying possible ideas for
taking forward to the ATCM, on a national basis.
Participants discussed their experiences in considering science
activities associated with tourism activities. As previous discussions
have indicated, a diverse range of such activities have taken place
or been proposed, and participants made reference to potential new
activities. Differing approaches to how to assess and authorise
multiple activities (in this case including science) occurring on the
same expedition - sometimes described as ‘nested permit
arrangements’ - were discussed. The importance of communication
with other relevant competent authorities was noted.
The workshop was successful in achieving the objectives of sharing
information, experiences and practices, and stimulating discussion
of approaches to authorising and permitting science activities
associated with tourism activities.
Noting that this informal workshop provided the opportunity for a
more focused discussion, the competent authorities forum could
consider closing discussion on this issue and moving on to focused
discussion of other priority issues.
In addition to advancing the discussion of the topic, the workshop
demonstrated the utility of informal web-based workshops. The
Convener notes that the organisational requirements for Germany
and for the Convener were relatively modest, preparations on the
part of individual participants were not burdensome, and future
informal online workshops could use a similar approach.
Participants expressed support for further workshops of this type to
consider additional priority issues.
Discussions since ATCM XLII (2019)
Noting the change in Convenership that will occur following this
meeting, the Convener provides a summary of work in the forum
since commencement in 2019. Information Paper reports by the
Convener submitted to the ATCM provide additional detail: IP58
ATCMXLIII (2021), IP79 ATCM XXIV (2022), and IP91 ATCMXLV
(2023). A summary of progress over that period follows.
Statement of scope and purpose
Within the mandate established by ATCM XLII, participants
discussed details of the scope and purpose of discussions, and
agreed on a statement (below) to guide work in the forum.
Summary list of issues of interest to the competent authorities
The group discussed the range of issues that have been previously
raised, as part of a process to identify priority issues. A number of
potential new issues have also been raised in discussions. A
summary list of issues is available in the forum.
Identification of five priority issues for initial discussion
Participants shared views on their priorities for discussion within
the forum. A list of five priority issues was agreed. The group noted
that other issues could be added or prioritised at any point as
necessary. These issues are (not in priority order):
Harmonisation of standards
Nested permits / permits where multiple activities are authorised
by different Parties on the same expedition
Compliance and enforcement issues of common interest to the
competent authorities (excluding arrangements under national
legislation)
Issues arising from new activities or those seldom conducted, and
potentially risky activities
Scientific activities associated with tourism activities
Preparation of topic summaries
To assist in discussion of priority issues, the Convener provided
topic summaries for each issue. These summaries were intended to
ensure participants had ready reference to previous consideration
and discussion of the topic in the ATCM and related forums, and
any relevant ATCM tools or arrangements (for example
communication and cooperation mechanisms). The Convener has
provided opportunities for review, input and discussion, and input
from a number of Competent Authorities was received. The topic
summaries are available to Parties on the web-based forum.
Discussion of opportunities for enhanced cooperation
Ideas and views on opportunities for enhanced cooperation between
competent authorities have been shared. In addition to the forum
itself, these have included: ad hoc meetings of competent authority
representatives, including in the margins of the ATCM; building
working-level contacts between competent authorities, including
through email lists; theme-based webinars; and videoconferences.
The group has used the web-based forum, informal ad-hoc meetings
in the margins of the ATCM, and an informal online workshop to
support discussions. A range of views have been expressed on the
potential to use email contact lists to support communication and
discussion. There continues to be interest in face to face meetings
(in the margins of the ATCM and/or separately convened).
Summary and conclusions
The competent authorities discussion forum has provided valuable
opportunities for discussion of key issues, and for cooperation
between competent authorities, and there has been wide
participation from competent authorities. An informal online
workshop was particularly useful in providing for focused
discussion of one priority issue.
Next steps for work in the forum might include:
ongoing review to identify emerging issues, maintain the list of
issues of interest, and confirm the priority of issues, to ensure the
forum focuses on the most important;
updating topic summaries for key issues to reflect current state of
play, by including discussions and developments since 2022 in the
ATCM, relevant papers, workshops (including the March 2023 Paris
workshop), and contributions to the forum;
continued use of the web-based forum;
further topic-specific informal online workshops to discuss priority
issues;
considering the option of selecting one issue for discussion in the
web-based forum, and one additional issue for an informal online
workshop; and
further discussion of potential face to face meetings, ‘working level’
email lists, and other modes of discussion.
Scope and purpose:
The competent authorities will consider issues related to
authorisation of tourism and non-governmental activities that have
general relevance for most competent authorities, with a view to:
identifying specific challenges and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation in the implementation of the Protocol, ATCM Measures
and Resolutions;
identifying for ATCM consideration emerging issues related to
tourism regulation; and
formulating advice to the ATCM, via delegations, on specific
relevant issues related to the evaluation and authorisation of tourist
and non-governmental activities.
The forum will be convened by the ATCM working group chair
responsible for the tourism agenda item. Discussion will be guided
by a work plan, and will address issues as agreed by participants,
including new and emerging issues as necessary. The convened
forum is open to participation by all national competent authorities
and wide participation is encouraged. The convened forum is not
intended to replace the other web-based forums for discussion and
consultation on specific tourism and non-government activity
proposals.
