Air Capacities on King George Island Landing strip maintenance at
the “Teniente Rodolfo Marsh M.” Airfield
Air Capabilities on King George Island
Landing strip maintenance at the
“Teniente Rodolfo Marsh M.” Airfield
Summary
This document presents the generalities and implications in the
field of air operations, linked to the maintenance of the landing
strip at the “Teniente Marsh" airfield on King George Island, the
direct effect of which will result in the use of the airfield with
restrictions, where the opening and closing dates of the airfield will
be informed in due course.
Introduction
Thanks to its particular geographical characteristics and the
permanent interest of the State, Chile is the only country in the
world that maintains and controls air connectivity capacity
throughout the year, including the winter season of the South
American continent. This makes it possible to provide, among
others, valuable support to the objectives of the national Antarctic
policy, favoured by its status as a gateway to Antarctica, thanks to
the exploitation of the capacities achieved by the Punta Arenas –
“Presidente Frei" Antarctic Air Base axis, on King George Island,
favouring not only a permanent and effective presence, but also
providing logistical support in aeronautical matters in support of
national scientific activity, developed by the Chilean Antarctic
Institute (INACH), as well as also providing the opportunity to
support the Antarctic programmes of other countries.
Likewise, the air operation capabilities thanks to the operation of
the “Teniente Marsh" Airfield, provide support as a platform in
consideration of the fulfilment of the international responsibilities
of Air Search and Rescue SAR, aeromedical evacuations, from the
Drake Sea to beyond the Antarctic Circle.
In this context, on 12 February 1980, the landing strip of the
“Teniente Marsh" Airfield was opened, located at the “Presidente
Frei" Antarctic Air Base, which at the time of its construction had a
length of 900 metres, allowing the operation of smaller aircraft and
others of greater size and capacity, such as C-130 aircraft, which
currently operate regularly throughout the year.
Current situation
Over the years, the runway has received improvement work, both in
the visual aids with which the airfield operates, as well as in its
taxiway surface, which was extended to currently reach a length of
almost 1,290 metres, and a width of almost 39 metres.
As can be assumed, the more than 40 years of uninterrupted
operation of the runway, together with the wear and tear of its
surface as a result of the changes in meteorological conditions that
have meant the presence of rainwater during the summer (initially
there was only ice on its surface), have caused the surface layer of
compacted gravel to suffer from erosion, which has caused
irregularities in the uniformity of its upper layer, increased by the
load exerted by the aircraft at the time of operating on this runway,
particularly during take-off and landing.
As a result of the above, the General Directorate of Civil
Aeronautics (DGAC) has developed and financed a major repair and
maintenance project for the runway, which will be subjected to in-
depth intervention, mainly on its taxiway surface.
These works seek not only to even out the surface, but also to
achieve a better safety characteristic for the operation of the
aircraft that regularly operate there. The jobs would basically
consist of:
Surface removal in stages of the taxiway surface, followed by
compacting.
Placement of paving stones at the thresholds of the runway,
assimilating the work and experiences obtained in other airfields
located in the extreme south of Chile, which have operating
conditions with a certain similarity to those presented at the
“Teniente Marsh" Airfield.
Placement of paving stones on the runway apron.
All of these works involve an investment of around USD 8 million,
with a time horizon that would range from November 2025 for the
start of works, until February 2027, the estimated date of
completion of the work.
The work to be carried out will require the application of
restrictions for the operation of the airfield, reducing the
availability of operating windows during some summer periods,
which will involve close coordination between Antarctic operators
and the national aeronautical authority.
In this context, it is necessary to specify that the limitations and
restrictions to which the “Teniente Marsh" Airfield will be subjected
are only temporary and limited, all of them necessary to be able to
carry out efficient work and thus make it possible to update the
standards of the landing strip, thus extending its useful life and the
capacity to support the National Antarctic Programme and the
foreign Antarctic Programmes that operate through it.
Finally, the purpose of this information document is that national
Antarctic programmes, as well as their state and private operators,
can plan their operations on the Punta Arenas – Presidente Frei
Base axis, as from another Antarctic airfield, on the general dates
indicated, considering that air operations will be restricted at the
airfield during the development of the runway repair works.
