Study of the geochemistry of fluids of the volcanic-hydrothermal
system of Deception Island
Study of the geochemistry of fluids of the volcanic-hydrothermal
system of Deception Island
Information Paper presented by Argentina
Summary
This document briefly reports the work being carried out to study
the geochemistry of fluids of the volcanic-hydrothermal system of
Deception Island, within the framework of the project carried out
by the Study and Monitoring Group of Active Volcanoes (GESVA),
belonging to the University of Buenos Aires and CONICET
(Argentina), together with the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA).
This project aims to provide information on the current state of the
volcanic-hydrothermal system and its behavior, in order to
contribute to the monitoring of the island and the evaluation of
volcanic risk in the region. Argentina recommends the ATCM to
recognise the value of these studies to contribute to the assessment
of risks associated to volcanic activity in the region.
Objectives
This project focuses on the study of the volcanic-hydrothermal
system of Deception Island, in the South Shetland Islands. This
volcano has an active eruptive history with more than 20 eruptive
events in the last 200 years. However, the studies necessary to carry
out an adequate task of geochemical monitoring of volcanic fluids
(gaseous emissions and thermal waters) are still scarce. Active
volcanic systems linked to marine environments and in regions with
high precipitation rates present important hydrothermal systems,
usually developing crater lagoons and geothermal areas with
permanent emission of fumarolic and/or diffuse gases, which
compositions and changes provide essential information to
understand the characteristics and behavior of a volcanic system.
The general objective of the research is the comprehensive
geochemical and isotopic characterization of fluid emissions. In this
way, it intends to contribute with 2 fundamental aspects in order to
understand the dynamics of the volcanic system of Deception
Island:
the generation of models that explain the processes that control the
development and behavior of the volcanic-hydrothermal system;
and the generation of compositional baselines for adequate
monitoring in future geochemical monitoring work.
Background
Deception Island (62°57'S; 60°38'W) is a unique Antarctic island,
with important natural, scientific, historical, educational and
aesthetic values. For this reason, scientific groups, as well as
numerous tourist ships arrive at the island during the Antarctic
summer, a situation that considerably increases the volcanic risk of
the region.
Deception Island is located northwest of the Antarctic Peninsula and
is one of the youngest islands in the Mar de la Flota- “Fleet Sea”-
(also known as Bransfield Strait) and the South Shetland
archipelago. From a geological point of view, Deception Island is a
stratovolcano with an active
Quaternary volcanic caldera that has a central depression invaded
by the sea, known as Port Foster.
The island hosts a magmatic-hydrothermal system, which has
developed a series of geothermally anomalous zones mainly on the
internal coast of the island: Primero de Mayo Bay (also known as
Fumarole Bay), Pendulum Cove and Whalers Bay, to mention the
most important. The manifestations located in Primero de Mayo Bay
constitute one of the largest fumarole fields on the island, with
temperatures of up to 90°C and emissions enriched in volcanic-
hydrothermal gases, while the remaining areas have slightly lower
temperatures (up to 60ºC) and emissions composed mainly of water
vapor.
More than 20 eruptions have been recorded in the last two
centuries, including the eruptions of 1967, 1969 and 1970. The
eruptions of the 1960s, as well as the episodes of instability
identified during the years 1992, 1999 and 2014–2015,
demonstrate that the volcanic system is still very active and that a
new eruptive event is very plausible. In this sense, any study aimed
at providing information on the current state of the volcanic-
hydrothermal system and its behavior is of fundamental interest for
future volcanic risk and monitoring tasks, with regard to the
safeguarding of the technical-scientific groups and tourists who visit
the island every year.
Working hypothesis
The working hypothesis is based on considering that volcanic
eruptions are preceded by migration of fluids to the surface through
a system of fractures. Magmatic bodies, through the volatiles they
release, are permanently transmitting to the surface the
characteristics and state of the deep magmatic environment. Fluid
manifestations provide valuable information about the
characteristics of the deep (magmatic – host rock) and shallow
(hydro-atmospheric) components that make up a volcanic-
hydrothermal system and that control the compositional
characteristics of its emissions.
Understanding the characteristics and dynamics of volcanic gases
becomes particularly relevant considering that they are the main
engine of eruptive events. This movement of deep fluids can be
detected on the surface from the physical-chemical variations of
gaseous emissions and thermal waters. The recognition and
interpretation of variations in these signals is essential to
understanding the behavior and evolution of the volcanic-
hydrothermal system and for the identification of eruptive
precursors.
For this reason, the study of the manifestations of volcanic fluids
allows us to determine the characteristics of the source of deep
magmatic generation, characterize the state of the surface emissions
feeding system, determine a pattern of geochemical behavior and
provide an invaluable contribution to the monitoring of the active
volcanoes.
Methodology and work technique
For the development of this project, the work carried out involves
sampling, measurements and analysis detailed below:
• Sampling of fumarolic gases and analysis for the compositional
determination of the majority gases CO2, H2S and H2O, in the
laboratory of Decepción Base, Argentina.
• Gas measurement in the field with gas detection equipment
(Multi-GAS) developed by the National Atomic Energy Commission
(CNEA), Argentina.
• Sampling of fumarolic gases to perform total chemistry analysis of
major and minor gases and isotopic composition (in the areas of
Primero de Mayo Bay, Caliente Hill, Whalers Bay, Mount
Pond and Salvador Beach). These samples are analyzed in
collaboration with the University of Florence and the University of
Milan, Italy.
• Alkalinity analysis of thermal, meteoric and marine waters, carried
out in the laboratory of Decepción Base, Argentina.
• Measurement and mapping of diffuse CO2 flux and soil
temperature in thermal areas.
• Diffuse soil gas sampling for isotopic analysis (Primero de Mayo
Bay and Caliente Hill). These samples are analyzed in collaboration
with the University of Florence, Italy.
• Sampling of sediments from thermal areas.
The analyses carried out in the Decepción Base laboratory consist of
quantitative determinations of alkalinity (mg/L CaCO3) in water
samples, and determinations of the contents of CO2, H2S and H2O
(% w/w) in gas samples.
Preliminary Results
The survey and sampling of fumarolic gases carried out since the
2021-2022 Antarctic Summer Campaign and until the current year
allowed the recognition of emissions with temperatures of up to 85
°C. It was determined that currently only Whalers Bay and Primero
de Mayo Bay present emissions dominated by CO2 (carbon dioxide)
and H2S (hydrogen sulfide), while the rest of the emission areas
seem to present a predominance only of CO2.
The thermal and diffuse gas mapping of the soil allowed us to
recognize and delimit in detail areas of thermal anomalies with
diffuse CO2 emission from the soil in Primero de Mayo Bay,
Caliente Hill and in the lagoon surrounding Decepción Base
(Argentina). Emission of CO2 from the water was also detected in
the coastal areas of Pendulum Cove, Whalers Bay and Telefon Bay.
Soil CO2 fluxes in the thermal areas of Deception Island are in the
range between 0 - >1,000 g m-2 day-1, while soil temperatures in
these areas are in the range of 2 to 60ºC, excluding the emission
points of the fumaroles.
The determination of pH, temperature and conductivity parameters
made it possible to characterize the meteoric waters, thermal waters
and seawater of the island, in order to complement the laboratory
analyses. The degree of acidity of the island's waters is close to
neutral (pH ~7), with a strong dominance of marine and/or
meteoric water. Meteoric waters, coming from precipitation and
melting ice, have lower conductivity values (0.1 – 1.1 mS)
compared to seawater (8.2 to 66.5 mS). In the areas of Pendulum
Cove, Whalers Bay and Salvador Beach, there are areas of thermal
waters between 25ºC and 60ºC with pH values slightly lower than
the rest of the water bodies on the island. Likewise, through
analysis of total alkalinity [mg/L CaCO3], considerable variations
(105 – 805 mg/L CaCO3) were identified between different sectors.
The highest alkalinity values were detected on the beaches where
the highest emissions of gaseous CO2 were recorded.
It should be noted that the differences in the physical-chemical
parameters between the different thermal areas of the island
suggest the occurrence of different processes controlling the
different emission zones, which implies dissimilar risk conditions in
each of them. For this reason, detailed monitoring of them is
considered essential to study their evolution.
The results obtained so far by this project have allowed us to begin
the development of a compositional and thermal baseline of the
volcanic-hydrothermal fluids of the island, which becomes more
adjusted and robust with the incorporation of new data each year.
The values determined during the current period of calm (GREEN
alert) allow defining geochemical and isotopic stability thresholds,
whose variations contribute significantly to monitoring tasks to
identify eruptive precursor signals in the event of eventual
destabilization of the volcanic system.
Concluding remarks
Argentina recommends the ATCM to recognise the value of these
studies to contribute to the assessment of risks associated to
volcanic activity in the region and to keep management measures of
natural hazards continually updated, with the aim to ensure
operators can carry out their activities in the area in a safely
manner.
