Education & Outreach activities of Brazil in 2023/2024
Education & Outreach activities of Brazil in 2023/2024
Introduction
The paper outlines the education and outreach activities undertaken
by the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) during the
2023-2024 season.
1st Brazilian Polar Film Festival
The first Brazilian Polar Film Festival, organized by the Federal
University of ABC as part of the program of activities to promote
polar sciences, with support from the National Council for Scientific
and Technological Development (CNPq), was held in September
2023 in São Paulo.
The following films were selected for exhibition:
The Continent of Extremes (Brazil) Chronicles of the End of the
World (Brazil)
Manu Tere - An Odyssey in Antarctica (Brazil) Marcelo Bosi
Uruguay Antarctic 360º (Uruguay)
Igor's Adventures in Antarctica (Brazil)
62º South, A Documentary in Search of the Antarctic Spirit
(Uruguay)
Polar Route (Brazil)
Cryosphere 1 (10 Years of Science in the Heart of Antarctica)
(Brazil) Antarctic Exploration in the 21st Century: The Rediscovery
of the Barros Islands (Brazil)
Antarctica Day
The Antarctica Day was celebrated on the 1st of December 2023, in
an online broadcast directly from the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic
Station. Videoconferences were held with the PROANTAR Manager
and representatives from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs (MRE)
and Science Technology and Innovation (MCTI), in addition to
lectures on the research projects currently being carried out at the
Ferraz Station.
Virtual trip to Antarctica
The Ferraz Station crew, a group made up of 17 Brazilian Navy
personnel, took part in various educational activities with students
from public and private schools nationwide. The initiatives included
the exchange of correspondence and also live sessions, when
children and teenagers can virtually visit the facilities and ask
questions directly of the scientists and the team responsible for
operating and maintaining the station's systems and equipment.
Under the guidance of teachers and educators, the video
conferences are preceded by lessons on Antarctica and the Treaty,
PROANTAR, logistical activities and research projects.
Since 2020, thousands of students from dozens of schools
nationwide have participated.
Exhibitions
Several exhibitions and presentations disseminated the importance
of Antarctica, Brazilian activities in the region and environmental
preservation of the Antarctic environment: the Independence
Exhibition, the Armed Forces Expo 2023, and the National Science
and Technology Week, in Brasília; and the International Science and
Technology Exhibition, in Novo
Hamburgo-RS. The cultural exhibition material consists of models,
special clothing, banners, snowmobiles, fiber replicas of Antarctic
animals and multimedia resources.
APECS-Brazil activities
The Brazilian committee of the Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists (APECS-Brazil), together with teachers, educators and
educational institutions, has planned and developed different
activities related to polar science. The main objective is to show
students from all over the country, at all levels, facts and curiosities
about the polar regions, how they affect our daily lives, the research
that Brazil is carrying out in Antarctica and the importance of
protecting and conserving this pristine environment. Topics such as
climate change, environmental issues, behavior in extreme
environments and scientific dissemination were covered during the
XXXI International Polar Week (October 2023).
More information at https://www.apecsbrasil.com/.
XXIII Meeting of Latin American Antarctic Historians
In September 2023, Brazilian researchers attended the XXIII
Meeting of Latin American Antarctic Historians, held in conjunction
with the VIII Antarctic Education Forum, in Ushuaia, Argentina.
Lectures were given on the 40 years of PROANTAR and the
biography of Commander Luiz Antônio de Carvalho Ferraz, after
whom the Brazilian Antarctic station is named. The aim of the
meeting is to offer countries a platform to promote and historically
recognize the scientific contributions and presence on the White
Continent.
