First assessment of cumulative impact of scientific stations on the
ambient air of an Antarctic oasis
English version provided by the author
First assessment of cumulative impact of scientific stations on the
ambient air of an Antarctic oasis
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
The performed studies made it possible for the first time to estimate
the emission of pollutants and surface air pollutant concentrations
from the operation of diesel generators of the whole set of scientific
stations in one of Antarctic oases – Larsemann Hills, East
Antarctica.
To prevent irreversible changes in the natural environment due to
the operation of Antarctic stations, it is important to assess the
levels of their anthropogenic impact. Model calculations make it
possible to estimate both the level of pollutants entering the
atmospheric air and their expected concentrations in the
atmospheric air and deposition on the earth’s surface.
Currently, about 70 year-round and seasonal Antarctic stations from
29 countries operate in Antarctica, where about a thousand people
live in winter and 5–5.5 thousand in summer. Human impact on the
natural environment of Antarctica may seem insignificant in
absolute terms compared to levels in other, more inhabited areas of
the Earth; however, given the extreme sensitivity and vulnerability
of Antarctic natural systems, its levels may exceed acceptable
(critical) thresholds (Tin et al., 2009). Among the sources of impact
in Antarctica, atmospheric emission has the greatest potential of the
long-range migration.
The Larsemann Hills is one of the most developed oases in the East
Antarctica. Currently 3 year-round scientific stations and one
seasonal base are operated here. The intense activity has been
started in 1986 with the construction of the Australian Law Station
in eastern Broknes, later transferred to Romania (Law-Racoviţă-
Negoiţă). Progress (Russian Federation) and Zhongshan (China)
stations were opened on the same peninsula in 1988–1989. The
Bharati station (India) was founded in 2012. The importance of
quantifying impacts for this area is reinforced by the presence here
of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 174.
In the recently published paper (Kakareka and Salivonchyk, 2024)
application of the previously proposed approaches of air impact
assessment (Kakareka and Salivonchyk, 2022) are implemented for
the Larsemann Hills.
The performed studies made it possible for the first time to estimate
the emissions of pollutants from the operation of diesel generator
sets from all scientific stations, located in the Larsemann Hills
starting from the construction of the first scientific station in 1986.
Surface air pollution due to the operation of diesel generators has
been assessed using AERMOD model. Modelling of pollutants
dispersion allowed to get surface air hourly, daily and annual
maximum concentrations of SO2, NO2, CO and PM10, as well as
PM10 and BC dry deposition fluxes. BC deposition level calculations
made possible to estimate its content in the snow and thus to
estimate radiative forcing, which accelerates snow melting.
Performed study may be considered as an assessment of cumulative
air impacts of a whole set of stations, located in a certain Antarctic
oasis, and may be useful in elaboration of methodologies of
cumulative impacts assessment for fulfillment of Environmental
Protocol obligations in relation to impact assessment of the planned
and performed activities in Antarctica.
References
Tin T., Fleming Z. L., Hughes K. A., Ainley D. G., Convey P., Moreno
C. A., Pfeiffer S., Scott J., Snape I., Impacts of local human activities
on the Antarctic environment. 2009.  Antarctic Science, 21, p. 3-33
doi: 10.1017/S0954102009001722.
Kakareka S. and Salivonchyk S. 2024. Assessment of the human
footprint in Antarctica: A case study Larsemann Hills. Polar Science.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2024.101048.
Kakareka S. V. and Salivonchyk S.V. 2022. Retrospective modelling
of air pollution due to operation of scientific stations in Antarctica:
an experience of reanalysis. Antarctic Science, vol. 34 (1), p.45-57.
Doi: 10.1017/S0954102021000547.
