Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections:
December 2023
Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections:
December 2023
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In December 2023, Australian observers conducted inspections of
Dumont d’Urville station (France), Robert Guillard station (France
and Italy) and the vessel L’Astrolabe (France). Dumont d’Urville
station had not been inspected since 1995 (United States) and
L’Astrolabe and Robert Guillard station had not previously been
inspected. The inspection team was given full access to all areas of
the facilities visited and the vessel, and observed a strong
commitment to Antarctic research and environmental protection in
all discussions and interactions with personnel. The inspection team
observed the facilities and vessel to be operating in full compliance
with the Antarctic Treaty and also observed a high level of
compliance with the Environmental Protocol. This paper presents a
summary of the inspection team’s report. The full inspection report
is attached.
Background
During the period 12 to 15 December 2023 a team of three
Australian observers conducted inspections of one year-round
Antarctic research station, one seasonal facility and one vessel, in
accordance with the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol):
Dumont d’Urville station (France) – 12 to 15 December 2023
Robert Guillard station (France and Italy) – 13 December 2023
L’Astrolabe vessel (France) – 15 December 2023
Dumont d’Urville station had not been inspected since 1995 (United
States) and L’Astrolabe and Robert Guillard station had not
previously been inspected.
The inspection team was given full access to all areas of the
facilities visited and the vessel, and observed a strong commitment
to Antarctic research and environmental protection in all
discussions and interactions with personnel. The inspection team
observed the facilities and vessel to be operating in full compliance
with the Antarctic Treaty.
Australia draws the CEP’s attention to the inspection team’s
observation that there was a high level of compliance with the
Environmental Protocol. Some opportunities for improvements to
operational practices at Dumont d’Urville station and Robert
Guillard station were identified.
In accordance with Article 14(4) of the Environmental Protocol,
Australia provided copies of the report to France and Italy for
comment. Comments received were considered and addressed as
appropriate when finalising the report.
Summary of observations
Dumont d’Urville station (France)
Dumont d’Urville station is a long-standing, active and productive
facility that supports a comprehensive program of scientific
research activities in the Pointe Géologie Archipelago and serves as
an important logistics hub for French and international research
and operations deep into the interior of the Antarctic continent. The
inspection team visited all parts of the main station area on Petrel
Island and Lion Island, and observed the facilities to be operating in
full compliance with the Antarctic Treaty.
The inspection team also observed a high level of compliance with
the Environmental Protocol and noted that, like other ageing
Antarctic facilities, there are opportunities to enhance some aspects
of the station’s environmental management, primarily related to
waste water
management and energy production. These issues have been
acknowledged and are the subject of underway or planned
initiatives, including a major station modernisation process.
Renewing the station will require overcoming a range of practical
challenges including the limited accessible ice-free terrain on Petrel
Island, the presence of wildlife colonies throughout and
surrounding the facilities and station operational areas, and the
importance of maintaining long-term research and monitoring
locations and datasets. Further efforts to manage the risk of
introducing non-native species and disease, including Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI), will also be important given the
close proximity and environmental and scientific significance of the
wildlife colonies.
Robert Guillard station (France and Italy)
Robert Guillard station is a compact and functional facility that
plays a significant role in supporting research and logistical
activities at Concordia station and on the inland traverse, as well as
some local research in the vicinity of Cap Prud’homme and the
Astrolabe Glacier. The inspection team visited the main station and
the nearby inland traverse staging area, and observed the facilities
to be operating in compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and
Environmental Protocol. Like at Dumont d’Urville station, the
inspection team noted opportunities to develop and apply
documented procedures to manage the risk of non-native species
and disease introduction, and to respond to fuel and oil spills. The
team heard about the increasing demand for access to the facility to
support science in the local area and noted the challenges to
construction and expansion that would be presented by the limited
ice-free area, challenging topography and presence of breeding
Adélie penguins throughout the area.
L'Astrolabe vessel (France)
L’Astrolabe is a modern, purpose-built vessel that primarily
provides logistics support for the French Antarctic Program (and
French-Italian activities at Concordia), and also serves as a platform
for some marine research. The inspection team was accommodated
on board L’Astrolabe during a round-trip voyage from Hobart to
Dumont d’Urville station, and undertook formal inspection activities
during a defined period during the resupply of Dumont d’Urville
station. The team observed the vessel to be operated by a
professional and well-trained crew from the French Navy, in
compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol.
The inspection team noted opportunities to better utilise and
expand the scientific capabilities of the ship to serve a growing
demand for in-transit marine research, and to enhance the
efficiency of resupply operations at Lion Island through a planned
review and upgrade of maritime infrastructure.
Acknowledgements
Australia expresses its sincere thanks to France for the collaborative
approach to undertaking reciprocal inspections during the 2023-24
season, including for the operational support generously provided
by the French Antarctic Program. The inspection team also thanks
the crew of L’Astrolabe and the personnel at Dumont d’Urville and
Robert Guillard stations for their warm reception, professionalism
and valued assistance.
