Identification and characterization of dangerous meteorological
phenomena for air navigation in Antarctica
Identification and characterization of dangerous meteorological
phenomena for air navigation on Antarctica
Summary
Colombia's contributions, through the Colombian Air Force, to the
Antarctic Treaty have been fundamental to advancing our
understanding of the atmospheric dynamics of the Antarctic
Peninsula. Throughout four Antarctic Expeditions, meteorological
data has been collected at both surface and altitude levels, with the
support of the Desert Research Institute (DRI) of the University of
Nevada for analysis and modeling. The study area was carried out
on King George Island or 25 de Mayo and at the Marambio Base.
Likewise, as a result, invaluable knowledge has been obtained about
the behavior of the atmosphere in the Antarctic region, which has
facilitated the development of accurate simulations.
The primary objective of the activities carried out is to mitigate the
risks associated with air operations in Antarctica and understand
the most frequent meteorological phenomena to improve predictive
capabilities.
Project context
During the VII International Congress of Geography in 1899, the
need to strengthen international expeditionary cooperation for
academic purposes was raised (Ludecke C, 2009), determining the
dangers to face on the white continent became one of the main
objectives in Antarctica.
Since the first Colombian Antarctic Expedition, the Air Force has
supported the development of these operations with C-130 aircraft
to transport scientific personnel and logistical material from
Colombia and other countries to contribute to the principles of the
Antarctic Treaty around the international cooperation.
Likewise, with the purpose of contributing to the knowledge of the
atmospheric conditions of Antarctica, and thereby favoring the
protection of air missions, the investigations carried out by the
Colombian Air Force will allow establishing a better knowledge of
the meteorological dangers for aviation and its impact on air and
navigation services. In this way, it is intended to generate
identification criteria for these phenomena for the international
community, which allow the safe and efficient development of Air
Operations.
The Antarctic Peninsula and the Drake Channel are frequently
affected by low-level clouds and fog impacting normal execution of
research activities and ship and aircraft operations in the area. The
high density of research stations in the Antarctic Peninsula requires
accurate forecasts to improve safety and reduce operation costs due
to flight turnarounds and cancellations. According
to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO, 2022), fog
episodes constitute a risk to aviation due to the reduced visibility
(< 1000 m) often preventing the landing of the aircraft. Aircraft
operations often rely on the forecasters experience and limited
numerical forecasts products; albeit some available operational
forecasting products tend to underestimate low clouds over
Antarctica (Pon 2015; Wille et al., 2017). Hence, understanding the
observable and predictable characteristics conducive to fog episodes
in the area is a primary concern of these studies.
The research has culminated in two studies aimed at
comprehending the generation of fog in the Antarctic Peninsula.
The first study delves into the phenomena primarily occurring in
the western region, focusing on King George Island or 25 de Mayo.
In the second study, phenomena in the eastern region, particularly
around the Marambio Antarctic Base, are examined. The findings of
these investigations were presented at two of the most influential
scientific events in Earth and Space Sciences: the AGU Fall Meeting
2022 and the EGU General Assembly 2024.
The results of these investigations have been incorporated into
meteorological products that are published on the Colombian Air
Force Meteorological Service's website, SIMFAC (https://
simfac.fac.mil.co). These products will be accessible through the
Antarctic meteorology module for the entire international
community engaged in aerial operations in Antarctica. The
published meteorological products provide a tool for obtaining
high-quality forecasts for the Antarctic Peninsula, enabling the
identification of meteorological phenomena that may impact
operational activities.
Abstracts of the projects carried out
Understanding Sea Fog Variability in King George Island or 25 de
Mayo, Antarctica using Special Observations and Cloud-Resolving
Simulations
In this study, the occurrence of austral summer sea fog events at
King George Island 25 de Mayo off the Antarctic Peninsula was
investigated using surface observations, special upper-air soundings,
reanalysis data, and WRF model cloud-resolving simulations.
Observations were gathered based on two Colombian Antarctic
Program research campaigns that were designed to observe fog
vertical and temporal variability as well as their synoptic drivers,
the first in January 20-23, 2020 and the second in February 14-
March 6, 2022; field campaigns developed within the Antarctic.
During the austral summer, ship track-based climatology shows that
the region is a hotspot of high frequency of marine fog with mean
occurrences of 20% of the time. Long term in-situ observations at
King Island 25 de Mayo agree with the climatological frequencies in
the 15-20% range. During our field campaigns, sea fog episodes
were present 10 out of 24 days. Northwesterly low-level flow
prevails during fog days as rather extratropical short wave low-
pressure propagated over the Drake Channel. The warm quadrant of
the cyclonic system promoted warm air advection over colder sea
waters, leading to the fog formation. WRF simulations confirm the
advective nature of the fog episodes with the model performing
relatively well by adequately capturing the fog day-to- day
variability and overall vertical structure characteristics. This
presentation aims to highlight our field campaign experience, while
showcasing observable and predictable marine fog characteristics,
further leading to confident and operational explicit fog forecasting
capabilities for the region.
Visibility and Fog Synoptic and Mesoscale Variability over
Marambio Base, Antarctic Peninsula
Summertime aviation, research, and field campaigns in Marambio
Base, Antarctic Peninsula (AP), and surrounding areas, are
frequently affected by low visibility and fog. Additionally,
upper-air soundings in the area are launched weekly, limiting the
study of the synoptic time scale variability of these hazards. A
special field campaign was designed to fill this observational gap,
and to examine the drivers of fog events. A three week-long
intensive observation campaign during February 2023 successfully
captured the evolution and vertical structure of two multiday fog
episodes that were later interrupted by westerly Foehn winds,
favoring sudden warming, drying, and clear skies over eastern flank
of the AP. This dataset is also used to evaluate and assess the skill of
regional climate simulations using the Global Forecasting Systems
data and the Polar-WRF model. We carried out the later modeling
activities to examine the mesoscale characteristics of the interplay
between the fog episodes and the Foehn winds. This study shows
the analyses of the special upper-air observations and modeling
simulations, with emphasis in the description of the observable and
predictable mesoscale ingredients and their relationship with
synoptic forcings. We found a cycle that modulates visibility and
fog:
low visibility ahead of the synoptic trough bringing a deep
northerly moistening and warming dominating warm advection fog
on the northeastern side of the AP;
an enhanced mid-level inversion is formed by adiabatic warming
due to westerly winds on the lee side of the AP limiting mixing;
visibility increases as Foehn winds warm up and dry out the low-
level atmosphere west of the AP;
a meso-low (heat-low) developed on the lee side of the AP that later
moved eastward with the synoptic trough, bringing cooler southerly
air masses that lower visibility and favoring cold advection fog;
cooling is maintained ahead of the synoptic ridge sustaining cold
advection fog.
Polar-WRF helped to diagnose the mechanistic nature of the fog
events, while providing intricate multiscale connections modulating
visibility in the region.
References
Dorman, CE, Mejia, J, Koračin, D, McEvoy, D. (2020) World marine
fog analysis based on 58-years of ship observations. Int J Climatol.
2020; 40: 145–168. https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.6200.
Moffat C. and Meredith M. (2018). Shelf–ocean exchange and
hydrography west of the Antarctic Peninsula: a review, Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. A.3762017016420170164.
Wallace, Margaret I.; Meredith, Michael P.; Brandon, Mark A.;
Sherwin, Toby J.; Dale, Andrew and Clarke, Andrew (2008). On the
characteristics of internal tides and coastal upwelling behaviour in
Marguerite Bay, west Antarctic Peninsula. Deep-Sea Research Part
II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, 55(18-19) pp. 2023–2040.
Van der Velde, I. R., G. J. Steeneveld, B. G. J. Wichers Schreur, and
A. A. M. Holtslag, 2010: Modeling and Forecasting the Onset and
Duration of Severe Radiation Fog under Frost Conditions. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 138, 4237–4253.
Pon, K.: The representation of low cloud in the Antarctic Mesoscale
Prediction System, MS thesis, Atmospheric Sciences Program, Dept.
of Geography, The Ohio State University, 80 pp., 2015.
Koracin, D. (2017). Modeling and Forecasting Marine Fog. In:
Koracin, D. and Dorman, C. (Eds.) Marine Fog: Challenges and
Advancements in Observations, Modeling, and Forecasting. Springer
Atmospheric Sciences. Cham: Springer. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-319- 45229-6_2.
Park S-Y, Yoo J-W, Song S-K, Kim C-H, Lee S-H (2022) Numerical
study on advective fog formation and its characteristic associated
with cold water upwelling. PLoS ONE 17(8): e0267895. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0267895
Bromwich, D. H., A. J. Monaghan, J. G. Powers, J. J. Cassano, H.
Wei, Y. Kuo, and A. Pellegrini, 2003: Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction
System (AMPS): A Case Study from the 2000–01 Field Season. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 131, 412–434, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
0493(2003)131<0412:AMPSAA>2.0.CO;2.
Hines, K. M., D. H. Bromwich, L. Bai, C. M. Bitz, J. G. Powers, and
K. W. Manning, 2015: Sea Ice Enhancements to Polar WRF. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 143, 2363–2385, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-
D-14-00344.1.
Hines, K. M., Bromwich, D. H., Wang, S.-H., Silber, I., Verlinde, J.,
and Lubin, D.: Microphysics of summer clouds in central West
Antarctica simulated by the Polar Weather Research and
Forecasting Model (WRF) and the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction
System (AMPS), Atmos. Chem. Phys., 19, 12431–12454, https://
doi.org/10.5194/acp-19-12431- 2019, 2019.
Skamarock, W. C., and Coauthors (2008). A description of the
Advanced Research WRF version 3. NCAR Tech. Note NCAR/
TN-475+STR, 113 pp., doi:10.5065/D68S4MVH.
Bromwich, D. H., et al. (2012), Tropospheric clouds in Antarctica,
Rev. Geophys., 50, RG1004, doi:10.1029/2011RG000363.
