Gender Equity Practices in Indian Antarctic Program
Gender Equity Practices in Indian Antarctic Program
Summary
The Paper describes the gender equity practice followed in the
Indian Antarctic Program in past and gradual increase in the
number of female participants both in the science management,
active Antarctic research and in the field of providing logistic
support to the expeditions. The paper also touches upon the present
and future plans in the field of EDI in sync with the objectives of
SCAR Action Group on EDI such as following the best practices in
terms of codes of conduct.
Introduction
Despite challenges and difficulties due to multiple roles that a
woman plays in the society, more so in a developing country like
India; women have done exceedingly well and carved out their own
space achieving accolades in several sectors which were considered
‘out of bounds’ for them not in very past. Higher literacy rate and
appreciation of role of education for the girl child led to increase in
the number of girl students in higher education and research
domains.  The Indian constitution prohibits discrimination based
on sex and provides women the rights that include equality, dignity,
and freedom from discrimination. There is a ministry dedicated to
the ‘Women and Child Development’ under the Government of
India that works towards the cause of women empowerment. The
government has taken several steps to promote inclusiveness and
remove gender inequality in society, resulting in gradual increase in
the number of women scientists and managers especially in the
centers of excellence and government departments. National
programs such as ‘Nari shakti’ (women power) and Mission Shakti
(Mission women empowerment) are aimed specifically at the
women empowerment. Towards this, the women entrepreneurs that
wish to launch micro and small enterprises are entitled for financial
support ranging from US $ 2,500 to about $ 1.2 million.
Much however, still remains to be achieved especially in creating a
favourable working environment and improving visible
inclusiveness and gender equality.
Women in science
Indian women have proved their mantle in all fields including the
highly specialized fields of science and technology viz: the Space,
microbiology and the Polar Program. Women scientists have made
significant contributions to India's space program and spearheaded
the space mission in India. They have taken lead in development
and testing of optical and infrared (I.R.) sensors, advanced launcher
technologies etc. that led to the success of Mars Orbital Mission and
the Chandrayaan- the Indian mission to the moon. They have also
headed and provided leadership in the policy making bodies such as
National Biodiversity Authority and others.
Women in Antarctic Program
The Indian Antarctic Program owes its initiation to a lady Prime
Minister (late Mrs Indira Gandhi). As early in 1983-84, two female
participants joined the Third Indian Scientific Expedition to
Antarctica contributing to geological and oceanographic research.
Ever since then, most of the expedition have seen lady scientists
participating in these national expeditions and contributing
significantly towards achievement of set-objectives.
Till 2023-24, when India launched its 43rd expedition to Antarctica,
79 female scientists have taken part in the summer and winter
components of these expeditions. The female participants
represented domains of medicine, physiology and psychology, earth
science, biology, engineering etc. Twelve of these wintered over at
Maitri and Bharati- the two Indian research stations. One of these
ladies has a distinction of being the leader of the wintering-over
team at Bharati. There are
strict rules for code of conduct in place at all the working places
with practically zero tolerance for any misbehaviour.
The Ministry of Earth Sciences of Government of India that manages
the entire gamut of the Earth System science including the Polar
Regions has a strength of 13 female scientists and administrators
that constitutes about 27% of its total managerial Human Resource.
Fifty percent of the senior level officers managing the Polar and
Southern Ocean programs are women. The National Centre for
Polar and Ocean Research (NCPOR), the autonomous institute
mandated to carry out the research, outreach and logistics in Polar
Region, that has a modest Human Resource of 296 personnel, the
women scientists and employees constitute 36% of its strength.
Gender Equity and Inclusiveness Measures
1. The Government is mandated by constitution to provide equal
opportunities to all its citizens, including the women population.
Gender equality and promoting women’s economic empowerment
have remained central to the policy discourses in the country.
2. The Government of India, through the Ministry of Women and
Child Development has taken several initiatives such as the ‘Gender
Champions program’ and ‘Beti Bachao, Beti padao' (‘ave the girl
child and educate the girl child) campaigns, to remove gender
imbalance and promote gender equality and shift societal attitudes
towards gender roles and norms.
3. Through the Ministry of Labour and Employment, it is
encouraging increased participation of women in the workforce,
such as by issuing an ‘Advisory for employers to promote women
workforce participation’.
4. To ensure safety and dignity of women employees, and
prevention of misconduct; the Government has enacted “The Sexual
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
Redressal) Act, 2013, which has provisions for constitution of
Complaint Committees to overlook any act of violation, physical or
verbal, at work place. Reporting of any gender-based violence,
sexual harassment and assault both verbal and/or physical is
mandatory.
5. The Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) indicates that there has
been an increase in women’s workforce participation by 13.9
percent with 22 percent in 2017-18 to 35.9 percent in 2022-23.
Though women’s participation in workforce has increased in recent
years, there is ample scope for further improvement that can be
addressed through effective implementation of existing policies by
employers.
