Australia’s Preparedness and Response for Avian Influenza
Australia’s Preparedness and Response for Avian Influenza
Summary
Since the beginning of 2022, outbreaks of the Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza (HPAI) have caused the death of millions of
seabirds globally, as well as mass mortalities of marine mammals.
In the austral summer of 2023/24, HPAI was detected for the first
time in the sub-Antarctic and on the Antarctic Peninsula. There
continues to be a high likelihood for the movement of HPAI to, and
spread within, Antarctic and sub-Antarctic regions via natural
migration and other pathways. The Australian Antarctic Division
(AAD) has prepared HPAI-specific preparedness and response plans
that are currently being revised to address the risk of HPAI arriving
in East Antarctica, and in proximity to Australia’s Antarctic stations.
Plans include actions to ensure rapid HPAI detection and response,
acknowledging the risk to wildlife, personnel, science and
operational activities. Australia strongly supports collaboration and
knowledge sharing between National Antarctic Programs and other
Antarctic bodies in response to the arrival and potential spread of
Avian Influenza in Antarctica.
Background
Entry of HPAI to the Antarctic region was expected to occur during
the 2023/24 austral summer. Its presence was confirmed in the
subAntarctic in October 2023 and on the Antarctic Peninsula in
February 2024. Now present in multiple species of seabirds
breeding and foraging in the Antarctic including albatrosses, gulls,
skuas and penguins, the HPAI virus will likely be transmitted to
other bird species and marine mammals. This poses a heightened
risk for the movement and transfer of HPAI within Antarctica and
across Antarctic regions. Importantly, HPAI presence in Antarctica
is concerning as it demonstrates that the virus can endure in the
cold, dry Antarctic environment and spread to multiple species that
breed in Antarctica.
Australia notes the virus has the potential to enter East Antarctica
via multiple pathways. Wildlife flight paths and transmission
pathways (including the potential for human-derived pathways such
as infected equipment, aviation or shipping activities) will be
reviewed as part of this preparedness, although Australia’s HPAI
monitoring and surveillance, and response actions, do not assume
any particular introduction pathway.
Overview of Australia’s Preparedness and Response
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), as lead agency of
Australia’s Antarctic Program (AAP), has responsibility for leading
Australia’s response to the anticipated arrival of HPAI in the East
Antarctic region, particularly in proximity to Australian stations.
The health and welfare of people and wildlife in Antarctica is a high
priority for the AAP, and mitigation measures have been enacted to
prevent the transfer and spread of this disease between humans,
animals and geographic locations.
All environmental authorisations and permits issued by the
Australian competent authority, including for non-government and
tourism operations, contain specific conditions related to HPAI as
well as additional guidance on how to reduce the risk of
inadvertently spreading the virus while visiting Antarctica. The
Australian competent authority considers all applications for
authorisation and permits (relevant to wildlife) in the context of the
latest available HPAI data, and will continue to ensure our
individual authorisations and permits reflect this information, as
required.
In addition to the AAD’s existing Unusual Animal Mortality
Response Plan, which focuses on animal mortalities of an unknown
cause, HPAI-specific preparedness and response plans are in place
for all Australian stations in the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic, and for
AAP shipping. These plans are currently being revised, and will
enable a considered and informed response by the whole of the
AAP, ensuring the safety of expeditioners, implementation of
appropriate
biosecurity measures, reporting and communication, and well-
informed decision-making. Plans focus on:
Monitoring and Surveillance
A key to Australia implementing an effective response to potential
HPAI outbreaks will be the rapid detection of unusual animal
behaviours and mortalities, and quality information from the field
to evaluate the risk to wildlife, personnel, and science and
operational activities.
In the 2023/24 Austral summer, AAD seabird biologists visited
seabird colonies and conducted surveys specifically to assess any
signs of HPAI near Mawson, Davis and Casey stations. These
surveys, coupled with visual observations by expeditioners at local
sites near stations and of individual animals in and around stations,
showed no evidence to suggest the presence of HPAI. No samples
were taken for surveillance and/or diagnostic testing for HPAI.
For the 2024/25 season, in preparation for the return of migratory
species to Antarctica during the next austral summer, and to aid in
early detection:
Appropriately qualified wildlife scientists will be deployed, where
possible, to strengthen monitoring and surveillance, and to assess
impacts of HPAI to inform the AAP response.
Expeditioners have been requested, and will be trained, to collect
video footage of seabirds and seals, particularly as birds begin to
arrive for the breeding season. Footage will be forwarded to AAD
wildlife experts for review, with advice provided to stations of any
concerns or additional measures required.
At present, surveillance sampling for HPAI is not undertaken, but
sampling for surveillance and/or diagnostic purposes may be
considered following an appropriate risk assessment.
Protection of human health
The protection of human health and avoidance of contact with
HPAI remains the highest priority for the AAP, given the austere
and remote environment of the Antarctic region and medical
response options available. Guidelines for expeditioners and field
teams include:
Maintaining separation distances from wildlife of at least 5 metres
and not handling dead or sick animals unless explicitly advised/
approved to do so.
Advising field, station or voyage leaders of any wildlife mortalities
or unusual behaviour such as loss of coordination, balance,
trembling, respiratory distress, lethargy, drooping wings, dragging
legs and unresponsiveness, who will report to the AAD Head Office
for further advice and action.
The collection of footage and reporting of unusual wildlife mortality
or behaviour to AAD wildlife ecologists as per monitoring approach.
Avoiding sitting, kneeling or lying on, or placing equipment on the
ground. Enhanced protocols for disinfecting equipment/field gear,
clothing and outdoor footwear will be used. On completion of field
or monitoring activities, soiled equipment and clothing is to be
cleaned with a disinfectant solution.
Access to HPAI-specific Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) kits,
which include fluid resistant suits, face masks, eye protection,
disposable rubber gloves, as well as other items necessary to
prevent the possible spread of disease to other locations.
No sampling or investigatory contact without approval from
wildlife health experts or without appropriate training, PPE,
scientific assessment and diagnostic pathways in place.
Avian Influenza Safety Alerts updated regularly and provided to all
stations, voyages for communication with expeditioners.
Reducing operational risk
Plans ensure measures are applied for operational activities that
involve shipping, aviation and transportation between Australia and
Australia’s Antarctic stations, and between stations and field sites in
Antarctica:
HPAI is tracked as part of the AAD’s season risk register, with
mitigation measures updated based on results of monitoring and
surveillance.
All AAP voyage briefing and training will include the most current
safety and environmental alerts, which will be updated prior to
each voyage as new information arises.
Heightened AAP response to bird strike or bird interactions with
resupply vessels, consistent with advice provided by a range of
bodies including the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).
AAD’s preparedness extends to and considers the risk of bird strike
from planes travelling to Australian Antarctic stations from infected
areas.
Enhanced protocols for the transportation of soiled gear, clothing
and boots on voyages to / from Australia. All soiled gear is to be
cleaned with a disinfectant solution on completion of monitoring
activities and prior to boarding the vessel.
Response
Should HPAI be suspected or detected, the AAD will apply a phased
approach including the closure of suspected infected sites, the
cessation of activities in close contact with wildlife, and increased
biosecurity and PPE use for the management response of stations
and expeditioners. The phased approach is to be based on a regular
risk assessment process that will be applied as new evidence arises.
The AAD will be guided in its response by advice from Wildlife
Health Australia (WHA), the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR), the SCAR-COMNAP Joint Expert Group Human
Biology Medicine, the Australian Centre for Disease Control (ACDC)
and experience of other National Antarctic Programs.
Supplementary advice will be sought from Tasmanian Government
Agencies for incidents on Macquarie Island.
Australia is working with relevant agencies to streamline potential
and suspected HPAI samples to biosecure diagnostic facilities
through appropriate government agencies, and to ensure approved
scientific confirmatory sampling has been undertaken.
Australia strongly supports collaboration and knowledge sharing
between National Antarctic Programs in response to the arrival and
potential spread of HPAI in Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic.
