Antarctic tourism diversification: current state and issues previously
discussed by the ATCM
Antarctic tourism diversification: current state and issues previously
discussed by the ATCM
Summary
This paper summarizes the outcomes of an exploration of the
framing, current state, and issues discussed by the ATCM related to
Antarctic tourism diversification. Based on ATCM's final reports
(1961-2022), seven dimensions contributing to tourism
diversification were identified, together with over 75 discussed
issues. Supplementary sources contributed to providing an overview
of tourism diversification's current state.
This information is relevant to tourism discussions, especially in
light of Decision 6 (2023) to initiate a dedicated process towards a
comprehensive framework for tourism and other non-governmental
activities. The work presented offers nuanced and up-to-date policy-
relevant knowledge on tourism diversification with the overall
objective of facilitating informed decision-making. SCAR
acknowledges the support of the 2023 Ant-ICON (Integrated Science
to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean Conservation) SC-ATS
(SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System)
Science-Policy Fellowship in the preparation of this paper.
Background
Tourism has been discussed at all ATCMs since the adoption of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection in 1991. In addition, tourism
has been the main subject of two Antarctic Treaty Meetings of
Experts (ATME) – the 2009 ATME on ship-borne tourism and the
2004 ATME on tourism.
In 2001, the ATCM acknowledged “an increase in the diversity of
tourism activities, which may present new management challenges”
(Final Report ATCM XXIV, 22, para 106). In 2012, the summary of
an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) referred to
tourism diversification as one of the ‘pending issues’ for tourism
policy, specifically questioning whether Antarctica should be open
to all types of touristic activities (ATCM XXXV/WP027 rev.1).
Parties also discussed whether Environmental Impact Assessments
(EIA) should solely consider the impact of an activity or whether its
purpose was also relevant but did not reach an agreement on this
matter. The following year, another ICG specifically reviewed the
topic of tourism diversification (ATCM XXXVI/WP047) and tabled a
list of examples of activities contributing to diversification,
suggesting continuing discussions, including on whether additional
regulation was desired.
Tourism diversification was also among the main topics at a 2019
tourism management workshop in Rotterdam, which recommended
to the CEP to “develop a framework for conducting pre-assessments
relating to new, novel or particularly concerning activities … [and]
ensure that site guidelines were as specific as possible in terms of
which activities were permitted or not at each site” (ATCM XLII/
IP026). The ATCM “strongly supported the recommendation to
develop a framework that would increase collaboration and the
consistency of the evaluation of new activities by competent
authorities” and “noted that the CEP would
undertake intersessional work on the framework and encouraged
further informal intersessional consultations” (Final Report ATCM
XLII, 102, para 367).
Yet, tourism diversification discussions have encompassed many
dimensions and have been addressed in varied ways in the ATS
context. Given the increasing number of tourists traveling to the
Antarctic, the breadth of touristic activities offered, and the
potential environmental and socio-cultural impacts arising from
tourism, a better understanding of and attention to the various
dimensions of tourism diversification are essential. To inform the
ATCM on the topic, this paper summarizes the findings of relevant
research on Antarctic tourism diversification (Makanse, 2024)
Makanse, Y. (2024). Contextualising Antarctic Tourism
Diversification: Tourism Management Implications from
Multinational Policy Debates. The Polar Journal, 1-44 . https://
doi.org/10.1080/2154896X.2024.2342113 .
Antarctic tourism diversification: framing and current state
A content analysis of ATCM documents from 1961 to 2022 was
conducted The main body of analysis compromised the Final
Reports of the (a) ATCMs (1961-2022), including CEPs (Committee
for Environmental Protection) (1991-2022), (b) Special Consultative
Meetings (SATCM) (1977-2000) and (c) ATMEs on tourism and
non-governmental activities (2004) and on shipborne tourism
(2009). Working papers (WPs) and information papers (IPs)
submitted by Parties, Observers, and Experts were also reviewed if
they were linked to Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) discussions
or provided insights into tourism status (e.g., IAATO statistics).,
revealing that, over the years, discussions on the topic of tourism
diversification encompassed many dimensions and considered
various significant developments. From the analyzed documents,
seven dimensions contributing to Antarctic tourism diversification
emerged. This section outlines these dimensions, complementing
them with examples drawn from tourism brochures, media sources,
and online information to contextualize and illustrate tourism
practices.
It is important to note that several developments may overlap
across the different dimensions. For example, specific activities may
be considered within different dimensions, e.g., camping is both a
type of activity offered and an overnight accommodation option. All
types of tourism entail a range of activities, e.g., adventure tourism
overlaps with the diversification of overnight accommodation
options, tourism locations, types of activities offered, and so on.
Table 1 summarizes and structures the complexity and wide array
of developments within tourism diversification; however, it does
not aim to portray an exhaustive compilation.
 
Table 1: Overview of Antarctic tourism activities, encompassing a
broad scope of tourism developments.
Note: Based on ATCM XLII/IP145 [A Catalogue of IAATO Operator
Activities, submitted by IAATO], Activities with IAATO or ATCM
guidelines are followed by an *; Activities described in the PVR are
in italics.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dimension
Scope and Examples
1
Modes of Transport
With Landings
Airborne
Flights
Seaborne
Expedition cruises (< 500 passengers) Sailing vessels Yachts and
Mega-Yachts
Combined air and cruise transportation
Flight-sail operations
No Landing
Airborne
Sightseeing flights
Seaborne
Cruise-only (> 500 passengers)
2
Types of Tourism
Adventure, high-risk, extreme tourism
Packaged commercial tours
Accommodation, modes of transport, activities, etc., that often
overlap with other dimensions (e.g., deep field or adventurous
vessel-based activities, airborne expeditions, ski expeditions to the
geographic South Pole)
Expeditions that involve “firsts” or "achievements" through
potentially overcoming natural, physical, mental, and psychological
limitations
At least 30 Guinness World Record breakings (e.g., longest
unsupported snow kite expedition in Antarctica, the youngest
person to ski to the South Pole, the oldest person to complete a
marathon on each continent)
First Porsche ride, first balloon ride, motorcycle rides, etc.
Land-based tourism
Expeditions, accommodations, activities, etc., that often overlap
with other dimensions (e.g., tour packages with a private charter
and luxury land-based accommodation, land-based trekking
expeditions on foot, cycling and biking expeditions, expeditions
with motorized vehicles or using skis or kites, etc.)
Other types of tourism
Cruise and thematic cruise tourism, Dark tourism, Influencer
marketing tourism, Last-chance tourism, Photojournalism, Wedding
tourism, Wildlife tourism, etc.
3
Types of Activities Offered
Types of Activities Offered (cont.)
Air-related activities
Fixed Wing and Helicopter Flights Paragliding RPAS Commercial
Flights* Skydiving
South Pole Fly-In
Mountain-related activities
Abseiling Base jumping Climbing Heli-skiing Ice Climbing
Mountaineering Skiing Snowboarding
Science-related activities
Citizen Science Station visit*
Terrestrial activities
Camping* Cross-country Skiing Cycling Extended Walk (usually
over 1km) Fat biking Ice Walk
Motorized Traverse
Last 1-2 Degree Expeditions Short Overnight Stays* Ski Kiting Ski
Traverse Skidoo tour Sledding Snowshoeing
South Pole Motorized Expeditions South Pole Ski Expeditions Zip
Lining
Water-related activities
Kayaking* Polar Plunge Remote Underwater Vehicle (ROV)* Scuba
Diving*
Ship Cruise Small Boat Cruising
Small Boat Landing Snorkeling* Stand Up Paddle Submersible
(HOV)* Surfing Swimming (short and long distance)
Wildlife-related activities
Emperor Penguin Colony Visits* Wildlife watching
Other activities
Day Trip South Shetland Islands
Filming
Overnight Stay South Shetland Islands
Photography Picnic Shopping for souvenirs, sending postcards,
stamping passports
Large-scale sporting events
Marathon* At least 6 marathons and half marathons taking place
(Antarctica Marathon & Half-Marathon, Antarctic Ice Marathon,
White Continent Marathon & Half Marathon, Last Desert, Triple 7
Quest, World Marathon Challenge)
4
Overnight Accommodation Options on Land
Short overnight stays
Add-on activity as part of a tour package, offered by most
expedition cruise companies
Coastal multiple-night camping
Often by small expedition groups from small vessels
Deep-field camping (usually associated with long expeditions or
crossings)
At least 10 semi-permanent camps (Whichaway, Wolf's Fang, Echo,
Union Glacier, Patriot Hill, Gould Bay, The Glaciers Retreat, South
Pole camp, Vinson base, Oasis guesthouse)
Other
Permanent facilities, governmentally or non-governmentally
operated (year-round or multi-season) with a primary tourism
purpose
5
Tourism Organizers
Diversity of the range of actors or proponents of activities
Authorized and unauthorized expeditions Private and commercial
operations
Membership
109 IAATO members (57 operators and provisional operators and
52 associate members)
Specialization
Antarctic tourism, Birdwatching tourism, Polar tourism, Wildlife/
Ecology tourism, etc. General tourism (not specialized)
Other
Company size, country from which the company is registered, group
tourist size per travel, years of Antarctic operation, etc.
6
Other Non-Governmental Activities
Art projects and installations
Art projects (e.g., Antarctica Biennale)
Educational activities
Programs linking students to the Antarctic (e.g., Students on Ice,
H41)
Film and photography projects
Documentaries (e.g., Antarctica by BBC, "Three Arts in Antarctica"
by Bartosz Stróżyński)
Other
Musical live performances, religious activities, etc.
7
Tourism Locations
Geographical Locations
Peninsula Continental - South Pole Ross Sea
Day trip South Shetland Islands
Deep Field Expeditions (e.g., to Pole of Inaccessibility, Last 1-2
Degree Expeditions, South Pole Expeditions, Vinson Massif)
 
Modes of Transport
Current modes of transport comprise a range of options that include
expedition tourism with landings, cruise-only tourism without
landings, land-based tourism with seaborne or airborne
transportation services, combinations of flight and sail operations,
sailing vessels and yachts, and sightseeing flights. Tourism
itineraries vary significantly in length, route, embarkation ports,
onboard services, and activities offered.
Due to technical innovations and specialization, the utilization of
new transportation technologies may improve sustainability.
Examples include tourism companies acquiring the first passenger
ship assigned a Polar Class 2 (PC2) hull and committing to smaller
carbon footprint biofuels. New technologies, such as enhanced
communication systems or engineering innovations ensuring greater
vessel stability, can also facilitate enhanced safety of passengers and
staff.
Technological innovations can also be accountable for expanding
access to unexplored and diverse areas. For instance, advancements
like ice-strengthened hulls on modern ships have facilitated greater
exploration of sea-ice areas, while flights to the South Pole are
presently available. Additionally, diversified transport modes enable
easier and faster travel to the Antarctic, partly accounting for the
exponential growth and prospect of shorter visits. The introduction
of large cruise-only ships (currently capable of accommodating
more than 2,000 passengers per trip) in the 1999/2000 season
significantly expanded the total carrying capacity
of the Antarctic tourism cruise fleet. In 2021, an Airbus A340 and a
Boeing 767 landed in Antarctica for the first time, carrying 23 and
21 passengers, respectively. These aircraft have, nevertheless,
200-300 passenger capacity. Moreover, with fly-sail operations,
companies can offer contracted itineraries that may be as short as a
5-day cruise. Tourists can also reach terrestrial campsites in the
Antarctic after only five hours of flight time from South Africa.
Yacht activity raises some further considerations. IAATO defines
yachts as sailing and motor vessels carrying 12 or fewer passengers.
In the 2019/20 season, yacht members of IAATO, non-members
with authorization from a Treaty Party, and non-members without
or unable to present authorization from a Treaty Party brought
passengers to the Antarctic in relatively similar numbers (ATCM
XLIII/IP054, respectively, 16, 16, and 11 yachts were observed in
the Antarctic).
Types of Tourism
This dimension refers to broader categories or classifications of
tourism experiences based on the purpose or nature of the trip.
These comprise specific sets of products or experiences that
distinguish tourist practices, catering to particular market segments
with distinct interests, preferences, or needs. In the ATCM
discussions, attention is especially given to adventure and land-
based tourism. According to IAATO, all sectors of the Antarctic
tourism industry display activities that could be perceived as
adventurous, whether land-based or vessel-based (ATCM XXXVII/
IP078), and five land-based operators are currently listed in
IAATO's member directory, offering activities, accommodation, and
transportation options.
In addition to commercially available tourism packages, adventure
tourism encompasses individuals or groups engaged in expeditions
involving ‘firsts’ or ‘achievements’ or aiming to accomplish a
challenging route. Examples include more than 30 Guinness World
Record breakings, a private expedition taking a Porsche to the
continent's interior to complete a 356-mile run in 2021, and a
famous baseball player throwing a record-setting pitch in 2022.
Even though some of these activities might only happen once, they
generate media interest and attention and could evolve into new
commercial tourism expansions.
Similarly, social media influencers significantly promote Antarctica
as a destination and thereby encourage additional tourist visits.
MrBeast, for example, went with a group on a 50-hour Antarctic
travel challenge. With currently over 189M views MrBeast, “I
Survived 50 Hours In Antarctica,” YouTube [video], https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=7IKab3HcfFk&vl=en. MrBeast is a
YouTuber with over 251 million subscribers., the video shows the
group climbing a mountain and naming it after one of their
sponsors. Videos showing the rough crossing of the Drake passage
also went viral on TikTok in 2022 – a honeymoon video showcasing
the turbulent passage, for example, has garnered 30.5M views to
date Natasha Travel [@theworldpursuit], “Mother Nature can be
fun #DrakePassage #Antarctica,” TikTok [video], https://
www.tiktok.com/@theworldpursuit/
video/7179052414803250434?q=%22drake%20passage
%22&t=1690187855901..
Finally, novel products continue to emerge as travel motivations
keep diversifying, driving recent developments, such as a luxury
wedding trip or the expansion of thematic cruises, including a
dedicated kosher cruise, a knitting cruise, and an upcoming Disney
Adventures cruise.
Types of Activities Offered
The variety of activities tourists can join has increased over the
years. These are the specific engagements and experiences that
travelers can participate in or engage with during their trip and are
often offered as add-on products to a tourism package. For instance,
on expedition cruises, travelers can engage in off-vessel pursuits,
while on land-based trips, they can partake in activities centered
around the semi-permanent camps. This dimension exclusively
emphasizes the individual activities on offer that tourists can
partake in while in the Antarctic rather than the entire set of
elements comprising the previous dimension.
Activities are varied and involve an extended range of engagement.
As such, companies assert their commitment "to put you in the
action as much as possible [and] to maximise your time" Aurora
Expeditions, “Activities Guide, Activities to put you in the Action,”
https://www.auroraexpeditions.com.au/brochures/. since “after all,
you certainly don't go to the South Pole to lay out in the sun.
Traveling to Antarctica means kayaking, hiking and generally
exploring one of the most untouched places on the planet”
Hurtigruten, “9 reasons to travel to Antarctica,” https://
www.hurtigruten.com/en-us/expeditions/stories/9-reasons-to-
travel-to-antarctica/.. Currently, from the 51 activities included in
the post-visit site report (PVR) form, 38 refer to different types of
activities Other activities in the PVR encompass logistical, transport
and scientific activities (e.g., Medical Evacuation, Gear Depot, RPAS
Navigation Assistance Flight).. However, more than 50 different
activities have been or are still being offered (see Table 1). These
include current offers such as zip-lining and picnicking but do not
include previous one-off activities (such as ballooning or jet skiing).
From those included in the PVR, 11 activities have an ATCM or
IAATO guideline.
Additionally, at least six large-scale sporting (marathon and half-
marathon) events regularly occur in the AT area. Two of these
sporting events bring tourists to run seven marathons on the seven
continents in seven continuous days (168 hours), with the tourists
participating in these events typically spending fewer than 24 hours
in Antarctica.
Overnight Accommodation Options on Land
Most tourists sleep on the vessels transporting them to the
Antarctic. Nevertheless, spending a night on the continent has
become more widely available. Overnight camping options are
either sold as an optional tour package activity or as
accommodation for land-based companies and longer expeditions
and crossings.
As an optional tour package activity, tourists are taken ashore by
small inflatable boats to spend a night in either tents or bivouac
bags. Tour companies advertise that no experience is required and
that anyone can camp in Antarctica.
In the case of accommodation for land-based companies, private
camps operate only during summer and are dismantled by the end
of each season. Currently, there are at least 10 semi-permanent
camps available (a more complete overview can be found in the
Report of the ICG on infrastructure supporting tourism and other
non-governmental activities in Antarctica, ATCM XLV). Some camps
are assembled with double-walled sleeping tents, communal
showers, and toilet facilities. In contrast, luxury camps move away
from the basic tough-and-rough idea of an expedition camp,
offering heated tents and polar pods with saunas, en-suite
washrooms, luxury interiors, and five-star international cuisine.
Tourism Organizers
Tourism organizers include private or commercial operators, who
may or may not be IAATO members. Of the current 109 IAATO
members, 57 are operators and provisional operators who directly
organize travel programs, while the remaining are associate
members booking customers into operator's programs or individuals
and organizations supporting IAATO objectives.
Tourism organizers may also be specialized in polar tourism or non-
specialized companies offering a larger portfolio of destinations.
Differentiations can further include company size, size of tourist
group per trip, years of Antarctic experience, and company
registration country, for example.
Other Non-Governmental Activities
Other non-governmental activities have also been associated with
Antarctic tourism. These include art projects and installations, film
and photography initiatives such as Antarctic documentaries, and
educational activities such as programs linking students to the
Antarctic. Live music performances, including a Metallica concert or
artist Diplo performing a DJ set, also contribute to this dimension.
Tourism Locations
Though also associated with diversification, the geographical
expansion of tourism has been most often related to growth
discussions. Yet, tourism diversification can lead to visitations to
uncharted locations and sites, such as exploring new sites for diving
or mountain-related activities.
According to IAATO (ATCM XL/IP053), during the 2022/23 season,
nearly 70,000 passengers effectively landed in the Antarctic
Peninsula, dispersed among 3,576 landings occurring across 208
different sites. Cuverville Island, Neko Harbour, Damoy Point/
Dorian Bay, Whalers Bay, and Portal Point were the most popular
visitor sites, accounting for around 25% of all landings made
throughout that season. The top twenty most-visited sites accounted
for approximately 65% of all landings. Although mainly
concentrated in the Antarctic Peninsula, tourism activities also
occur in other continental areas and the Ross Sea.
Antarctic tourism diversification: issues discussed by the ATCM
Discussions of issues relating to Antarctic tourism diversification in
the ATCM Final Reports were compiled and categorized in relation
to the aforementioned seven dimensions and summarized in Table
2. A total of 78 distinct issues were identified, with some discussed
repeatedly over several years. Notably, some overlap with
considerations on tourism growth, and several reoccur in different
dimensions.
Some of the issues discussed relate to known threats, including, for
instance, the innate risks of operating in the Antarctic and the
resultant potential environmental impacts. Additionally, several
issues were raised regarding possible interference with National
Antarctic Programs (NAPs), including disruption of scientific
research and pressures on search and rescue (SAR) resources. Thus,
both human and environmental safety have been extensively
considered. Jurisdictional issues, differences in domestic legal
systems, and the lack of consistency of certain activities and
dimensions with the Antarctic values or principles, also received
substantial attention.
Other issues were related to unknown threats. These are the
unforeseen and unpredictable consequences that tourism
developments can have, as some have never occurred before. Those
encompass difficulty understanding potential interactions with the
environment, unidentified risks for human safety, or unknown
influences on prescribed Antarctic values, for instance.
Table 2: Overview of issues related to Antarctic tourism
diversification discussed in ATCM Final Reports.
Note: NCA = National Competent Authority, EIA = Environmental
Impact Assessment, EIES = Electronic Information Exchange
System, NAP = National Antarctic Program, SAR = Antarctic
Search and Rescue
Dimension
Focus
Issue
Source
1
Modes of Transport
Combined air and cruise transportation
Authorization process, which could lead to unexpected gaps in the
assessment of activities
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 72, para 251
Environmental impacts
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 71, para 249
Involvement of multiple CAs in the various components or segments
involved in single fly-cruise expeditions
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 71, para 249
Potential for increased visits to certain sites
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 71, para 249
Safety due to increased ship traffic
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 71, para 249
Future development of air and cruise activities
Concerns related to logistic aspects such as the bunkering,
provisioning and resupplying of vessels
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 72, para 252
Concerns regarding expansion, resulting in a need for larger planes,
which could additionally demand the enlargement of current
infrastructures and landing strips
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 72, para 252
Considerations related to air traffic control
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 72, para 252
Waste management
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 72, para 252
Large Vessels
Concerns related to the safety of maritime navigation
Final Report XXVIII ATCM, 169, para 5.2; Final Report XXX ATCM,
37, para 157
 
Potential for undesirable environmental impacts;
Final Report XXIX ATCM, 36, para 151
2
Types of Tourism
Adventure tourism
Authorizations particularly related to adventure sport tourism
activities
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
 
Differences in domestic legal systems among proponents, and thus
the possibility of "forum shopping"
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Impossibility of applying binding regulations under current
domestic legal systems
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Increasing pressures on SAR resources
Final Report XXIV, 22, para 107; Final Report XLI ATCM, 40, para
88
 
Increasing pressures on the environment
Final Report XLI ATCM, 40, para 88
 
Interference with scientific programs
Final Report XXIV, 22, para 107; Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 69,
para 243
 
Lack of definition and identification of activities belonging to this
category
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Lack of legal provisions to address adventure tourism
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Need for stricter regulation of new types of tourism, in particular
adventure tourism
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Risk for human life (participant and SAR teams), especially related
to extreme adventure tourism
Final Report XXXIX ATCM, 69, para 243
Land-based tourism
Differences in domestic legal systems among proponents, and thus
the possibility of "forum shopping"
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
 
Lack of legal provision in the Protocol to address land-based
tourism
Final Report XXIX ATCM, 38, para 163
 
Legal and environmental matters connected with this type of
tourism
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195; AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII
ATCM, 3
 
Need for consistency of land-based tourism with the principles of
the AT and the Protocol
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195; AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII
ATCM, 3
 
Need for proper definitions of land-based tourism
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195; AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII
ATCM, 3
3
Types of Activities Offered
Activities involving multiple participants and/or permitted by
different CAs
Complications arising from expeditions that contain a mix of NGO
and governmental visitors
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Difficulty in accessing lists of denied permits or authorizations and
understanding the reasons for their denial
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
EIES’s limitations concerning relevant information regarding CA,
expedition details, authorizations, information regarding permits or
authorizations denied, and the updating of the NCA contact list
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Forum shopping and third-party flagged vessels
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Lack of progress in the ratification of Annex VI of the Protocol
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Problems related to multiple authorization processes
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Problems related to the enforcement of relevant provisions within
domestic legislation
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Quality of communication mechanisms between NCAs
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Large-scale sports, such as marathons
Effect on infrastructure and personnel at stations
Final Report XXXVII ATCM, 64, para 232
Environmental impact
Final Report XXXII ATCM, 56, para 207
Human safety
Final Report XXXII ATCM, 56, para 207
Lack of international regulation
Final Report XXXII ATCM, 56, para 207
Potential disruption to the function of scientists and other station
activities
Final Report XXXII ATCM, 56, para 207
New Activities
Difficulty in assessing applications
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 302
Difficulty in determining participants’ safety
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 302
Difficulty in regulating the types of interactions with the
environment
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Environmental impact
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 302
Lack of guidelines or information on activities that specific NCAs
had not dealt with before, such as kite skiing, snorkeling, and
leisure fishing
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Lack of information regarding risks for new activities, especially
sports and adventure-related
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 301
Need for comprehensive descriptions of activities
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Need to consider cumulative impact when assessing the range of
activities proposed
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Potential added diversity of behavior and interaction with the
environment
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Potential implications of SAR operations on NAPs and personnel
Final Report XLI ATCM, 40, para 88; Final Report XLI ATCM, 40,
para 88
Risky Activities
Lack of a harmonized position across Parties, especially concerning
potentially risky activities for the environment and the safety of the
environment
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Posed risks to NAPs from potentially risky activities conducted by
non-governmental organizations
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 302
Possible impacts on NAP resources to assist with emergency
responses
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 81, para 302
Potentially risky adventure activities masked under an application
as a scientific activity
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Station Visits
Station visits that involve multiple NCAs
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 75, para 280
Unauthorized Activities
Challenge in preventing unauthorized expeditions from taking place
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
4
Overnight Accommodation Options on Land
Non-permanent, semi-permanent and permanent facilities
Environmental impacts
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195 and Final Report XLIII
ATCM, 64, para 222
Impacts on SAR capacity of NAP
Final Report XLIII ATCM, 64, para 222
Impossibility of applying binding regulations under current
domestic legal systems
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
Lack of consistency with the principles of the Treaty and the
Protocol
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195
Lack of understanding of the terms non-permanent, semi-permanent
and permanent in light of the EIA provisions
Final Report XLI ATCM, 40, para 88
Need for proper definitions of permanent tourism infrastructure
AT Secretariat SP9, XXXVII ATCM, 3
Possible assertion of private property rights
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195
Possible assertion of rights to usufructuary benefits through regular
permitting
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195
Possible impacts on wilderness values
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195, Final Report XLI ATCM,
40, para 88
Possible jurisdictional issues
Final Report XXVII ATCM, 30, para 195
Potential for abandoned infrastructure should business
circumstances change
Final Report XLIII ATCM, 64, para 222
5
Tourism Organizers
Expansion of the range of actors involved
Consideration over cumulative impacts when assessing tourism
activities, including those unauthorized or of non-IAATO members
Final Report XLI ATCM, 40, para 88
Challenges regarding tour companies and/or tourist ship operations
from third-party States
Final Report ATME 2004, 10, para 30
Difficulties in addressing individuals in NAP engaging in leisure
activities
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Diversification of proponents of activities
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 83, para 307
Membership
Challenges that the presence of non-IAATO operators imply for the
coordination of operations, collection of accurate tourism statistics
and compliance with ATCM tourism measures
Final Report XLI ATCM, 36, para 75
Challenges regarding tour companies that deliberately decide to
operate outside the strictures of industry self-regulation
Final Report ATME 2004, 10, para 30
How to deal with non-IAATO members
Final Report XLI ATCM, 36, para 75
Unauthorized Activities
Difficulties in prosecuting unauthorized activities (including dealing
with individuals with multiple passports; national legislation that
only applied to activities organized nationally, and different levels
of involvement between those who initiated an activity and those
responsible for its execution)
Final Report XXXVIII ATCM, 76, para 285
6
Other Non-Governmental Activities
 
Potential challenges when the organizer is an international group
without a clear legal address
Final Report XL ATCM, 99, para 363
 
Use of another permit (e.g., ship's permit for tourism) after refusal
of activity permit
Final Report XL ATCM, 99, para 364
7
Tourism Locations
 
Possible conflict of interests between science and tourism
Final Report XXIX ATCM, 39, para 173
 
Risk of non-native organism introduction
Final Report XVII CEP, 144, para 233
Conclusions
This Information Paper shows and describes the different
dimensions in which tourism diversification is taking place in the
Antarctic. It also stresses Antarctic tourism diversification's complex
and multifaceted nature. Apart from encompassing several
dimensions of tourism development, the diversification of each
dimension is very often tightly related to the further diversification
of another. For example, once a new location becomes available for
tourism (e.g., the interior of Antarctica), the range of types of
activities that can take place there also expands, together with the
possibilities for overnight accommodation, modes of transport, etc.
The same applies to potentially all other tourism dimensions. Once
a new mode of transport becomes available, new locations can
become accessible for tourism, new tourism organizers can enter
the market, potential further types of activities can be offered, and
so on. Inadequate attention to any dimension can lead to an
escalated risk of additional concerns in other dimensions, setting off
a cascading effect.
As such, approaches to addressing tourism diversification should
acknowledge its dimensions and ramifications. The dimensions
emerging from this analysis, as summarized in Table 1, can be used
as heuristic or framing devices by policymakers to structure future
discussions. Compartmentalizing suggested policy options into a
dimension-based approach also facilitates tracking of ATCM
discussions and outcomes over time. Such systematic data recording
can further provide practical support for decision-making bodies
(particularly where participation may be fluid or non-consecutive)
and help with managing time constraints, by providing access to a
comprehensive overview of past discussions to support informed
decisions.
