Consolidation of the Argentine-Spanish Permanent Instrumental
Volcano Monitoring Network on Deception Island volcano
English version provided by the authors
Consolidation of the Argentine-Spanish Permanent Instrumental
Volcano Monitoring Network on Decepción Island volcano
Abstract
The purpose of this document is to report on the Argentine-Spanish
binational volcano monitoring network on Deception Island, which
currently consists of ten broadband seismological stations, eight
GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite Systems) stations, one IP camera
and two satellite nodes. This joint collaboration has allowed the
modernization and strengthening of the instrumental monitoring
network on the island and provides continuous, real-time
surveillance. This document also provides information on the
cooperation between Argentina and Spain regarding the volcanic
risk management on the island. During 2024, work will be carried
out for the update of the Appendix 6: volcanic alert level system
and escape strategy, within the framework of the review process of
the Management Plan for ASPA N°4.
Background
There are almost twenty volcanoes considered active in the
Antarctic continent, at least nine of them are certain to have been
active during the Holocene (Mount Berlin, Buckle Island, Deception
Island, Mount Erebus, Mount Hudson, Mount Melbourne, Penguin
Island, Mount Takahe, and The Pleiades). Five of them have had
volcanic activity during historical times (1892-1972), being Mount
Erebus and Deception Island considered to be the most active
volcanoes on the continent, with several eruptive events over the
last two centuries.
Although several impacts over Antarctic scientific bases have been
reported due to the activity associated with these volcanoes, to date
there are still few studies that assess the potential risks, on a
regional and global scale, related to eruptions at high southern
latitudes and the potential impacts over ecosystems, tourism, air
navigation and maritime navigation on the Antarctic continent. For
this reason, understanding and managing volcanic hazards and risks
is a key factor for the safe development of activities in this region of
the planet.
In Antarctica, the deployment and maintenance of instrumental
volcano monitoring networks, mainly relies on national research
programs. For both economic and logistical reasons, the
development of this type of networks on the Antarctic continent is
very scarce, being limited to only a few of the main active volcanic
centers situated close to scientific bases, such as Mount Melbourne,
Mount Erebus and Deception Island.
Even rarer is that these instrumental networks are multi-parametric
and have the ability to transmit information in real time throughout
the year, and therefore allow the detection of anomalies and
changes in any of the monitoring parameters that might enable the
activation of early warnings on the potential occurrence of a future
volcanic eruption.
Up to date, of the three existing monitoring networks, only those of
Mount Melbourne, operated by the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e
Vulcanologia (INGV-Catania) and the University of Catania, and
Deception Island, operated by the Instituto Geográfico Nacional de
España (IGN) and the Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia
Volcánica (OAVV) of the Servicio Geológico Minero Argentino
(SEGEMAR), transmit the monitoring information in real time.
Volcano Monitoring on Deception Island
Volcano monitoring activities at Deception Island began with the
deployment of the first seismometers at the Argentine, Chilean and
British stations, in the 1950’s, 1965 and 1969, respectively; all of
which were lost during the 1967 and 1969 eruptions (Figure 1).
Monitoring activities were resumed in 1986, and during the seismic
crises that occurred in the summer of 1991-1992, the detection of
variations in several monitoring parameters (seismic and
deformation mainly) allowed the evacuation of the personnel on the
island.
Figure 1: Map of Deception Island, with the location of the scientific
bases, and the location of historic volcic vents and areas of
fumarolic activity and heated ground. (Modified from Geyer et al.
2023).
In 1993 the Deception Island Volcano Observatory (OVD) was
created as a result of a collaboration between the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (IAA), the University of Buenos Aires (UBA), the
National University of La Plata (UNLP) and the National Museum of
Natural Sciences (MNCN) of the Spanish National Research Council
(CSIC) and the universities of Cadiz (UCA) and Granada (UGR). It
mains purpose was to guarantee volcanic surveillance while
personnel was on the island, during the austral summers. In that
sense, it was possible to detect the 1998-1999 and 2015 seismic
crises, providing information on the events registered, as well as
interpretations and potential scenarios on the activity of the
volcano.
Since 2020, the National Geographic Institute (IGN) of Spain, as the
responsible agency for the surveillance of seismic, volcanological
and other geophysical phenomena in that country, assumed the
responsibility of carrying out the volcanological monitoring of the
island, in order to ensure the safety of the Gabriel de Castilla Base
staff. To this end, in 2021 began the renovation of the existing
volcano monitoring network through the deployment of permanent
multiparametric, seismic and geodetic stations, with the capacity to
transmit information in real time, for the continuous monitoring,
365 days a year, of the volcano (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Deployment of the volcano monitoring network IGN from
Spain, started in December 2021 and whose last installations were
carried out during March 2024.
At the same time, in 2022 SEGEMAR, as the responsible agency for
volcano monitoring in the Argentine Republic through its OAVV,
signed an agreement with the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA),
and decided to move forward with the installation of the first
permanent Argentine volcano monitoring network in real time on
Deception Island, in order to ensure the safety of the staff of
Deception Base. The network was finally installed during March
2023, as part of the activities of the summer Antarctic campaign of
that year (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Deployment of the Argentine volcano monitoring network
from OAVV/SEGEMAR during March 2023.
Consolidation of the Argentine-Spanish Volcano Monitoring
Network
International cooperation promoted by Article III of the Antarctic
Treaty is an essential instrument to carry out most of the scientific
activities in a continent with unique challenges for scientific
research and logistics. In this regard, (a) considering the long
tradition of cooperation between Argentina and Spain in the study
and monitoring of Deception Island volcano, (b) that currently, they
are the only countries that have operative temporary bases on the
island during the austral summer, and (c) that both countries have
decided to modernize and strengthen their instrumental monitoring
networks on the island, with the goal of achieving continuous
surveillance in real time, the natural path for both countries was to
combine both initiatives in a joint effort.
This is why during 2023, within the framework of the bilateral
Antarctic cooperation agreements between Argentina and Spain, a
Memorandum of Cooperation was signed between SEGEMAR and
the IGN for the exchange of real-time monitoring information and
the generation of a binational volcano monitoring network for
Deception Island. In addition, this agreement provides mutual
support between the two countries in terms of network
maintenance activities and strengthens the capacity of the telemetry
networks to transmit information in real time.
Currently, the Argentine-Spanish binational volcano monitoring
network consists of ten broadband seismological stations, eight
GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite Systems) stations, one IP camera
and two satellite nodes (Figure 4).
Figure 4: Map of the Argentine-Spanish binational volcano
monitoring network on Deception Island.
Also, both countries complement this information with the
processing of satellite radar (In-SAR) and thermal images, and field
work (e.g., geochemical sampling, thermal camera measurements,
drone overflights, geological studies, etc.) in collaboration with
research groups from universities from both countries.
In the beginning of 2024 advances were achieved on the exchange
of information in real time (Figure 5), thus both countries have now
the capacity to receive information from all the instruments in real-
time in their respective processing centers in Buenos Aires
(SEGEMAR-OAVV) (https://oavv.segemar.gob.ar/monitoreo-
volcanico/isla-decepcion/) and Madrid (IGN) (https://www.ign.es/
web/ign/portal).
Figure 5: Visualization of real-time seismological information from
the binational volcano monitoring network of Deception Island.
For the analysis of the seismic activity, both countries use an
automatic detection system, which, once the event is detected,
locates its hypocenter using both automatic and manual processing
routines. (Figure 6).
Figure 6: Maps of the location of seismic activity in Deception
Island published by Argentina (Left) and Spain (Right).
For the analysis of the data obtained by the GNSS network, three
different processing schemes have been proposed: 1) a daily
solution processing of coordinates with daily data, 2) a semi-daily
solution processing of coordinates with hourly data, and 3) a
baseline processing between the different stations of the network.
It is expected that during 2024 activities will be carried out for the
unification of criteria between both countries for the processing of
the seismic and deformation data and the coordination between
both institutions for the publication of the monitoring information
and the generation of Volcanic Activity Reports.
In this context, as a result of the cooperation between Spain and
Argentina, the activity of Deception Island volcano is being
monitored in real time, with the capacity to detect potential
changes that may anticipate any anomalous condition precursor of
an eventual eruptive process, and the resulting generation of early
warnings.
Deception Island Volcanic Risk Management
The occurrence of an eruptive event in one of the main active
volcanoes in Antarctica is highly probable, possibly in the near
future. To face a potential crisis, it is necessary to advance in the
generation of hazard maps, and in the improvement of volcano
monitoring networks and the development of new risk assessments
to be better prepared for a potential crisis, with the goal of
mitigating the impact of these events on the staff that is working
there, as well as in the more remote areas of the region that could
be affected by the ashfall and ash dispersion.
Deception Island is the only volcano on the Antarctic continent that
has an early warning system and a contingency plan for the
occurrence of a potential volcanic eruption, as included in Appendix
6 of the management plan of the Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) N°4 (http://www.deceptionisland.aq/package_es.php),
whose revision has been initiated in 2024 to adapt it to the current
conditions.
Spain and Argentina are strengthening their coordination and
cooperation in communicating volcanic activity alerts and issuing
Volcanic Activity Reports to ensure the safety of operations carried
out on the island during periods of activity of the active bases, as
well as scientific and logistical activities in the region that could be
affected in the event of a reactivation of the volcano.
