Determination of the Contribution of Atmospheric Pressure to Sea
Level Variations in Antarctica in Austral Summer
Determination of the Contribution of Atmospheric Pressure to Sea
Level Variations in Antarctica in Austral Summer
General context
In the context of the international cooperation between the
Antarctic and Oceanographic Institute of Ecuador (INOCAR) and
the Colombian Maritime Authority of Colombia (DIMAR), within
the Colombian Antarctic Program (PAC), the initiative to
consolidate a project aimed at expanding knowledge about sea level
rise at a global level, focusing on Antarctica, was proposed since
2017. proposing the research project in five phases, entitled:
"Determination of the Contribution of Atmospheric Pressure to Sea
Level Variations in Antarctica in Austral Summer" II / V.
This project seeks to understand how atmospheric pressure
influences sea level variations near Greenwich Island in the South
Shetland Archipelago, as a contribution to the study of ocean-
atmosphere interaction processes in Antarctica. Within the
framework of this collaboration, the Antarctic and Oceanographic
Institute of Ecuador (INOCAR) has the Pedro Vicente Maldonado
Antarctic base, which was chosen to develop the project (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Study area, Greenwich Island in the South Shetland
Archipelago. Source: Project Report 10EAC-CF-009 Sea Level
Dossier
In the 10th Colombian Antarctic Expedition, in collaboration with
INOCAR, the project was carried out in the second phase, with
three more phases of the project pending in subsequent years. The
research project seeks to install a portable weather station near a
tide station to obtain accurate measurements of atmospheric
pressure and wind. These measurements will be analyzed to
quantify the impact of barometric pressure on sea level oscillations
and to understand the response of sea level to other variables, such
as wind. The project aligns with the thematic areas of basic
knowledge and relations between South America and Antarctica,
according to the country's Antarctic Agenda, and will be carried out
in international cooperation at a nearby base that has a tide gauge
installed.
For 23 days, two sea level sensors and a rapidly deployable
meteorological station were installed at Ecuador's Pedro Vicente
Maldonado Antarctic Station, through which oceanographic and
meteorological conditions were monitored to associate atmospheric
events with the analysis of meteorological residue (Figure 2).
B.
Figure 2. A. Easy-to-deploy weather station for Antarctic conditions.
B. Researchers with RBR sea level sensors ready to be anchored.
Source: Project Report 10EAC-CF-009 Sea Level Dossier.
The data obtained provided a harmonic analysis of the tidal
constituents to eliminate this signal from the time series and obtain
the meteorological residue. The latter will be used as a dependent
variable in a regression, fitting atmospheric pressure and wind data
as independent variables to determine their contribution to sea
level variability within the meteorological component.
For the measurement period (January 12 to February 01, 2024), the
following data could be obtained, the relative humidity sensor
recorded an average humidity of 90.9% with a maximum of 100%
and a minimum of 54%, the atmospheric pressure sensor recorded
an average of 985.9 hPa with a maximum pressure of 1000.7 hPa
and a minimum of 972.5 hPa, and the ambient temperature sensor
recorded an average of -4.78°C, with a minimum temperature of
-9.7°C and a maximum of 2.52°C.
It can be observed that during the 23 days of data collection, three
days with low peaks of atmospheric pressure were evidenced, which
were on January 23, 27 and 31, where on January 23 an
atmospheric pressure of 972.5 hPa was obtained, being the lowest
of the observed period, associated with the passage of a cold front.
On that day, a wind speed of up to 28 kn was recorded in a
northwesterly direction to the northeast.
Also on January 27, an atmospheric pressure of 975 hPa was
observed where there was a set of low pressure systems, with a
wind speed up to 20 kn, with variable direction, from January 31 a
pressure of 980 hPa was observed where there was a set of low
pressure systems, with winds of speed up to 31 kn, During the days
of January 16, 22, 25, 30 and February 1, 5 days with high peaks in
atmospheric pressure were observed, the highest being 1000.7 hPa
on January 30, where good weather was evident. During the
measurement period, topometric RBR surveys were carried out
using a Trimble R10 GPS (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Topometric survey. In the photo, researchers from
Colombia and Ecuador. Source: Project Report 10EAC-CF-009 Sea
Level Dossier.
In the future, it is expected to continue contributing to different
studies on climate change by applying corrections to sea level
trends, which will include the installation of tide gauges near the
study area. This project highlights the importance of open science,
international cooperation, and environmental protection of
Antarctica.
