Updated progress on environmental monitoring of McMurdo Station
infrastructure modernization activities
Updated progress on environmental monitoring of McMurdo Station
infrastructure modernization activities
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
This paper describes environmental monitoring conducted in
association with ongoing infrastructure modernization activities at
McMurdo Station. Impacts on the affected environment that would
potentially result from the implementation of the modernization
activities were identified and assessed as part of a Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE). The purpose of environmental
monitoring alongside these activities is to examine impacts and
identify potential mitigations, where possible. The objective of this
paper is to provide an update on progress made towards
implementing environmental monitoring of the modernization
projects and to present current findings.
Introduction
McMurdo Station on Ross Island was established in 1955 and,
therefore, much of the station infrastructure dates back several
decades and is nearing or has exceeded its intended life expectancy.
Many components of the McMurdo Station infrastructure need to be
upgraded to ensure that United States scientific activities in
Antarctica can continue uninterrupted.
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) has begun
implementing infrastructure modernization projects that generally
involve demolishing, constructing, renovating, and operating
buildings and structures at McMurdo Station. Prior to the initiation
of these projects, potential environmental impacts were identified
and assessed as documented in Final Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation for Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station
Area Activities.
Section 7 of the CEE document discusses environmental monitoring
employed by USAP to assess and verify the impacts of
modernization activities. This information paper is intended to
further elaborate on specific types of environmental monitoring
relevant to the modernization activities and present current findings
now that modernization activities are underway at McMurdo
Station.
Current environmental monitoring relevant to ongoing
modernization activities
Accidental spills
Accidental releases (of any size) of pollutants are reported through
emergency dispatch personnel to on-site spill response personnel.
The spill response personnel perform spill clean-up (or act as a
resource to instruct others performing clean-up). Additionally, they
prepare a spill report that is distributed to key stakeholders within
USAP. Environmental personnel input data from each spill report
into a tracking database. The spill tracking database allows for data
to be sorted and visualized by various parameters to assist in
identifying potential trends and areas for improvement. So far, no
trends have been identified as attributable to modernization
activities specifically.
Non-native species
Any non-native species found at McMurdo Station are reported to
USAP environmental personnel. The environmental personnel
collect, document, and dispose of the specimens. A
database of all discoveries of non-native species is maintained to
allow for analysis of common vectors. Thus far, no unusual trends
have been observed regarding discoveries of non-native species
since modernization activities began.
On-site reviews
Periodic in-person reviews of modernization activities are used to
determine if mitigation measures identified in Section 6 of the CEE
document are being implemented and to correct instances where
mitigation measures are not being implemented or where practices
could be improved. For example, secondary containment was
provided for some fuel-containing equipment observed to have
inadequate spill protection. Additionally, these in-person reviews
support the verification of predicted impacts as discussed in Section
7.3 of the CEE document.
Operational data
Various data are gathered on all USAP activities each year to satisfy
Treaty obligations as well as United States law (the Antarctic
Conservation Act). Of the data collected for these purposes, the
following metrics also support monitoring of impacts associated
with modernization activities:
Population
Aggregate production
Cargo movement
Fuel use
Vehicle/equipment use
Non-hazardous waste generation
Hazardous waste generation
Wastewater generation
Water use
Annual quantities of each of these metrics are compiled and
compared to the projected quantities provided in the CEE document
to relate the difference in actual versus projected amounts.
Additionally, a five-year average for the years prior to
implementation of modernization activities (2014 to 2019) is also
used for some metrics to provide a comparable “baseline” value.
Comparison of these metrics to projections in the CEE document as
well as baseline values could provide useful insight for verifying
predicted impacts as modernization activities progress. Currently,
USAP only has two seasons (2019-20 and 2022-23) of operational
data for comparison to the baseline, as modernization activities
were paused for multiple seasons during to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Soil quality
USAP implements a procedure to assess and characterize any soil
encountered that is suspected of being historically contaminated
with petroleum hydrocarbons. Whenever station personnel
encounter soil suspected of being contaminated (e.g., appears
discolored or has a noticeable petroleum odor), environmental
personnel collect samples for on-station laboratory analysis. If the
total petroleum hydrocarbon concentration exceeds 500 parts per
million, then the soil is managed as hazardous waste and removed
from the continent for disposal.
Station footprint
High-resolution satellite imagery of the McMurdo Station area is
routinely captured to support both science and operational projects.
The imagery also provides a photographic record of how the station
footprint changes over time. Review of satellite imagery allows for
verification that modernization activities have been limited to the
existing station footprint. All modernization activities completed so
far have been limited to the existing footprint.
Additionally, a key element of the modernization design is a more
consolidated and efficient footprint. Future review of imagery post-
modernization will also support evaluation if this design element
was successfully implemented.
Surface runoff quality
Surface runoff quality was previously assessed as part of a study at
McMurdo Station conducted in 2010 and 2011. The results of this
study indicated that snowmelt contained elevated concentrations of
heavy metals and polycylic aromatic hydrocarbons. Using the
methodology from this study, surface runoff monitoring activities
were resumed in 2022 to coincide with the resumption of
modernization activities.
Samples are collected from surface runoff drainage channels at two
locations up to four times each austral summer and shipped to an
analytical laboratory in New Zealand for analyses that include;
dissolved metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and total
petroleum hydrocarbons.
Data obtained since this monitoring resumed in 2022 indicates that
while there is a continued presence of heavy metals in surface
runoff, they are generally at lower concentrations than in 2010 and
2011. Continued monitoring throughout modernization activities
would allow for early detection of unforeseen impacts - data will be
assessed to determine if contaminants not previously detected
during 2010 and 2011 are observed or if previously detected
contaminant concentrations increase.
Wastewater quality
McMurdo Station includes a wastewater treatment plant that treats
all sewage generated by the station prior to discharge into
McMurdo Sound. Wastewater treatment plant personnel
continuously monitor several parameters of both influent sewage
and effluent discharge year-round to ensure treatment is effective.
Additionally, environmental personnel collect annual samples to
characterize the effluent discharge and compare the results against
aquatic toxicity guidelines. Since modernization activities began,
there have not been adverse impacts to effluent quality indicating
that the wastewater treatment plant continues to be an effective
mitigation during modernization activities.
Environmental monitoring relevant to modernization activities but
not currently implemented
All monitoring described in the previous section includes
components that address one or more of each of the predicted
impacts of modernization activities summarized in Table 5-2 of the
CEE document. However, two impacts associated with
modernization activities listed in Table 5-2 are not addressed by the
current monitoring: fugitive dust and noise.
Fugitive dust
Fugitive dust from various activities was identified as a potential
environmental impact. The implementation of various types of dust
monitoring (the use of handheld meters, active sensors, or passive
sampling stations) were considered, but deemed impractical due to
the cost and labor required compared to the magnitude of predicted
impacts. As summarized in Table 5-2 of the CEE document,
although some of the impacts associated with fugitive dust are
predicted to have high probability of occurring, all of these impacts
are predicted to have a local extent, short-term duration, and
minimal intensity. Although fugitive dust monitoring is not
currently employed at McMurdo Station, mitigation measures
described in the CEE including the use of blast mats, compaction
and wetting of surfaces have been implemented.
Noise
Noise generated from various activities was also identified as a
potential environmental impact. As described in the CEE document,
noise abatement is performed to protect human safety and health.
Although no formal environmental monitoring is currently
implemented for noise, health
and safety personnel monitor noise levels to protect human health.
Noise levels, with the exception of blasting and explosives use, were
identified in the CEE document as below thresholds disruptive to
birds or marine mammal environments. During blasting and
explosives use, explosives charges are calculated to ensure minimal
vibration. Site activity does not occur if any wildlife enter the work
site and blasting and explosives are not used in or near marine
environments.
Conclusion
Environmental monitoring performed so far alongside
modernization activities has not identified any unforeseen impacts
or impacts greater than those predicted in the CEE document. The
modernization projects are still in early stages and USAP will
continue to implement and develop, and report on environmental
monitoring as the activities progress. The continued goal of
environmental monitoring will be to examine impacts throughout
the activities, and compare impacts to those identified in the CEE,
and identify mitigations, where possible.
