An overview of the South Pole Station Master Plan
An overview of the South Pole Station Master Plan
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The U. S. National Science Foundation (NSF) is responsible for
managing research infrastructure that advances science at the
frontiers of many disciplines. The NSF managed U.S. Antarctic
Program (USAP) research campus at the South Pole provides a
platform for climate research, Earth observation, astrophysics, and
polar field work that is unparalleled anywhere else on the planet.
Science conducted from the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
provides valuable insights into the past and future of our climate
and the origins of the universe.
If the infrastructure that enables Antarctic science is not kept robust
and efficient, USAP is at risk of losing science capabilities year over
year as facilities, utilities, equipment, and vehicle fleet degrade.
Station Master Plans provide a guide to making informed value-
added investments.
The South Pole Station Master Plan establishes the NSF’s long-range
vision for ensuring SPS infrastructure can continue to support a
world-leading science program.
Background
The U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) infrastructure portfolio includes
a wide range of research and related facilities, utilities, equipment,
and vehicles, spanning three permanent stations, seasonal field
camps, and three gateway/port locations – all of which supports
science ranging from astronomy to biology. NSF initiated the
Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program as a
strategic approach to ensure that critical science needs are met
through an enduring and dedicated effort to recapitalize our
stations (see ATCM 45, IP125 for more information).
The AIR Program is a portfolio of investments in facilities and
infrastructure across USAP stations and gateways that will assure
safety, enhance efficiency, and increase resilience. The AIR program
is managed as a portfolio of investments guided by Station Master
Plans Master Plans are posted on the USAP web portal at
www.usap.gov that have been developed with robust engagement
from across the science community. Master plans exist for McMurdo
Station and Palmer Station, but not the South Pole Station.
South Pole Station Master Plan
Master planning is a continuous analytical process that involves
evaluating factors affecting the present and future physical
development and operation of an installation. This evaluation forms
the basis for determining development objectives and planning
proposals to solve current problems and meet future needs.
Planning for a South Pole Station Master Plan began in 2020. Early
efforts collected existing station data and presented a framework for
more detailed future planning. In early 2023 NSF began work on
the South Pole Station Master Plan (SPSMP).
The SPSMP must balance the future scientific needs with logistical
and budget realities as well as consider the special status of the site
as Antarctic Specially Managed Area Number 5. Environmental
conditions at the South Pole are extremely harsh, and operating a
research station at such a remote location involves complex and
costly logistics support. The first step in
the SPSMP process was the development of an analysis of
alternatives with life-cycle cost estimates of various future
scenarios. NSF utilized this analysis to establish the vision for the
future of the South Pole Station: Modernize infrastructure and
operations at the South Pole Station to continue supporting science
within the existing 150-bed capacity.
Once the vision was established the NSF and SPSMP team held a
four-day virtual planning charrette in August 2023. The charrette
was a facilitated conversation with the scientific community,
federal partners, station operational teammates, and the general
public. Over 175 individuals attended the charrette and
collaborated on the plan for the future of the South Pole Station.
The NSF plans on sharing the draft South Pole Station Master Plan
with the general public via the United States Federal Register in the
Spring of 2024. Public comments will be collected which the NSF
will use to inform the final Master Plan. ASMA 5 Management
Group members will also be engaged at this time. NSF will publish
the final Master Plan on the USAP website www.usap.gov once
completed in the Fall of 2024.
Path Forward
The final South Pole Station Master Plan will present a summary of
current conditions, constraints, and opportunities for the South Pole
Station. It will present a site plan for redevelopment of
infrastructure in need of replacement, consider conceptual building
forms and design considerations for those replacement structures,
identify projects that will require capital funding levels for
completion, and establish a phasing plan for accomplishing these
improvements. As project work is further planned, Environmental
Impact Assessments will be conducted for scope beyond the
boundaries of what has already been assessed under current
environmental documentation.
The South Pole Station Master Plan is the first such plan developed
for the South Pole Station, and it – like the other USAP station
master plans – will be routinely reviewed and updated as conditions
and priorities warrant.
