Initiation of review of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially
Protected Area No. 143 and Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.
162
Initiation of review of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially
Protected Area No. 143 and Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.
162
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
initiated a five-yearly review of the Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 143 Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula,
Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, and ASPA 162 Mawson’s
Huts, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East
Antarctica. The reviews are being conducted with reference to
Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to
Resolution 2 (2011). This paper briefly describes these Areas, and
how the reviews are progressing. Australia intends to present the
results of the reviews for consideration at CEP 27 (2025).
Background
ASPA 143 Marine Plain
Marine Plain is situated in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica. ASPA
143 Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth
Land is located approximately 10 km south-east of Australia’s Davis
station, and was originally designated under Recommendation 5
(1987) following a proposal made by Australia. Revised
Management Plans were adopted under Measure 2 (2003) and
Measure 9 (2013). Following a five-yearly review conducted by
Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed the existing Management Plan
would remain in force with the next review to be initiated in 2024.
The Area is representative of a major Antarctic terrestrial ice-free
ecosystem, and is primarily designated to protect its outstanding
fossil fauna and rare geological features. The Area is of exceptional
scientific interest because of its relevance to the palaeoecological
and palaeoclimatic record of Antarctica.
ASPA 162 Mawson’s Huts
Cape Denison is situated in George V Land, East Antarctica. ASPA
162 Mawson’s Huts, Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V
Land, East Antarctica is located approximately 100 km east of
France’s Dumont d'Urville station, and was originally designated
under Measure 2 (2004) following a proposal made by Australia.
Revised Management Plans were adopted under Measure 12 (2009)
and Measure 9 (2014). Following a five-yearly review conducted by
Australia, CEP XXII (2019) agreed that the existing Management
Plan would remain in force with the next review to be initiated in
2024.
The Area is primarily designated to protect the huts erected by the
1911-1914 Australasian Antarctic Expedition and the associated
landscape which has considerable historic, archaeological,
technical, social and aesthetic values. The building form of the huts
themselves shows the functional and efficient planning that was
undertaken in response to the site position and the elements
endured by the expedition members.
Progress with review of Management Plans
ASPA 143 Marine Plain
Australia has initiated a review of the Management Plan for ASPA
143, including consultation with subject matter experts and
personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past five years. To
date, the following matters have been identified for further
consideration and possible revisions to the Management Plan:
site access
existing in situ scientific equipment
monitoring programs
updates to supporting documentation, and
editorial changes for consistency with other ASPA Management
Plans and the Guide,
Ongoing landscape vulnerability research will also inform the
review.
ASPA 162 Mawson’s Huts
Australia has initiated a review of the Management Plan for ASPA
162, including consultation with subject matter experts and
personnel permitted to enter the Area during the past five years. To
date, the following matters have been identified for further
consideration and possible revisions to the Management Plan:
site visitation
site pressures (including climate change)
monitoring and maintenance program
description of biological features
documentation procedures
updates to supporting documentation, and
editorial changes for consistency with other ASPA Management
Plans and the Guide
There is a comprehensive conservation management plan for the
Mawson’s Huts historic site, which is managed by the Australian
Antarctic Division. A review of that conservation management plan
is underway, and will inform the further review of the Management
Plan for ASPA 162.
Next steps
Australia will continue the reviews of these Management Plans over
the next 12 months, and intends to present the outcomes for
consideration at CEP 27 (2025).
