Development of actions to detect, survey and remedy environmental
liabilities due to hydrocarbons in Argentine Antarctic Bases
Development of actions to detect, survey and remedy environmental
liabilities due to hydrocarbons in Argentine Antarctic Bases
Summary
In accordance with the provisions of the Madrid Protocol with
respect to the general obligations established in Article 1.5 of Annex
III, Argentina is committed to addressing the pollution caused by
Antarctic Gas Oil (GOA) at its bases. As a continuation of the
technological development tasks in bioremediation in Antarctica
carried out by the Argentine Antarctic Programme in the last 20
years, Argentina designed a three-year work plan to carry out the
initial diagnosis and subsequent bioremediation actions at all its
permanent bases. The plan consists of diagnostic and
bioremediation procedures that include environmental assessment
and mapping phases, remediation actions and analysis of the
results. During the 2023/2024 Antarctic campaign, soil sampling
was carried out at multiple bases for detailed contamination
analysis. The results will guide the priorities for action. The
fundamental purpose is to mitigate the negative environmental
impact on Antarctic ecosystems through the application of specific
remediation methodologies.
When the plan is concluded, Argentina hopes to contribute to the
CEP by sharing the results of the plan's implementation and
providing the project methodology for inclusion in the CEP Clean-
up Manual.
Introduction
At the moment, Antarctic Gas Oil (AGO) still constitutes the main
source of energy at all bases on the Antarctic continent. Much of the
fuel remains stored for successive seasons in very challenging
environmental conditions. Both the storage and handling of these
large quantities of AGO represent a high environmental risk of spills
or accidents affecting soil and water.
After the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol, Argentina carried
out a diagnosis through an environmental review of its activities on
different bases in order to comply with Article 1.5 of Annex III of
the Protocol:
Past and present terrestrial waste disposal sites and abandoned
Antarctic activity work sites will be cleaned up by the generator of
such waste and by the user of such sites.
As a result of this evaluation, it was detected that one of the
environmental liabilities that required diagnostic and remedial
actions was pollution caused by fossil fuels. Argentina has been
carrying out research and bioremediation tasks at the Carlini Base
for more than 20 years, and this has allowed it to develop
remediation techniques and procedures in the soils of Antarctica
ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII Sofia (2015) DT 49 Environmental
Remediation in Antarctica (Argentina/Brazil).ATCM XLIII - CEP
XXIII Paris (2021) BP 05 Characterising Antarctic Fuels to Inform
the Clean Up of Fuel Spill Sites (Argentina/Australia).
In 2022, through a specific call from the Ministry of Science and
Technology (ImpaCT.AR Programme), Argentina designed a work
plan to carry out the initial diagnosis and subsequent
bioremediation actions at all its permanent bases. This work
initially covers a period of three years and aims to develop
procedures that provide the scientific-technological capacity to
detect, survey and remedy with site-specific strategies the
environmental liabilities generated by the use of fossil fuels in soils
at the Argentine Antarctic Bases.
Development
The work programme has three stages:
First stage (year 1), in which samples are taken to carry out a
quantitative diagnosis (extent, volume, concentration and type of
contaminated material) of the environmental liability caused by
fuel management activities at the different Argentine bases. In
addition, it involves a survey of the infrastructure intended for the
storage, transportation and mobilisation of fossil fuels in said
locations.
Once this stage is complete, in the second part (year 2) it is
expected to carry out on-site field remediation actions where
possible and convenient, involving the development of specific
methodologies for each of the different soils contaminated with
hydrocarbons, which are then applicable on a real scale in
Antarctica while taking into account the environmental values of
the site, the surrounding area and the degree of contamination
(extension, volume, concentration, potential impact on fauna and
flora, and type of contaminated material).
Finally, the last stage (year 3) will consist of the closure of the
treatments at the bases, with the consequent analysis of the results
obtained in terms of remediation of the contaminated environment.
In this way, Argentina will reduce the harmful effects generated by
petroleum hydrocarbon pollution on Antarctic flora and fauna,
affecting various ecosystems (soil, sediments of coastal areas,
freshwater lagoons, etc.).
The programme is currently in its first stage during the 2023/2024
summer Antarctic campaign of the Argentine Antarctic Programme.
On board the Icebreaker A.R.A. “Almirante Irizar”, scientists from
the Argentine Antarctic Institute have surveyed and collected soil
samples from the Orcadas, Carlini, Esperanza, Petrel and San Martín
Antarctic bases in order to analyse the levels of contamination
present. The sampling will make it possible to map the
environmental situation of the Argentine bases and categorise the
environmental liabilities found according to magnitude, danger and
feasibility of resolution, based on the criteria established in the
Cleaning Manual of the Environmental Protection Committee of the
Antarctic Treaty.
The samples will be analysed by the Argentine Antarctic
Programme to determine the concentration of hydrocarbons in the
soil, and based on the above-mentioned categorisation, select the
priority situations to be resolved in the second stage of the project
by carrying out biopiles in the field.
Conclusion
In conclusion, in accordance with the provisions of the Madrid
Protocol, Argentina has undertaken a significant initiative to
address the problem of pollution caused by Antarctic Gas Oil at its
bases and the clean-up of its work sites. This commitment translates
into a three-year programme that includes stages of diagnosis,
bioremediation and analysis. The research carried out by scientists
from the Argentine Antarctic Institute will enable progress in the
reduction of the negative anthropic environmental impact
generated by the use of fossil fuels, and generate technological
developments that may be potentially feasible elsewhere on the
continent. The current efforts, supported by the Argentine Antarctic
Programme, represent a crucial milestone in the preservation of
Antarctic ecosystems and reflect Argentina's continued commitment
to protecting the environment in the Antarctic region.
Argentina hopes to share the experience of this three-year
systematic plan once it is concluded and contribute its work
methodology for inclusion in the CEP Cleaning Plan. This would be
in line with the actions included in the CEP's Five-Year Work Plan
in Repair or remediation of environmental damage, as well as in
points 5.e and 5.f of the CEP Climate Change Response Plan.
References
Martínez Álvarez LM, Ruberto LAM, Lo Balbo A, Mac Cormack WP
(2017) Bioremediation of hydrocarbon-contaminated soils in cold
regions: Development of a pre-optimised biostimulation biopile-
scale field assay in Antarctica. Science of the Total Environment,
590-591:194-203
