A Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities
A Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities
Summary
IAATO presents this paper and catalogue of activities to aid in
discussions around the development of a tourism framework by
Parties at ATCM 46 and beyond. All IAATO Operator activities in
Antarctica are permitted or authorized by Competent Authorities
through Environmental Impact Assessments (or equivalent),
Advance Notifications and, where relevant, Waste Management
Permits, submitted in advance of the season. IAATO Operators
strive for safe and responsible operations in the Antarctic Treaty
area and plan activities that will have no more than a minor or
transitory environmental impact. Activities are recorded and
submitted as part of the ATS Post Visit Reporting system. This paper
expands on the previously submitted ATCM XLII (2019) IP145 A
Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities.
Background
This paper expands on the previously submitted ATCM XLII (2019)
IP145 A Catalogue of IAATO Operator Activities. As discussions in
the Special Working Group on the Development of a Tourism
Framework begin, it was suggested to IAATO that the Special
Working Group would benefit from more information to help
Parties better understand the range of activities IAATO Operators
currently undertake in Antarctica, and what those activities entail.
This paper is in response to that suggestion.
Introduction
All IAATO Operators seek the authorization of their Competent
Authority for any activities they plan to undertake by submitting
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) or equivalent, Advance
Notifications and, where relevant, Waste Management Permits, in
advance of the season. Because of variations in the requirements
between Competent Authorities, IAATO endeavors to ensure that
their Operators work to meet industry best practice by requiring
them to supply Advance Notifications and EIA to IAATO even if
their Competent Authority does not impose those requirements. In
line with IAATO’s mission, all members subscribe to the principle
that their planned activities will have no more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. To maintain
membership in good standing, activities must be conducted in a safe
and environmentally responsible manner, something that IAATO
has held as a primary goal since the Association’s founding in 1991.
Equally, as all IAATO Operators and their field staff share the strong
belief that carefully managed firsthand experiences are
irreplaceable in creating a group of ambassadors committed to
supporting the continued protection of Antarctica. Every tourist’s
visit, whatever activities they undertake, is designed to promote
knowledge and understanding of Antarctica via education.
IAATO maintains an extensive database in order to understand
long-term trends to facilitate decision-making about the responsible
management of its Operators’ activities. Data is collected through
Post Visit Report (PVR) forms, adopted by the ATCPs, which are
submitted to the IAATO Secretariat and collated into an annual
statistics overview. Data are shared with Competent Authorities to
inform and assist with their work in managing human activity in
the region.
What follows is a catalogue of the IAATO Operator Antarctic
activities in the IAATO database for both Deep Field and Marine
activities, along with very brief explanations of what the activity
entails. All activities described below are documented in Post Visit
Report Forms. All activities are described in much greater detail in
each Operator’s EIA including locations, routes, equipment carried,
mitigation measures in place, etc. In response to requests from
Parties, IAATO has expanded activity descriptions when appropriate
for more accurate reporting (e.g. Skiing has expanded to Cross-
Country Skiing and also Downhill Skiing) in Post Visit Reports.
Changes are reported annually to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat so
they can update the ATS database appropriately.
IAATO offers this list as a basis for continued dialogue with
Competent Authorities, Antarctic Treaty Party representatives,
members of the CEP and others working toward a common
understanding of human activity in Antarctica.
Catalogue of Activities as documented in the Post Visit Reports filed
by IAATO Operators
*Indicates that an ATCM or IAATO Activity Guideline is in
existence.
**Indicates Deep Field Only Activity
Intracontinental Aircraft Flights**: A deep field fixed-wing flight
that may make one or more landings before returning to the
original location, or reaching an alternative final destination.
Antarctic Expedition Motorized**: Expeditions that predominately
use an electric or internal combustion motor vehicle (wheel or
tracked), with or without sleds.
Antarctic Expedition Other**: Expeditions that use wind-craft,
specialist large-wheeled trail (fat-tire) bicycles, or other non-
motorized vehicles to cross areas of ice, slush and snow.
 
Antarctic Expedition Ski**: A single person or a team traversing by
skis with sleds.
Antarctic Expedition Snowkite**: A single person or a team
traversing on skis while being pulled by kites, usually with sleds.
Avian Influenza Pre-Activity Assessment*: Pre Client-Visitation
evaluation of site by qualified staff, crew, or for signs and symptoms
of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza.
Citizen Science: Participating in a project classified as citizen
science where scientific data collection is undertaken by amateur
(non-professional) scientists, for use by science professionals.
Climbing: Climbing mountains, nunataks or ice features with
guides, the length of the trip can range from a few hours to multi-
day expeditions.
Commercial Filming: Support and/or transport of professional
filmmakers (e.g BBC, Discovery etc).
Cross-country Skiing: Backcountry skiing (often with skins to allow
uphill travel) – this can be over short or long distances.
Day Trip: A round trip flight (fixed or rotary wing) where
passengers are on the ground for several hours.
Deep Field Camping**: Establishing a small, temporary field camp
for more than one night in tents or bivouacs in a location away
from an Operator’s main operations hub.
Deep Field Experience Skydiving**: Tandem or solo free fall
skydiving from an aircraft before landing by parachute.
Deep Field Experience Foot**: A single person or team walking in
the Antarctic environment.
Deep Field Experience Mountaineering**: A single person or team
mountaineering.
Deep Field Experience Pedal-Drive**: A single person or team
traversing by pedal driven vehicle.
Deep Field Experience Skiing**: A single person or team traversing
by skis.
Deep Field Experience Snowkiting**: A single person or team on
skis while being pulled by a kite(s).
Deep Field Flight-Field Landing**: Intracontinental flights utilizing
non-traditional landing areas.
Downhill Skiing: Ascending and descending a snow-covered slope
on skis.
Emperor Penguin Colony Visits*: Visiting, including camping at
relevant distance from, an Emperor Penguin colony.
Expedition Support: Support offered to various types of expeditions,
including, communications, meteorological forecasting, SAR
support, medical care, etc. by marine, air or deep field Operators.
Extended Walk: A walk which moves beyond the immediate vicinity
of a landing (usually over 1km).
Gear Depoting: Caching gear (SAR equipment, fuel, etc.) in strategic
locations by vehicle, airdrop or ski traverse for later use.
Helicopter Assisted Ski Touring: Skiing over short or long distance
with helicopter assistance in transport between sites and/or base
camp/mother ship.
Helicopter Assisted Trekking: Journey on foot with helicopter
assistance in transport between sites and/or base camp/mother
ship.
Helicopter Flight: A helicopter flight which takes off from and
returns to the original location, or may make one or more landings
before reaching an alternative final destination.
Helicopter Flight-Seeing*: A flight which takes off from and returns
to the same location without landing elsewhere.
Helicopter Landing*: Landing on any form of landing pad.
Hydrographic Work: Measurement and description of features
which affect maritime navigation, either from the mother vessel or
small boat.
Ice Landing: Landing onto floating ice (whether of sea or land
origin), either from a vessel or tender.
Ice Walk: Walking on floating ice (whether of sea or land origin) to
a destination away from a vessel, tender or helicopter landing area.
Kayaking*: Moving through the water in a kayak.
Last 1-2 Degree Expeditions**: Using a form of transportation
(motor vehicle, skis, kite, etc) to travel the last 1 or 2 degrees to the
Pole.
Marathon*: Organising a marathon or other sport foot event in
Antarctica over a pre-designated route.
Multi-Night Coastal Camping*: Establishing a small, temporary field
camp for more than one night in tents or bivouacs in a location
away from an Operator’s main operations hub.
Music Event Ashore: event onshore that involves a music element.
Music Event Onboard: event onboard that involves a music element.
Polar Plunge: A short immersion into Antarctic waters, usually done
by jumping off a platform or wading in from a beach.
Remote Underwater Vehicle (ROV)*: Exploring underwater using a
remotely operated vehicle, which is tethered to a support vessel.
RPAS Commercial Flight (UAV-C)*: Piloting an RPAS for
commercial use, usually for documentary or marketing purposes.
RPAS Operational/Navigation Flight (UAV-O)*: Piloting an RPAS to
aid a vessel in navigation through Antarctic waters.
RPAS Scientific Flight (UAV-S): Piloting an RPAS for scientific data
collection, usually done by scientific researchers.
Science Support: Support functions in the field, usually logistical, to
scientific community, including NAPs.
Scuba Diving*: Using a self-contained underwater breathing
apparatus (scuba), completely independent of surface supply, to
explore underwater.
Ship Cruise: Sailing through Antarctic near coastal waters without
leaving the principal vessel.
Short Overnight Stays (Coastal Camping)*: Vessels offering a near
shore camping experience, using tents or bivouacs, overnight with
no meals ashore.
Small Boat Cruising*: Small boat (Zodiacs, RIB, etc.) ride to observe
the Antarctic environment.
Small Boat Landing: Small boats (Zodiacs, RIB, etc.) taking guests
for a landing in Antarctic coastal areas.
Snorkeling*: Swimming to observe underwater while equipped with
a diving mask and snorkel.
Snowboarding: Ascending and descending a snow-covered slope on
a snowboard.
Snowshoeing: Hiking with snowshoes so that the person's feet do
not sink into the snow.
South Pole Fly-in**: Flight to South Pole for visits to the geographic
and ceremonial South Poles.
Sporting Event Multi-Sport: A sporting event that combines more
than one activity e.g. run/ski/fatbike.
Stand Up Paddle Boarding: Standing on boards and using a paddle
to propel oneself through the water.
Station Visit*: Tour of National Antarctic Program station with
permissions arranged in advance.
Submersible (HOV)*: An untethered watercraft designed to operate
underwater with occupants inside.
Swimming – Distance: Swimming to travel a distance (usually 500m
– 2km).
Vinson Massif Climb**: Climbing part or all of Vinson Massif with
mountaineering guides.
Wildlife Watching on Vessel (Whales, Seals, etc.)*: Watching
wildlife from onboard the primary vessel.
