State of conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum (HSM No. 42)
English version provided by the author
State of conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum (HSM No. 42)
Summary
This document reflects the work carried out in the last Antarctic
summer campaign by researchers from the Argentine Antarctic
Program at Historic Site and Monument (HSM) No. 42, contributing
to its conservation. Their main objective was to analyze the
preservation conditions of the entire collection of objects found in
the museum and in the Omond House. The survey and organization
of the Casa Moneta collection are necessary to incorporate the
preventive conservation plan that is being developed according to
the current diagnosis, which is added to the diagnosis of the
structural plan carried out in previous campaigns, helping develop a
project that will encompass the museum in its entirety.
Introduction
The Historic Site and Monument (HSM) No. 42 is located on Laurie
Island, South Orkney Islands. This HSM includes different sectors of
the Orcadas Base that have historical value, among which is Casa
Moneta, built in 1905 and used until 1940, currently a museum. It
is the first Argentine facility in Antarctica and is named in honor of
the Captain of the National Meteorological Service Manuel Moneta,
who was part of the expeditions to the Antarctic continent in the
years 1923, 1925, 1927 and 1929.
This house-museum houses a collection of objects that total around
600 items. The collection is also made up of objects that were found
in different parts of the base and near it. Embalmed specimens and
bone remains are added to the collection, demonstrating the
different species that inhabit the area. Also, it contains instruments
for measuring geomagnetism and meteorology. Other objects play
the role of museological support, helping to explain the history of
the base, such as photographs and oil paintings.
Casa Moneta is located in the Argentine Orcadas Base, on Laurie
Island between Uruguay Bay and Scotia Bay, and was built in 1905,
serving as a house-dwelling for 34 consecutive years for the
personnel of the different expeditions and constituting the first
permanent Argentine settlement in Antarctica.
The current assesment and conservation work in the Moneta
Museum and the Omond House are part of a line of actions carried
out by personnel of the Naval Museum of the Argentine Navy at the
beginning of the 21st century, which in 2019 added staff of the
Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA), dependent on the National
Directorate for the Antarctic of Argentina (DNA).
The Casa Moneta Museum is protected by the Antarctic Treaty
System as Historic Site and Monument No. 42, as well as by
Argentine legislation that designates it as a “National Historic Site.”
It is an Antarctic construction from the “heroic era”, therefore, as
administrators of the HSM, it is central to the study and exploration
of Antarctica to ensure its conservation for future generations,
rendering it a unique responsibility.
Activities carried out for the preservation of the Casa Moneta´s
collection
Within the framework of the Historical Heritage Project of the
Argentine Antarctic Program, under the leadership of the
Coordination of Social Sciences, Communication and Outreach of
the IAA, the tasks developed during the 2023-2024 Summer
Antarctic Campaign are a continuation of the tasks carried out in
the 2022-2023 Antarctic Summer Campaign. That year the team
aimed to carry out a diagnosis of the state of conservation of the
Casa Moneta, via a visual examination with a thermographic
camera. Also, humidity and temperature data were collected and a
graphic and 3D survey was performed.
The project continued during this campaign and mainly aimed to
analyze the preservation conditions of the entire collection of
objects found in the museum and in the Omond House.
The activities focused on knowing the state of conservation of the
entire museum collection. Also, an order of action priorities was
established to improve the storage conditions of those objects that
were stored, taking into account the data collected in the previous
campaign, mainly from areas with higher percentages of humidity
to prioritize the care of objects in those places.
The work carried out also included the detection of risks that may
in the future threaten the preservation of the collection in Casa
Moneta and the Omond House, to establish a diagnosis of the
current state and provide recommendations to contribute to its
conservation, by comparing with the data collected, already
registered by the Historical Heritage team. During the campaign,
the team developed a database to keep a record of all the items in
the collection, in an orderly and easily accessible manner. There
was also progress with regards to the registration of the collection,
identifying each one of the items by photographs and assembling
storage boxes for 44 items.
After storing the collection items in safe boxes, they were labeled
and stored in specific places to preserve their state against weather
and time conditions that may affect Casa Moneta.
The Historical Heritage team also carried out cleaning activities.
Using non-aggressive techniques, the team performed tasks of dry
cleaning and reorganization of the warehouse, dry cleaning of the
entire “Casa Moneta” museum, and a general survey of the Omond
House.
Conclusions
The survey and organization of the Casa Moneta collection are
necessary to incorporate the preventive conservation plan that is
being developed according to the current diagnosis, which is added
to the diagnosis of the structural plan carried out in previous
campaigns, helping to develop a project that will encompass the
museum in its entirety. This plan will be carried out by the
Coordination of Social Sciences, Communication and Outreach of
the IAA, in coordination with the National Naval Museum of the
Argentine Navy.
At the end of the campaign, the Heritage team concluded with a
series of recommendations that were issued to the authorities and
were essential for the care of Casa Moneta, due to water filtrations
that could damage the collections kept there.
The conservation work carried out is based on guidelines and
recommendations expressed in international charters for the
preservation of Heritage, promoted by institutions such as the
International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and the
International Council of Museums (ICOM). It also considers the
ATCM Guidelines for the handling of historic remains, for the
assessment and management of heritage in Antarctica, and for the
designation and protection of historic sites and monuments.
References
Aldazabal, V. and Pereyra, P. (2001). Centenary Project of the
Argentine installation in the
Antarctica (1904-2004). Recovery and enhancement of Omond
facilities
ATCM XLV – CEP XXV Helsinki (2023). IP 113 CEP 9b State of
conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum (HSM N°42)
House -1003- and Casa Moneta -1905-. Report of tasks carried out.
Barr, S. (2021). How we talk about Antarctic cultural heritage.
Antarctic Affairs, 8, 33-52.
Cronyn, J. M. (2003). Elements of archaeological conservation.
Routledge.
Gaiser, RF, Robles, CA, Kobashigawa, JM, Pereira, S and Skronski,
N. (2021). Mycobiota associated to Casa Moneta Museum wood,
South Orkney Islands, Antarctica. Polar Biology, 44(9), 1817-1831.
IRAM Argentine Institute for Materials Rationalization. Standard on
thermal conditioning of buildings, 1996. IRAM 11603: “Thermal
conditioning of buildings. Bioenvironmental classification of the
Argentine Republic.
IRAM Argentine Institute for Materials Rationalization. Standard on
thermal conditioning of buildings, 2000. IRAM 11625: “Thermal
insulation of buildings. Verification of its hydrotermic conditions.
Verification of the risk of condensation of surface and interstitial
water vapor in the central panels of exterior walls, floors and
ceilings of buildings in general.
Martínez, C. (2017). Report on maintenance tasks at the Orcadas
base. DNA.
Moneta, J.M. (1949). Four years in South Orkney. Peuser.
Roucco, MI and Del Valle, RA (2003) Tectonic tsunami in the South
Orkney Islands of Argentine Antarctica.
Sinner, C.E (2023). Risk of surface and interstitial condensation.
Recommendations for structural and constructive conservation.
IAA-DNA
Skronski, N. (2016). Moneta house condition report. Argentine
Army.
