Air Capacities on King George Island “Búfalo" Aircraft Hangar
Maintenance
Air Capabilities on King George Island
“Búfalo" Aircraft Hangar Maintenance
Summary
This document provides information regarding the work to improve
the Antarctic infrastructure, consisting of the maintenance of the
capabilities of the aircraft hangar of the “Presidente Frei" Antarctic
Air Base, King George Island, which directly benefit the safety and
comfort of those who perform functions permanently, or for other
national and foreign programmes that receive support at this
aeronautical facility.
Introduction
Through its Air Force, Chile operates with aircraft based on King
George Island, thus guaranteeing compliance with the international
responsibilities maintained by the State of Chile regarding the Air
Search and Rescue Service (SAR), as well as aeromedical
evacuations, from the Drake Sea to beyond the Antarctic Circle. To
this end, it has an aeronautical infrastructure capacity present at the
“Presidente Frei" Antarctic Air Base, one of which is the “Búfalo"
hangar, which is located to one side of the runway on the “Teniente
Marsh" airfield.
This airfield not only serves as a means of protecting aircraft, but
also contributes to the Base's personnel being able to carry out their
aircraft maintenance tasks, maintenance of ground support
equipment and the logistics management of air cargo. Along with
this, its facilities allow the operation of the network and a water
tank, an energy generation room and a medium voltage room,
belonging to the Base's electrical interconnection system.
Likewise, this facility houses material and human resources from
other international Antarctic programmes, when as a result of their
Antarctic campaigns, they require shelter and logistical support for
their benefit.
In this way, considering the permanent use, the prevailing weather
conditions in the area and the age of the building have led to this
infrastructure undergoing deterioration typical of its age, bearing in
mind that its materiality and technology date from the beginning
from the 1980s. Therefore, it is necessary to update its
functionality, safety standards and comfort features for users.
Maintenance works
For this reason, as the State Antarctic Operator and responsible for
the “Presidente Frei" Antarctic Air Base, the Chilean Air Force
developed an Improvement and Maintenance Project for the
“Búfalo" hangar, aimed at revitalising its facilities and operating
conditions, for the protection and security not only of the aircraft
that operate there, since the human and material resources of the
Antarctic Programmes that use this capacity must also be
considered.
The works were put out to tender with companies that had
experience in construction on the white continent, for which the
requirements were, among others, full compliance with all aspects
of care and preservation of the Antarctic environment to ensure the
lower impact of the work.
The works themselves began in November 2023 with the transfer of
materials and personnel to the “Presidente Frei" Antarctic Air Base,
prior to a planning stage that took much of last year. Accordingly,
the completion of the work is scheduled for 31 May of this year.
The improvement and maintenance project involved working in the
infrastructure area itself, in the electrical area, services, and
lighting, among others. Some of the detailed work includes the
following:
Replacement of roof casing
Change of electrical system
Change in platform and access surface
Change of access doors
Change of work surface
Roof repair
Changing of the lighting system
With all of the above, the “Búfalo" hangar will provide a capacity
with operational safety standards that will contribute to the
protection and integrity of the personnel who work in that area,
working with a certain level of comfort, so necessary in such an
inhospitable scenario along with the maintenance of facilities in
accordance with the needs of protection from inclement weather,
together with being an alternative support in situations that require
a spirit of trust and cooperation between the member states of the
Antarctic System.
