Recommendations on the contribution of the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) on the coordination of meteorological
programmes in Antarctica, as operated by WMO Members, and in
support of evolving global needs
Recommendations on the contribution of the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) on the coordination of meteorological
programmes in Antarctica, as operated by WMO Members, and in
support of evolving global needs
Summary
This paper provides a summary of the recommendations on the
WMO activities on Antarctica, as made by the Panel on Polar and
High Mountains Observations, Research, and Services (PHORS) of
the Executive Council of the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), following its meeting in Oslo, Norway, 12 to 15 February
2024.
Background
Since 1963, WMO has actively supported its Members that are Party
to the Antarctic Treaty System, through the WMO Executive Council
(EC), on the coordination of meteorological activities in Antarctica
as carried out by nations and groups of nations, and aligned with
Article 2 of the WMO Convention.
WMO has focused on the interfaces between these meteorological
activities, the relevant WMO Programmes, in particular the World
Weather Watch (WWW), and the activities organized in the
framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. The aim is to meet
requirements for meteorological, environmental monitoring and
climate research, and support necessary services.
Since 2007, the Panel of EC on Polar and High Mountains
Observations, Research, and Services (PHORS), is the coordinating
body of WMO activities in Antarctica.
Currently, the Panel includes twenty-five members from nineteen
WMO Members and three partner organizations. The Panel co-
chairs are the Permanent Representatives (PR) with WMO of
Norway and of New Zealand. Eleven members of the Panel come
from countries that are consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty,
and four members are from countries that are non-consultative
Parties of the Treaty.
The most recent meeting of the Panel and its Advisory Group on
Antarctica was held in Oslo, Norway, on 12 to 15 February 2024.
PHORS Panel meeting recommendations and next steps
The Panel made recommendations in support of the WMO Members
activities on the Antarctic, by taking into account:
The Helsinki Declaration on Climate Change on Antarctica,
Resolution 2(2023) – of the 25th meeting of CEP (CEP25) of
ATCM45, committing to “substantially increase its efforts to
communicate the global implications of climate change in
Antarctica within own countries and in international forums, and
the need to prevent the irreversible changes to Antarctica and
consequential implications for the planet”.
The Resolution 2 (2014) – ATCM XXXVII – CEP XVII, Brasilia and
the commitment of WMO to cooperation, facilitation, and exchange
of meteorological and related oceanographic and cryospheric
environmental information, including but not limited to
meteorological and marine (wave and sea ice) forecasting services
over a range of time scales.
The Resolution 6 of the 19th World Meteorological Congress (2023)
that adopted five priorities for action on global and regional
impacts of changes in the cryosphere, one of these is focused on
enhancing the cooperation and coordination across WMO Members
on their activities related to Antarctica.
The Panel members agreed:
on the global importance of improved and sustained data
availability from Antarctica. They highlighted with examples the
contribution to better global climate model predictions and weather
forecasts including of extreme events occurring in Antarctica and
for improving the understanding of the complex interactions
between Antarctica and the rest of the Earth system.
on the interest of WMO related to the emerging global impacts of
irreversible changes of Antarctica Ice Sheet manifested through the
contribution to sea level rise, and affecting coastal areas and small
islands developing states, and their cascading effects. WMO
supports its Member states and territories on developing
hydrometeorological and climate information and services
contributing to response, mitigation and for adaptation strategies.
Their effectiveness depends on the best scientific information
available, including on changes of the Antarctica ice sheet over the
coming decades and centuries and the quality of mid and long-term
projections of sea level rise.
that basic in-situ observations are still lacking over most of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet and the surrounding ocean, especially where
rapid changes are occurring.
on the value of facilitation through WMO towards increasing the
availability of critically important Antarctic observations and data
and the applications of research results for improving the estimates
of Antarctic ice sheet melting and the understanding of the
associated global impacts.
that the increasing activities in the Antarctic have increased the
demand for meteorological and climate information, including
marine weather, sea ice, and icebergs. They agreed that
coordination and improved communications on the provision of
these services across the countries with gateway cities, South Africa,
Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, and Chile, together with those
offered from other WMO Members and institutions active in the
region, would benefit significantly from building on the
collaboration through WMO, as established in other regions of the
globe.
that in the countries that are Party to the Antarctic Treaty,
depending on the national mandates, the National Meteorological
Services may or may not be closely engaged with national
institutions active in the Antarctic, while their collaboration may
provide mutual benefits, and these could be materialized if working
through the national delegations at ATCM.
the importance of upscaling the engagements for establishing a
network of Regional Climate Centres for Antarctica (AntarcticRCC-
Network) covering Antarctica and the Southern Ocean as
documented in the meeting of 12-14 December 2022, in Melbourne,
Australia and during the Oslo meeting. This is supported through
the contribution of interested Members, by building on their current
activities and in the existing framework of WMO Regional Climate
Centres. A special recognition was given to role of the collaboration
between operational and research programmes towards the
development of necessary information services.
on the value of the observations and data access from the Antarctic
and Southern Ocean, in support of the Global Numerical Weather
Prediction and Climate Reanalysis applications, and on the global
benefits from the potential for their affiliation with the
WMO coordinated Global Basic Observing Network (GBON),
established in this sense. The Panel strongly endorsed the goal that
Members with a presence in the Antarctic increase their efforts to
operate long term and sustained stations/platforms contributing to
GBON in areas of global commons including the High Seas and the
Antarctic, according to their ability, either individually or jointly.
reiterated that, in line with the regulations under the Antarctic
Treaty System, WMO Members have been authorized to issue WMO
Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS) station identifiers
(WSI) for the stations/platforms they operate in Antarctica, and
register them in the WMO Observing System Capability Analysis
and Review Tool (OSCAR/Surface)
on the benefits of adopting technical tools for routinely monitoring
existing observations, aiding on identifying and addressing
nonconformances, e.g. the concepts of Regional WIGOS Centres, as
operated by Members with an interest on Antarctica.
The Panel prepared the following recommendations submitted to
the WMO Executive Council for its 78th session in June 2024:
to organize consultations in 2024/2025, with the WMO Members
representing countries that are Party to the Antarctic Treaty, and
explore an enhanced collaborative mechanism, as devolves from
Article 2 of the WMO Convention (Basic Documents No. 1 (WMO-
No. 15) and aligned with the Resolution 2 (2014) – ATCM XXXVII –
CEP XVII, Brasilia, for gathering and sharing of observations and on
the provision of services for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean,
similar to other areas of global commons and taking into account
the particularities of engagements and programmes on Antarctica,
explore mutually beneficial contributions through the collaboration
through WMO towards advancing the operational and scientific
goals in the Antarctic and facilitate the access to sound scientific
information for those countries affected by the global consequences
of changes on Antarctica.
foster a framework of coordinated engagements between WMO
Members’ national meteorological services with responsibilities for
Antarctic activities and other agencies with responsibilities
undertaken through ATCM, as well as organizations like the
Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR), the Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP), and the
informal Working Group on Antarctica Meteorology and Climate
(WAMC), etc.
in response to the Resolution 2 (2014) – ATCM XXXVII – CEP XVII,
Brasilia, initiate a roadmap for a WMO climate and weather service
strategy for Antarctica in consultation with relevant organizations
and with users, by building on the experience and engagements of
the ongoing implementation of the AntarcticRCC-Network, and by
fostering the support of these activities through coordination and
with operational solution for disseminating data and products, to
meet specific user needs.
The Panel recommended that WMO invite organizations active in
ATCM to take note of the potential for engagement and
contribution to these consultations, based on mutual benefits, as is
the definition of needs and the availability of weather and climate
information addressing the needs of all with a presence on
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and of the global community.
