





Preliminary Plan for Installation and Operation of the PANSY Atmospheric Radar System at Syowa Station




Preliminary Plan for Installation and Operation of the PANSY Atmospheric Radar System at Syowa Station
Submitted by Japan
1.	Summary
JARE, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition, plans to carry out an atmospheric research program named PANSY (Program of ANtarctic SYowa Meso-, Strato-, and Troposphere/ Incoherent Scatter [MST/IS] radar). It will employ a large radar system, to be installed in the 2010–2011 season, at Syowa Station (69°00′ S, 39°35′ E) for at least 12 years.
This project aims to help understanding of how the atmospheric system from the surface up to 500 km works, with precise measurement of winds and plasma parameters, and to contribute to improving the global atmospheric model for better forecasting the future global climate. This project has been endorsed by several international academic associations such as the IUGG (International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics), SCAR (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research), and SCOSTEP (Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics).
The main part of this antenna system is composed of 1,045 sets of Yagi antennas 3-4 m tall, installed in a circular area 160 m in diameter with pipe holes dug in the ground. A small hut will be constructed near the antenna site, and all the other facilities, including electric power generators and a fuel tank, will be installed in or near the existing buildings of the station.
After completion of the observations at Syowa Station, the entire antenna system and associated facilities will be removed from the site and brought back to Japan. The holes for the antenna poles dug in the ground will be restored to their original condition. 
The Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) document for this proposed activity will be submitted to the Ministry for assessment this year
2.	Introduction
The Antarctic Syowa Station is one of the core observatories of the polar atmosphere, conducting meteorological and various other atmospheric observations, including measurements of greenhouse gases and aerosols. Observations there over fifty years have clarified the physics of auroras and also contributed to the understanding of the ozone hole mechanisms over the Antarctic continent. 
The Antarctic atmosphere is the least influenced by human activities, hence it is suitable for monitoring the earth’s climate with extremely low noise. The Antarctic is also home to various unique atmospheric phenomena, such as katabatic winds, the ozone hole, polar mesospheric clouds (PMC), and auroras. Changes in Antarctic atmospheric observations, from those for scientific discovery and environmental monitoring into precise observations suitable for quantitative discussion, would not only provide a breakthrough for polar science but also achieve significant improvement in the accuracy of predictions for the earth’s climate.
Precise observation by a large atmospheric radar installation from the ground up to the upper atmosphere is very important for improving accuracy of global warming predictions by means of climate models. Installation of large atmospheric radar systems in the Antarctic has been requested by resolutions of various international academic societies such as IUGG, SCAR, SCOSTEP, SPARC (Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate), and URSI (Union Radio-Scientifique Internationale). 
Japan has expertise and experience with VHF large atmospheric radar systems, and therefore installation of the PANSY radar system will be a great contribution to understanding the earth’s atmospheric environmental change. PANSY will be one of the largest atmospheric radar systems in the world, and the first one to be installed in the Antarctic. VHF radar observations with smaller radar systems in the Antarctic have been carried out at Peru’s Machu-Picchu Station, Sweden’s Wasa Station, and Australia’s Davis Station in order to observe strong signals from polar mesospheric summer echoes (PMSE) at around 80–90 km in altitude. The PANSY radar, in contrast, will precisely measure atmospheric motion (wind velocities) and plasma parameters from the ground up to 500 km altitude with high time resolution.
3.	Goal of the activity and necessity
3.1	Goal of the activity
The proposed plan is to install a large atmospheric radar system, the PANSY radar, at Syowa Station, for the first time in the Antarctic, and to measure the atmosphere continuously and precisely from the ground up to the upper atmosphere of 500 km (the troposphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, and the thermosphere/ionosphere) in the Antarctic, where observations are the least sufficient.
The radar system has a unique capability of measuring vertical wind velocities and various physical parameters with high precision and with high resolution. Introduction of this radar system will enable cooperative research with current observations at Syowa Station and high resolution numerical simulations, and comprehensive and quantitative research on the polar atmosphere can be expected. 
Installation of the PANSY radar will enable quantitative evaluation of the energy budget, including localized phenomena in the polar region. Also, better evaluation and understanding of the impact of human activity on the global climate will become possible. 
The data collected are to clarify generation of various clouds in the polar region, to evaluate quantitatively the atmospheric waves, especially gravity waves, that transport energy and momentum, to clarify effects of meteorological phenomena unique in the Antarctic such as katabatic winds, and to clarify the effects of solar activity such as auroras. These studies are necessary to reveal the variability and response of the earth’s atmosphere for predicting the earth’s environmental changes, such as global warming, and they might bring about a breakthrough in polar atmospheric science.
3.2	Necessity
A large atmospheric radar system is the only tool that can measure vertical motion in the atmosphere with high precision and high resolution as well as measuring wind velocities continuously from the troposphere to the mesosphere and atmospheric constituents in the ionosphere. Therefore, the establishment of a large atmospheric radar system with this project is very important and necessary to capture the Antarctic atmosphere precisely as a whole, to clarify the roles of processes of the polar atmosphere, and to improve accuracy of climate prediction such as for global warming. 
	Japan has been developing large atmospheric radar systems, such as MU (Middle- and Upper-atmosphere) radar at Kyoto University and EAR (Equatorial Atmosphere Radar) in Indonesia. Installation of the PANSY radar system will complete the network of large atmospheric radar systems in all latitudinal regions—equatorial, midlatitude, and polar regions. As for ionospheric research, the PANSY radar will accomplish the ionospheric radar network in polar regions with EISCAT Arctic radar and the U.S. AMISR radar to be installed in the Antarctic. The installation of the PANSY radar in near future has been strongly anticipated by resolutions from international academic associations, described above.
4.	Outline of proposed activity
4.1 Installation of PANSY
Antenna, transmitter, and receiver (TRX) modules, distribution racks, cables, an observation control hut, power generators (installed in a pre-existing building), and a fuel tank will be installed in the summer of 2010–2011 in the Maigo Zawa on Higashi Ongul To (East Ongul Island) (Figure 1). The main antenna array, which dominates the major part of the overall area, will be set up in a circle 160 m in diameter and 18,000 m2 in area; it consists of 1,045 sets of three-element crossed Yagi antennas in a triangular lattice at 4.5 m intervals (Figure 2a).

Figure 1. Map showing the site for the PANSY observation system at Syowa Station.
The ground is not level, but holes 10 cm diameter and 1 m deep will be drilled with a small heavy instrument (Figure 2b). Steel pipe bases will be buried there, and an aluminum antenna and a TRX module will be installed on each base without concrete, which will decrease the environmental impact (Figure 2c). Twenty-four additional three-element Yagi antennas will also be installed around the main antennas in a similar way, reaching about 150 m in length. Gravel and sand generated from the drilling operation will be collected and kept at the base. An observation control hut will be constructed near the antenna site and will accommodate in-house equipment for controlling the measurements. Two diesel-powered generators will be installed in a pre-existing building with a 20 kl fuel tank set up nearby.
. 
Figure 2. Images showing sets of antennas (a), a small heavy instrument for drilling small holes in the ground (b), and the base of an antenna without cement (c).
The total area where the masts of the antennas etc. contact the ground is 4%, and the area of the antennas etc. projecting to the ground is 5% out of the 160 m diameter circular area. The system is designed to have low power consumption and to be lightweight in order to be installed and operated with a limited electric power supply and in the severe natural environment of the Antarctic.
4.2 Operation of PANSY
Twenty-four-hour observation is planned for 335 days with a 30-day maintenance period each year. Usual operation of observations and system checks will be carried out in the main part of Syowa Station through a LAN, keeping the antenna field and the associated huts unstaffed to minimize the environmental impacts on the antenna site.
5. 	Removal after operation
The initial period of observation is planned to be at least 12 years covering one cycle (11 years) of solar activity. After the 12-year observation campaign, results obtained by this project will be assessed and a decision will be made whether the observations should be continued or not. When all the observations at Syowa Station have finished, the entire antenna system and associated facilities will be removed from the site. The pipe bases will be pulled out using a small heavy instrument, and all the equipment, including the antenna, the TRX modules, the distributing racks, the cables, and the observation control hut (including the base structure), will be removed. The duration of the removal will be two months in summer at the longest, and all the materials removed will be brought back to Japan. The holes in the ground, with a diameter of 10 cm, will be restored to their original state with the gravel and sand removed during the installation.
6. 	Possible alternatives and consequences
6.1 Alternative of conducting no activity
Existing observations are not precise enough, nor do they cover the middle and upper atmosphere, which can contribute to the clarification of the earth’s atmospheric environmental changes, such as global warming. This alternative will result in ignoring the social demand and the international scientific expectations mentioned earlier.
6.2 Alternative to install the antenna in an area other than Syowa Station
Syowa Station is the most suitable place for the installation to minimize environmental impacts because it is easy to prepare monitoring and countermeasures for environmental impacts. Therefore, any plan that did not use Japan’s largest Antarctic research station would increase the impact on the environment. Various kinds of atmospheric observation data collected at Syowa Station would not be utilized with this alternative either.
6.3 Alternative to change the antenna design
6.3.1 Smaller antenna using higher radar frequency (UHF band)
The dimensions of the antenna could be smaller. However, observations of the neutral atmosphere below 100 km in altitude would become difficult, and observations of the Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMC) would be especially difficult. 
6.3.2 Parabolic antenna
It is impossible to maintain a large parabolic antenna in the strong winds at Syowa Station. Also, a parabolic antenna cannot be steered rapidly to change the direction of observation.
6.3.3 Other combinations of antenna size (number, area) and transmission power
An increase in transmission power would cause an increase in power consumption, hence increased fuel consumption. An increase in the antenna area would cause an increase in the time and materials required for construction so as to become unrealistic.
7. 	Natural environment in the Syowa Station area
7.1 Geology and geography
Ongul Shoto (the Ongul Islands), where Syowa Station is located, are low, flat islands. The peak of Higashi Ongul To (East Ongul Island) is Hachinosu Yama, 43.4 m in altitude. This area used to be covered by an ice sheet, and there are geographical features scraped by the ice. The area is underlain by various gneisses and amphibolites that highly metamorphosed from igneous and sedimentary rocks of pelitic and calcareous compositions. It shows various folding structures caused by the transformation effect. A part of Maigo Zawa where construction of the main part of the antenna system is planned has comparatively smooth geographical features with a weathered surface covered with a gravel layer about 50 cm in depth. This area is usually covered with light snow from February to December.
7.2 Biota
Higashi Ongul To (East Ongul Island) has only exposed rock and a gravel surface with several small ponds. In summer, algae grow in the ponds and moss colonies are seen in sandy areas where water supply is available from melting snow. Terrestrial animal species are extremely scarce, with a few species of mites recorded besides protozoa and nematodes living in the moss and/or algal colonies. These flora and fauna are rarely seen in or around Maigo Zawa, where the radar system is planned. There is no rookery of birds, including penguins, on the island, although several kinds of birds are sighted in the vicinity of Syowa Station, with South Polar skuas most often seen flying. It is very unusual to see penguins at Maigo Zawa. 
8. 	Possible environmental impacts
8.1 Solid waste
All of about 15 tons of wood and corrugated cardboard waste from packages for about 150 tons of materials transported from Japan will be brought back to Japan, except for a minute amount of fragments, which will be burned in an incinerator at Syowa Station. No solid waste will be generated during observation operations. If antennas should be damaged by a blizzard, damaged parts will be replaced with spare parts and be brought back to Japan as well. Similarly, all the solid waste generated during the removal of the radar system after observations are finished will be brought back to Japan.
8.2 Impacts of the radio waves transmitted
The PANSY radar transmits VHF radio waves with a peak and an average power of 500 kW and 25 kW, respectively, which are not insignificant. The safety standards for the human body defined by the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) and related domestic law in Japan is 2.0 W/m2 as an average power density. Even when a person approaches as close as 3 m from the antenna, the power density is small at 0.25 W/m2, and therefore the impact on the human body is extremely small. Impacts on animals are not expected because the area of the radar installation is a region where no animals usually approach. Even if a penguin should walk under the antenna, the impact would be extremely small because the radiation toward the ground is smaller by 20 dB (1%) compared to the radiation toward the sky.
8.3 Impacts on flora, fauna, and the ecosystem
There is no flora, and animals are rarely found in the area of the antenna site. Therefore, impacts on flora, fauna, and the ecosystem will be extremely small. Concrete, which might cause environmental problems, will not be used in the antenna field, except for a minimal amount under the hut. Therefore, impacts on the ground and secondary impacts on flora and fauna will be minimal.
With regard to the introduction of non-native species, there are no materials, including the packing materials to be transported for this project, that can have impact on indigenous flora and fauna. Therefore, impacts on the environment are not expected. This is also the case during the observation period, because there is basically no need to transport materials to the site for the radar observations. 
8.4 Impacts on geography and the landscape
As for the antenna construction, nothing will be changed in the geography, and only holes (10 cm diameter, 1 m depth) for the metallic bases supporting the antenna masts will be drilled at 1,069 points. Additional 57 holes of similar dimension for the distribution racks will be drilled in the 160 m diameter antenna field. The 10 m3 of soil generated during the drilling will be stored at the station, and therefore the impact on the geography will be minimized. No concrete will be used for the antenna field, no artificial construction will remain after the removal of the radar system, and the geography before the radar was set up will be restored. Holes left after the removal of the antennas will be restored with the original gravel and sand that was removed, which will minimize the impact on the landscape.
9.	 Indirect and cumulative impacts
Power consumption and fuel consumption will be minimized by new radar transmitter developed for high-efficiency of the power supply. Also, the number of antennas has been increased and transmission power has been decreased in order to decrease fuel consumption. No concrete will be used, but pipe bases will be inserted in the holes drilled in the ground for antenna installation. Power generators will be installed in a pre-existing building in the main part of Syowa Station, and electricity will be supplied from there, which will make monitoring easy and minimize the risk of fuel leakage. Throughout the above-mentioned consideration of environmental impacts, indirect and cumulative impacts during the twelve years of the observation campaign seemed to be no more than minor or transitory.
10.	 Monitoring 
An environmental monitoring plan according to the guidelines of COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) and SCAR will be prepared, and environmental impacts will be recorded. Potential impacts of the activities will be investigated, and the impact will be contained immediately. During the PANSY observation campaign, daily checks on the fuel consumption of the power generators, checks and adjustments of the instruments once every three weeks, and yearly overhauls of the power generators will be performed. Leakage of fuel will be checked for every day, along with surface meteorological observations.
11. 	Procedure for the environmental impact assessment
A draft plan of the installation and operation activities of the PANSY atmospheric radar system at Syowa Station was introduced and considered by the relevant committee in the Ministry of the Environment last September to assess the significance of the impact described in Article 1 of Annex I of the Madrid Protocol. The committee advised the ministry that the activity be preceded by an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) as impacts are predicted to be minor or transitory. Therefore, an IEE document will be submitted to the Ministry this year.

