





Key Climate Change Actions in Antarctica: Emissions Reduction, Adaptation and Science






Key Climate Change Actions in Antarctica: Emissions Reduction, Adaptation and Science


Table of Contents

1.	Introduction	3
2.	Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions	4
3.	Climate Change Adaptation Strategies	5
3.1	Adaptation strategies for Antarctic marine ecosystems	5
3.2	Adaptation strategies for Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems	5
4. 	Climate Science	6
5. 	Concluding Remarks	6
6. 	References	6

Key Climate Change Actions in Antarctica:
Emissions Reduction, Adaptation and Science

Abstract
In ASOC’s view, activities related to climate change in Antarctica need to take place in three areas:

    • Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions: Widespread deployment of energy efficiency and renewable energy systems at all Antarctic stations, coordination of transport and logistics strategic planning about new facilities (necessity, location and design) can bring about regional and global environmental benefits as well as cost savings. Given that Antarctica is one of the regions of the world where the impacts of climate change are most apparent and pronounced, Treaty Parties should lead by example in the global effort in addressing climate change.
    • Implementation of climate adaptation strategies:  Strategies for reducing the vulnerability of climate-sensitive ecosystems and organisms will be increasingly important as the rapid changes underway may exceed the natural abilities of many Antarctic organisms to cope. Strategies to increase the resilience of ecosystems include: establishing a representative network of marine protected areas, protecting areas which are less likely to change (refugia), such as the Ross Sea; implementing appropriate biosecurity measures; putting into place adaptive management systems which are able to incorporate uncertainty and to respond to new information, for example through the expansion and improvement of CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) and the establishment of a Southern Ocean Sentinel program.
    • Globally important climate science: ASOC acknowledges and supports the world-class climate research conducted by Antarctic researchers.  We support the continued timely dissemination of these findings to policy makers and the world population in general. At the same time, we underline the importance of leading by example by minimizing the climate impacts of research and logistic activities through reducing greenhouse gas emissions wherever possible.

1.	Introduction

Antarctica plays an important role in the global efforts in addressing climate change. It is one of the world’s regions where the impacts of climate change are most apparent and pronounced. What happens in Antarctica has been shown to be critical to how the remainder of Earth’s climate system adjust. Climate-related research by Antarctic scientists has been at the forefront of the field. Lastly, as the only continent collectively managed internationally, the global symbolic value of focusing on reducing emissions from human activities in Antarctica cannot be underestimated. 

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assesses the polar regions in each of its reports, the most recent published in 2007. That report underlined the central importance of how the highest, coldest continent responds to changing atmospheric circulation patterns underway at an increasing rate over recent decades. More recently, SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE; Turner et al., 2009) report provided a detailed review of past and possible future climate in Antarctica. Despite the implications of what was contained in these reports, very little reference was made to Antarctica at the fifteenth Conference of the Parties (COP 15) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that took place in Copenhagen, Denmark, 7 to 19 December 2009. Continuing on from earlier meetings, negotiations at COP-15 focused on how the populated parts of the globe could work together to mitigate and adapt to climate change. That is despite the fact that profound climate-related changes are occurring, are very well known, and are projected to accelerate in the immediate future (Turner et al., 2009). The results of COP-15 were politically disappointing, in that no binding international agreement to reduce emissions was made, in spite of ever-increasing scientific evidence that it is necessary to take action immediately.

Antarctic research has shown, as detailed in the IPCC (Parry et al., 2007) and SCAR ACCE reports (Turner et al., 2009), that ‘climate change’ is far more complex than mere warming or cooling of different regions or rising sea level, but rather also involves changing wind and rain/snowfall patterns, ocean circulation, and ocean chemistry (acidification). These are the factors that are at the base of how citizens experience climate change, with personal experience being critical for any action being formulated. 

In view of the scientific evidence and the ongoing international climate negotiations, ASOC urges that activities in Antarctica need to be take place in three areas, if only as evidence of leadership in more than ‘just’ research: reduction of greenhouse gas emissions; climate change adaptation strategies; and the conduct of climate science itself.  Each of these areas will be discussed briefly in the following sections.

2.	Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions

Within the global context, energy consumption and emissions from human activities in Antarctica are small. Nevertheless, activities in and travel to Antarctica are resource intensive and emissions of greenhouse gases, relative to the number of people involved in the activities, are proportionally high. The average carbon dioxide emissions from a visitor to Antarctica in the 2004/5 season were  greater than the average annual carbon dioxide emissions per capita in Africa, Latin America, or Asia in 2005 (Shirsat and Graf, 2009; ASOC, 2010a).  The greenhouse gas emissions produced during the typical two-week holiday of an Antarctic tourist, most of whom start their journey in the US or Europe, equal the emissions produced by the average European in twenty months (Lamers and Amelung, 2007). 

At the same time, National Antarctic Programs have accrued two decades of experience in using advanced energy management controls, robust energy efficiency measures, encouragement of behavioral change, improved insulation, and innovative snow removal techniques to reduce energy demands. Solar collectors, solar panels and wind turbines have significantly reduced the need for fossil fuel, and in some national programs have become the standard for field camps. Energy efficiency measures, small-scale renewable energy applications, and management of energy needs through technical means and behavioral change have the added advantages of being flexible, portable, relatively cheap and requiring little infrastructure. The ambition to run entire stations or field camps on 100% renewable energy is increasingly common and feasible, though not entirely so at all locations. This experience demonstrates that it is feasible to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from human activities in Antarctica. Doing so can save costs and bring about local and global environmental benefits (Tin et al., in press1, summarized in a separate IP submitted to this ATCM). 

Greenhouse gas emissions arising from Antarctic activities can also be reduced through:
    • increased coordination and cooperation of transport and logistics;2
    • identification of best emission reduction practices/technologies;2 
    • incorporation of greenhouse gas emissions into the Environmental Impact Assessment process;2
    • strategic planning about new facilities (e.g., whether a new facility is necessary; how can the location and design be optimized to minimize energy use and greenhouse gas emissions); 
    • increased adoption of remote scientific research techniques which would reduce travel to and presence in Antarctica.

Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, which has to be a combination of local and global efforts, is one of the most effective ways of limiting the rate and extent of climate change. As the only continent collectively managed internationally, and one that plays an important role in the study of global climate change, there is an ethical importance to reducing emissions and leading by example using best practice (ATCPs, 2008). The global symbolic value of focusing on reducing emissions from human activities in Antarctica – long considered as one of the world’s most logistically challenging environments – cannot be underestimated (Norway and UK, 2008). 

3.	Climate Change Adaptation Strategies

Organisms have a limited array of responses that allow continued survival in changing environments (Turner et al., 2009, P. 364). It is at the organism level that a species responds to habitat change. The rapid environmental changes taking place as a result of global climate change may exceed the natural abilities of many Antarctic organisms to cope. In this context, strategies for reducing the vulnerability of climate-sensitive ecosystems and organisms will be increasingly important for management, as species’ ranges shift and interactions change. In the climate policy context, such strategies are referred to as adaptation. 

While adaptation is a relatively new concept in the management of the Antarctic region, it is an integral component of the global response to climate change and is becoming a vigorous field of science and practice in other parts of the world. Examples include Australia’s Great Barrier Reef Climate Change Action Plan (GBRMPA, 2007) and the Arctic Council Sustainable Development Working Group’s project on “Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Arctic” (Njåstad et al., 2009). 

3.1	Adaptation strategies for Antarctic marine ecosystems 

Between now and 2100, all components of Southern Ocean ecosystems are expected to show significant change in abundance and distribution as organisms respond to the predicted 33% reduction of sea ice extent (Turner et al., 2009, P. 384). Earth’s average temperature is expected to have warmed by 2°C above pre-industrial levels between 2025 and 2052. By this time, profound changes in sea ice coverage (extent, thickness, seasonality), ocean circulation and the location of large-scale ocean fronts and precipitation are expected to occur (Ainley et al. 2010). As an example of how marine species might respond, approximately 50% of Emperor (colonies) and 75% of Adélie colonies penguin colonies north of 70°S are projected to decrease or disappear. As ocean fronts are expected to move south, constricting the productive waters south of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, migratory cetaceans may have to travel over longer distances to reach their feeding grounds and there perhaps find that their target prey will be reduced in availability (Ainley et al. (2010), Tynan and Russell (2008), see also Tuner et al., 2009, p. 384-385). 

Adaptation strategies that could increase ecosystem resilience include: 

    • establishing a representative network of marine protected areas (MPAs) and marine reserves to build up ecosystem resilience and to act as scientific reference areas;
    • protecting climate refugia (areas which are less likely to change). The Ross Sea is an area where sea ice is likely to persist the longest and will provide a refuge for sea ice-dependent species in the future as sea ice continues to disappear from other areas (Jenouvrier et al. 2009, Ainley et al. 2010); and  
    • putting into place adaptive management systems which are able to incorporate uncertainty and to respond to new information and unforeseen circumstances in a timely fashion. This requires constant monitoring of activities and ecosystem responses and can be established through the expansion and improvement of CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) (ASOC, 2010b) and the establishment of a Southern Ocean Sentinel program (Constable and Doust, 2009).

3.2	Adaptation strategies for Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems 

High among future scenarios is the likelihood of invasion by more competitive non-native species, as warmer temperatures and increased human visitation combine to make it easier for non-native species to colonize and establish themselves on the continent itself (Turner et al., 2009, P. 355, 356).  This is a significant risk for Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity.

Appropriate adaptation strategies include: 

    • implementing appropriate biosecurity measures across different spatial scales, applied to different biological groups (Hughes and Convey, 2009); and  
    • increasing the resilience of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems to climate change through holistic and strategic designations of a network of protected areas. The protection of inviolate areas also will help protect the wilderness and scientific values of key high-risk areas for the future.


4. 	Climate Science

How the Antarctic environment behaves in the next few decades will be critical to the societies that occupy the land of more northern latitudes. Scientific research and monitoring from Antarctica has to continue to play an important role in informing policy decisions, providing the evidence, and in reminding the world of the urgency to address climate change. Continuing research on the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (ASOC, 2010c), implications of a warming Circumpolar Deep Water, increasing salinity of coastal surface waters, and the sequestering of carbon dioxide by its dissolution in the cold Antarctic Circumpolar Current, are all examples of Antarctic research which will continue to have profound global implications.

ASOC acknowledges and supports the world-class climate research produced by Antarctic researchers. Continued timely dissemination of these findings to policy makers as well as to the world population will help generate the support needed to formulate appropriate global actions. In this context, SCAR's recent report that was submitted to the UNFCC in Copenhagen should become a useful tool. At the same time, findings from research undertaken by National Antarctic Programmes as well as that of CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) and a Southern Ocean Sentinel program will be invaluable contributions to IPCC’s ongoing assessment process.


5. 	Concluding Remarks

State-of-the-art climate research is revealing dramatic changes in the Antarctic environment, which have profound implications for the continent, the Southern Ocean, and the global community. ASOC acknowledges and supports continuing efforts in climate change research in Antarctica; urges that the results of such research be fed back into developing adaptation strategies that will increase resilience of Antarctic ecosystems against the impacts of climate change; and stresses the importance of National Antarctic Programs leading by example by minimizing the climate impacts of research and logistic activities wherever possible. 


6. 	References

ASOC, 2010a. Environmental and economic benefits of climate change mitigation and adaptation
in Antarctica. ATME on Climate Change, Svolvær, Norway, April 6-9, 2010.

ASOC, 2010b. Antarctic krill fisheries and rapid ecosystem change: the need for adaptive
management. ATME on Climate Change, Svolvær, Norway, April 6-9, 2010.

ASOC, 2010c. The future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet: observed and predicted changes, tipping points, and policy considerations. ATME on Climate Change, Svolvær, Norway, April 6-9, 2010.

Ainley, D.G., Russell, J., Jenouvrier, S., Woehler, E.,  Lyver, P. O’b., Fraser, W.R. and Kooyman, G.L. (2010). Antarctic penguin response to habitat change as earth’s troposphere reaches 2°c above pre-industrial levels. Ecology 80, 49–66.

ATCPs, Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 2008. Final Report of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXI. Annex E Report of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XI). 

Constable, A.J. and Doust, S. 2009. Southern Ocean Sentinel – an international program to assess climate change impacts on marine ecosystems: report of an international Workshop, Hobart, April 2009. ACE CRC, Commonwealth of Australia, and WWF-Australia.

GBRMPA, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. 2007. Great Barrier Reef Climate Change Action Plan 2007 – 2011.

Hughes, K. and Convey, P. 2009.  The protection of Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems from inter- and intracontinental transfer of non-indigenous species by human activities: A review of current systems and practices. Global Environmental Change. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.09.005

Parry, M.L., Canziani, O.F.,  Palutikof, J.P.,  van der Linden, P.J. and Hanson, C.E. eds. 2007. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Jenouvrier, S., H. Caswell, C. Barbraud, M. Holland, J. Stœve, and H. Weimerskirch. 2009a. Demographic models and IPCC climate projections predict the decline of an emperor penguin population. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106:1844-1847. 

Lamers, M. and Amelung, B. 2007. The environmental impacts of tourism in Antarctica: a global perspective. In: Peeters, P. (ed.). Tourism and Climate Change Mitigation: Methods, greenhouse gas reductions and policies. Proceedings of the E-Clat Climate change and tourism conference, Westelbeers, 11-14 June 2006, Breda University of Applied Sciences, Breda, 51-62.

Njåstad, B., Kelman, I. and Rosenberg, S. (eds.) 2009. Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in the Arctic. Arctic Council Sustainable Development Working Group (SDWG). Norsk Polarinstitutt Brief Report no. 12. 

Norway, United Kingdom. 2008. Antarctic climate change issues. ATCM XXXI, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2-13 June, 2008. WP 35.

Shirsat. S. V. and Graf. H. F. 2009. An emission inventory of sulphur from anthropogenic sources in Antarctica, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics. 9, 3397-3408.

Tin, T., Sovacool, B.K., Blake, D., Magill, P., El Naggar, S., Lidstrom, S., Ishizawa, K. and Berte, J. in press. Energy efficiency and renewable energy under extreme conditions: case studies from Antarctica. Renewable Energy (2009), doi:10.1016/j.renene.2009.10.020.

Turner, J., Bindschadler, R., Convey, P., di Prissco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D., Mayewski, P. and Summerhayes, C. (eds.) 2009. Antarctic climate change and the environment. SCAR, Cambridge UK.

Tynan, C.T. and Russell, J.L. 2008. Assessing the impacts of future 2∞C global warming on Southern Ocean cetaceans. International Whaling Commission, Scientific Committee document SC/60/E3



