





Continued operation of Kohnen Base as a summer base in Dronning Maud Land including maintenance of a lab in the deep ice by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI)




Continued operation of Kohnen Base as a summer base in Dronning Maud Land including maintenance of a lab in the deep ice by the AWI
Introduction
From 2000 to 2009, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Swit­zerland, the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland worked together in a European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA). The main scientific objective was to obtain fine-grained pictures depicting the climatic and atmospheric changes over several glacial and interglacial periods, thus contributing to international climate research.
On 6 October 2000, the Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt, UBA) issued a permit to the AWI on the basis of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) in line with Annex I of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty with international participation to carry out deep ice core drillings in Dronning Maud Land. This permit was valid until 30 April 2005 and beside the proper drilling down to a depth of 2800 meters it included the operation, construction and deconstruction of Kohnen sum­mer base as well as logistic activities (transport of personnel and material by land and by air). The UBA extended this permit several times, for the last time until 31 July 2009.
The deep ice drillings within the scope of EPICA are finished now. Kohnen Base is, however, supposed to be used as a summer base over the next 10 to 15 years. In the future, this drilling camp shall serve as a starting point for manifold research activities. Additionally, a lab in the deep ice of the drilling hole shall be maintained at a depth of more than 2 kilometres for later measurements.
During ATCM XXX, we provided information on future projects in Dronning Maud Land and on the planned licensing procedure (IP 19/2007). The present information paper reports on the permit, which has now been issued, to continue running Kohnen Base including the lab in the deep ice (cf. 2.), on current and planned research activities around Kohnen Base (cf. 3) and on Germany’s decision regarding the used drilling liquid (cf. 4).
Licensing procedure regarding the continued operation of Kohnen Base
On 12 November 2007, the AWI filed an application with the UBA for the continued operation of Kohnen Base as a summer base, including the maintenance of the lab in the deep ice. Since it was necessary to review and assess the environmental impact, the AWI submitted an updated environmental impact assessment on 1 April 2009.
The UBA reviewed the submitted documents and concluded that the project would have a minor or transitory impact on the assets to be protected set forth in Article 3, paragraph 2, sub‑paragraph b of the Protocol of Environmental Protection. It furthermore concluded that there was no need to carry out a CEE within the meaning of Annex I of the Protocol of Environmental Protection.
On 28 July 2009, the UBA issued a permit for the period from 1 August 2009 to 31 July 2010. This permit refers to the continued operation of Kohnen Base as a summer base and to the maintenance of the lab in the deep ice. Requirements and conditions regarding supply trips, the operation of the station, the handling of fuels and the disposal of wastes and sewage already defined in the permit issued on 6 October 2000 had been substantially included in the new one. The permit is planned to be extended annually. For this purpose, the AWI has to notify the UBA of all planned changes of their activities three months before the expiry of the permit.
Current and planned research activities around Kohnen Base
Within the scope of the approved project, it is planned to make additional measurements inside the drilling hole. This is necessary since water rose in the drilling hole. This hole must be kept open, however, to make other drillings and geophysical investigations possible. In this context, additional measurements are planned so that an exact interpretation of the data gained from core drillings can be made, thus leading to a better understanding of ice dynamics and changes in the mass balance. Furthermore, activities in the field of meteorology and atmospheric physics considering the special conditions of the inner Antarctic high pressure area are planned, too.
In detail, the following activities are planned – but no application for a permit has been filed with UBA to date:
        ◦ Deep ice lab,
        ◦ Detailed exploration of the ice layers by means of aero-geophysical methods in areas of the Antarctic that are unexplored so far,
        ◦ Monitoring of the natural inputs of aerosols to Antarctic snow,
        ◦ Sampling of near-surface firn ice layers to investigate what happens when air is included in snow,
        ◦ Investigations of regional meteorological occurrences in order to understand the correlation between snow falls and mesoscale events.

The continued operation of Kohnen Base is imperative for this scientific research.
Once those activities have been finished, Kohnen Base will be deconstructed and almost all parts of the camp removed from the Antarctic. Only the steel uprights and associated wooden panels, the glass-fibre reinforced plastic pipes in the drilling hole as well as rubber coated cables will remain in the Antarctic. Their return transport would require additional personnel and would also involve increased energy consumption. Those measures would cause greater environmental impairments than leaving all material in situ. Furthermore, the material would not pollute the surrounding firn ice and snow.
Decision on the use and continuance of the drilling liquid
Before issuing the permit, the use and the continuance of the drilling liquid had to be considered and assessed. The drilling hole contains a mixture of the drilling liquid Exxol® D40 (pure kerosene) and a densi­fier (HCFC 141b). This drilling liquid is supposed to remain in the drilling hole to keep the hole open for later measurements and to drill as deeply as possible.
Similarly to the permit of 6 October 2000, UBA believes, in line with Article 2, paragraph 1, sub‑para­graph d) of Annex III of the Protocol of Environmental Protection, that the drilling liquid and the densifier are wastes including other harmful persistent compounds which have to be removed from the Antarctic as soon as the activities are finished.
In this context, there is still one problem: on the one hand, there is no alternative to the used drilling liquid and on the other hand, there is no tested technology to remove the drilling liquid from the drilling hole once the scientific work has been completed. Therefore, the AWI was, on the basis of this permit, allowed to use the above-mentioned drilling liquid together with the densifier and to leave it in the drilling hole once the scientific investigations were finished. However, the latter shall only be permitted as long as there are no tested technologies for completely removing the drilling liquid once the work has been completed. Therefore, the new permit stipulates that the AWI must investigate possible technologies for the removal of such drilling liquid. As soon as such technology has been identified, the AWI is, after termination of the scientific activities, obliged to remove the drilling liquid together with the densifier from the Antarctic as long as it is practically and financially feasible for the AWI.
Outlook
Since use and continuance of the used drilling liquid Exxol® D40 (pure kerosene) and of the densifier (HCFC 141b) in the Antarctic are still controversial, this paper is intended to stimulate a debate on possible ways of developing reasonable alternatives to this drilling liquid and of developing and testing technologies for the complete removal of drilling liquids from the Antarctic.
