





Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group





Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group 
Submitted by Australia, China, India, Romania and Russian Federation


Abstract
Following the adoption of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills at ATCM XXX, the Parties active in the region established a management group to oversee the implementation of the ASMA Management Plan. This paper gives a brief report on the Management Group’s recent activities.
Background
The ASMA Management Plan assists in protecting the Larsemann Hills environment by promoting coordination and cooperation by Parties in the planning and conduct of human activities. 
The Parties active in the ASMA have established an international Management Group to oversee the Management Plan’s implementation.
As of July 2008, China has assumed the coordinator’s role.
Management Group activities
The Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group met most recently in Punta Arenas, Chile in July 2009.
At this Management Group meeting and through intersessional communications, the Parties active in the ASMA have exchanged information on operational and scientific activities carried out and planned in the Larsemann Hills region. 
In January 2009, Zhong Shan and Progress hosted visits by Australian officials who also toured the development of the site of India’s new research station Bharti. The visitors were informed by the Voyage Leader that IEE for the development of path from landing site to station site has already been submitted to ATS.  Later, return courtesy visit was made  by the Indian Voyage Leader, Dr Rajesh Asthana to these station.
In the period since the Plan’s adoption, Parties active in the region have agreed to implement practical measures to minimise introductions of non-native species – as reported to CEP XI in ATCM XXXI / IP 17 Measures to protect the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica from the introduction of non-native species. The full implementation of these measures has yet to be achieved.
The Parties active in the region are also undertaking preparatory work on the possible nomination of Stornes as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area. Detailed discussion will occur at a meeting planned to coincide with the XXI meeting of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs at Buenos Aires, Argentina in August 2010.

