





Antarctic Waters Operations Course 2010





Antarctic Waters Operations Course 2010

The increase of traffic in the Antarctic and accidents putting human life and the environment at risk have created the need that masters and officers in charge of navigational watch on board ships operating in Antarctic waters, have the experience and appropriate training before being assigned to perform these duties on board such ships. 

In response to this requirement, the Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine will run the XIX International Antarctic Waters Operations Course between 19 and 28 October 2010 at the Maritime Instruction and Training Centre, CIMAR. According to the Chilean legislation this course is compulsory for deck officers performing their duties on board of vessels under Chilean Flag operating in the Antarctic. 

The aim of this course is to strengthen and update the knowledge of officers navigating in ice-covered waters, regarding navigational matters and safe operation of vessels, emphasizing the limitations imposed by climatic and glaciological characteristics taking into account the international legislation and the prevention of environmental pollution.  

The course normally integrates officers from the Chilean Navy, foreign navies and merchant marines and is offered in Spanish with simultaneous interpreting to English. Course instructors come from marine institutions of friend countries, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Valdivia Scientific Studies Centre and the Navy. 

This course has been developed for deck officers who meet the certification requirements as officer in charge of a navigational watch according to the STCW 95 requirements, and who have approved seagoing service in that capacity for a minimum period of 12 months.

Course intake will be limited by the availability of the bridge simulator. The maximum number of students is 21, which allows the suitable participation of trainees in each ice-navigation exercises shifts performed at the Full Mission Bridge Simulator. 

The course is free of charge and includes daily lunch and coffee. Additionally, CIMAR provides foreign officers with transportation from and to the airport and daily transportation to and from CIMAR. Lodging expense is not included. 

Trainees completing successfully this course will be able to:

    • Plan a voyage to the Antarctic and its navigation considering glaciological, hydrographical, oceanographic, and meteorological factors. 
    • Conduct navigation in restricted and ice-covered waters, with adverse wind conditions and restricted visibility.
    • Monitor and control the compliance with legislative requirements of Antarctic agreements and regulations related to safety of human life at sea and environmental protection. 

The course begins with a review of international regulations and recommendations concerning the Antarctic, its historical development to date and several particular positions of the Member States. There is a special emphasis on the Antarctic Treaty System, the Antarctic Treaty itself and the existing protocols concerning the protection of the environment and living resources. 

The second unit is related to the Antarctic Environmental System, precautions to be taken and limitations imposed by the glaciological and meteorological conditions to ship operations. This requires to study the Antarctic’s geographical and geomorphologic characteristics, its origin, dynamic behaviour, drift, and the geographical distribution and composition of the different types of ice. Also, the Antarctic area presents changing meteorological conditions of great intensity, which make necessary to review the general climatology of the area and to learn how to recognize and process data in order to anticipate the consequences of the drastic changes of the meteorological conditions. 

The third unit deals with the preliminary conditions of the ship to operate in cold climates and ice-covered waters, including the characteristics  of the vessel design, hull, steering, propulsion and auxiliary systems as well as the restrictions of ice classification and regulations to operate in ice.  It also deals with temperature control systems and their operation, and preparedness and performance of the crew in low temperature and ice environments.

The fourth unit focuses on the precautions and proceedings for operating and manoeuvring the ship in ice-covered waters. Risk assessment and preparation of the ship before approaching ice-covered waters. Use and restrictions of different types of propulsion systems and rudder. Restrictions imposed by different types of ice and its accumulation. Icebreaker and towing support. 

From the point of view of the bridge work, there is also a review of peculiarities of navigation in ice, the use of radars and the bridge team-work. In this regard, the use of the bridge simulator is of great value, since it allows students to practice ship conning in ice-covered areas of Antarctic settings especially created for the purposes of the course.

The following unit covers the planning of a voyage to the Antarctic, bearing in mind all factors affecting it such as environmental conditions, routes, areas, anchoring grounds and activities. It includes preparing navigation charts and interpreting ice and meteorological data, among others. This part finishes with a Group Planning Game, simulation that demands from students the preparation of a typical trip to Antarctic taking in account passengers transportation and different cargo types. This game integrates the different topics reviewed and finishes, the last day of classes, with a presentation by groups and a final oral quiz.

The sixth unit explains the capacities and precautions regarding the use of the bridge electronic and communications equipments in polar, cold or ice-covered areas. It also covers aids to navigation, the use of navigation charts, radars and identification and positioning systems.

The use of the helicopter in the Antarctic offers extraordinary advantages due to the support that can provide to passengers and cargo transport, specially in unreachable areas by ship.  It can also be used for the timely detection and recognition of ice fields and for selecting the most appropriate sailing route. 

The seventh unit focuses on operations with onboard helicopters, which is a common situation of ships operating in the Antarctic. From the safety point of view, these operations convey a greater complexity due to the special area in which they are carried out.

The unit covering the Analysis of Antarctic Accidents presents an overall view on Antarctic accidents and their impact on the safety of human life and the environment. Later, the class is divided in work groups. Each group receives a study case on an Antarctic maritime accident, which later has to be presented submitting the conclusions of the analysis done for each case. 

The course also reviews the aspects of maritime safety, particularly the specific precautions and measures for different types of activities and tasks performed by ships in the Antarctic. Likewise, it reviews responsibilities, capacities and restrictions of the search and rescue system in the area, as well as the dangers to which people can be exposed and the most appropriate measures to adopt in cases such as ship abandoning, survival and cooling. 

Finally, the last unit deals with environmental issues, including international regulations such as the MARPOL Convention and the Protocol of Madrid, the areas that can be contaminated by discharges and special and protected areas. It also reviews pollution-fighting measures and restrictions, plans for preventing pollution by garbage, bilge waters, oil spills and the analysis of accumulative effects of pollution in the short and long term.

The Antarctic Waters Operations Course is one of the initiatives developed by the Chilean Navy to face the challenge posed by the White Continent, which compel us not only to be prepared to face an accident appropriately and timely, but also to preserve the natural wealth of this territory.

