





The Chilean Antarctic scientific program: a leap forward





The Chilean Antarctic scientific program: a leap forward

The Chilean Antarctic Scientific Program is led by the Chilean Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Chileno - INACH), which has the three-fold responsibility for financing, coordinating and executing all of the national scientific activities in Antarctica. This great responsibility was difficult to fulfill by the very small number of scientist and supporting staff working at INACH and until recently, a similarly small number of scientists involved in Antarctic science. 
A pivotal change occurred in 2005 by the application of two major changes to our Antarctic Science Program: 
(i) the implementation of an open and transparent competition system for project selection, subject to international peer review, and 
(ii) the sustained increase in our funds plus an alliance with other Chilean science funding agencies (namely, CONICYT) which allowed us, through leveraging efforts, increasing +10 times the total budget allocated to scientists to develop their scientific projects, without including logistics, from 2004 (~U$77,0001) to 2010 (~U$902,0002). 
This increase has resulted in a leap in the number of projects executed in Antarctica, moving from 15 projects in 2004 (only 33% of which were peer reviewed), to 42 projects (with 90% subjected to international peer review) in 2010. This increase has been supported by the existing capacities and facilities at universities and research institutes along Chile, with a further leverage effect through the contribution of infrastructure, salaries and other subsidized services from our Antarctic Program. 
The Chilean Antarctic Scientific Program shows a particular strength in the study and understanding of the Antarctic environment, its physical and biological character in both past and present, and in the modeling of future scenarios. It is organized around four thematic research lines identified by INACH in correspondence with the SCAR programs: (1) Relationships between South America and Antarctica [8 projects], (2) Global warming and climate evolution [10 projects], (3) Abundance and diversity of Antarctic organisms [7 projects], and (4) Antarctic environment and its bioresources [13 projects], plus 4 other projects. The number of projects included on each research line depends on the merits of the submitted proposals and as such, obeys to the development or interest on specific issues at the national and international level. A detail of all projects being executed during this year is summarized on the bilingual publication PROCIEN, and it can be found at the INACH web site, www.inach.gob.cl.
A third component on the Chilean Antarctic Scientific Program, which supports the former figures, is a sustained improvement in the logistic support provided to the projects. Currently, INACH is focusing in building up permanent laboratories in Chilean Stations and improving the coordination with all Chilean Antarctic Operators. These efforts have resulted in a more comprehensive coverage of our usual field work area, as exemplified by the most recent XLVI Chilean Antarctic Scientific Expedition, with 27 projects being conducted on King George, Robert, Deception, Livingston, Low, and Snow Islands, as well as in various locations on the Antarctic Peninsula, as far south as the Fleming Glacier (near Rothera Station, UK). 
The final objective of this program is to produce high-quality Chilean Antarctic science, worthy of international recognition and in keeping with the Chilean national interests through the delivery of selected studies relating to our cultural, economic and social development.

