





Romania contribution in IPY 2007-2008




Romania contribution in IPY 2007-2008

The papers accepted at the IPY Oslo Conference:

Pedobiological Processes Evolution in Polar Areas
T.Gh. Negoita1, Gh. Stefanic1, N. Dumitrescu2, M. Cotta1
1Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania; 2University of Agronomical and Veterinary Sciences, Bucharest-1,  Romania

Optimization of cold-adapted amylase and protease production from newly Streptomyces 4 Alga using statistics based experimental designs
Mihaela Cotârleţ1, Gabriela Bahrim1, Teodor Negoită2, Peter Stougaard3
1University “Dunărea de Jos” Faculty of Food Science and Engineering,    Bioengineering Department, Domnească Street No. 111, Galaţi, Romania
2Romanian Polar Research Institute, C.P. 42-29, Bucharest, Romania
3University of Copenhagen Faculty of Life Sciences Department of Ecology Genetics and Microbiology Section, Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871, Frederiksberg C, Denmark
Mihaela.Cotarlet@ugal.ro

The Necessity of Integrated Research of Polar Permafrost Crust and Soils
Teodor Gheorghe Negoita and Gheorghe Stefanic
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania
negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

Microbial and Enzymatic Characteristics of Spitsbergen Soils
Teodor Gheorghe Negoita 1, Gheorghe Stefanic 1, Mirela Matei3, Sorin Matei3, Mihaela Cotta1
1Romanian Polar Research Institute,  Bucharest - 4, Romania;
2 Research Institute for Cereals and Industrial Crops, Fundulea, Romania;
 3National R&D Institute for Pedology, Agrochemistry and Environmental Protection, Bucharest, Romania


SCAR Polar Week
October 4, 2009
1. Agerpres (The National Press Agency) – Press release
It was communicated a press release on the Romanian scientific research results and all
the unrolling actions within IPY, Polar Week at campus level in Romania signed by Teodor Gh. Negoita, director of Romanian Polar Research Institute. This press release was assumed by Romanian news media.
 
October 5, 2009
2. Romanian National Radio Broadcasting 
Dr. Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute Romanian activities into the IPY, Polar Week campus level 2009

45 minutes interview concerning the Romanian scientific results in Antarctica and the Arctic in 2007-2008 IPY, and the fields of expertise in climate changes. The unexpected and disastrous effects of fast warming on Polar and European ecosystems. The health of Earth depends, firstly, massively reforestation otherwise the rich persons can become poor persons.

October 6, 2009
3. Bucharest University, Biology Faculty, Romania
“The worldwide importance of polar zones”/Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute
Within the “Introduction to genetics” classes of Bucharest Biology Faculty, the following were discussed: glacier parts/icebergs separation from the Antarctic icecap as a result of atmosphere warming; year by year reduction of the Arctic Ocean ice, the valley glaciers retreat, a long term prospective, biodiversity loss, migration of species towards the poles, pollution, gas emissions, especially (C02) and methane. All have a negative influence on European ecosystems. 

October 9, 2009
4. "Gheorghe Asachi" Technical University, Iasy, Faculty of Architecture “G.M.Cantacuzino” Iasi
“The future of Polar Zones” by Andreia Magdalin, student and Dr. Teodor Gh. Negoita 

We talked about the danger in the Arctic and Antarctica is due to global warming. This leads to the loss of glaciers and the increase in virus activity with undesirable impact on polar ecosystems. Restricting tourism will be beneficial. New technologies offer exciting discoveries in the polar areas therefore need to make efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. It was actually a virtual meeting (on the internet with webcams) of all architecture students  leagues in Romania (Bucharest, Iasi, Cluj, Timisoara, Oradea ). 

Romania Marks October Polar Week 
Over the course of Polar Week (Oct 5-9th) Dr. Teodor Negoita of the Romanian Polar Research Institute spearheaded a number of public polar outreach activities including radio shows, lectures at the Metropolitan Library in Bucharest, and school based outreach activities in Sascut Gymnasium, Bacau County. He spoke of Romania’s strong leadership in Antarctic research and encouraged participants to consider the impacts that polar changes will have on the rest of the globe and how their actions play a part in the global ecosystem change we are seeing and will see in the future. We thank Romania and Dr Negoita for a strong presence in October Polar Week!   http://ipy.arcticportal.org/component/k2/item/2281

1. Children in Bucharest - Gymnasium no.206, Sector 6 - October 6
These reasons are slightly different for each research field, but there are three common principles. Any research in Antarctica is unique as it cannot be done elsewhere in the world. Despite the remoteness from other areas, research of the highest quality is performed in Antarctica. The scientific results certainly can solve problems of global warming.   

2. Adventure and research at the Poles: glacier letting affects us all -Metropolitan Library-October 6
A scenario was described - of numerous unique polar species that could become extinct, due to reproduction period changes, while …insects migrate towards higher latitudes. There have been in the Earth history similar episodes, but there is no knowledge of getting things under control. Images used shown the disintegration of the Antarctic Icecap parts, rapid changes as a result of global warming in the Arctic, but also in Europe, Romania included, such as flooding, desertification, season periods changes, and implication thereof on biodiversity. 

3. Pro Vita Universale Association - Romania Metropolitan Library - October 4
Antarctica is a source for all the research and science fields, enough for young keen on new researches. At the end of difficult way a mysterious world will found out, a new planet, practically. There were presented the results of Romanian research in the IPY, the danger that lies on the Poles. The audience and journalists have drawn an alarm on the causes of polar ice caps melting.

4. Lecture from Dr. Negoita "Melting ice from the Poles affects us all" - Faculty of Biology, Bucharest University, October 7
As everybody recognizes the serious effects of global warming, it has been suggested that the minimization of the impact each man has every day on the environment and living species should be make public on blogosphere.  

5. "Mihai Eminescu" National College - Bucharest - October 7
A Polar atmosphere was created by different presentations: a film, slides, chapters from book, Science on Ice. With Chinese in Antarctica, author Teodor Gh. Negoita, followed by discussions about pupils, teachers and parents care for environment, decreasing of green house gases, warming effects which disturb the Poles biodiversity




October 8, 2009  
6. “Terra Magazine”
       IPY in the world and Romanian contribution- Daniel Iftimescu and Teodor Gh.Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute

The past, present and future – The first IPY from World and the extent of the present one.
The Romanian contribution in 1267 project/ Pedobiological processes evolution in polar areas (PPEPA) coordinated by Teodor Gh. Negoita. Our experience, of over 40 years, in the soil biology field is the basis of the elaboration of a unitary conception about how the soil evolution/permafrost must be studied and quantitatively estimated under climate changes. The increasing of total temperature from the last period affected the large permafrost areas, where the soil was destroyed due to ice melting. 

7. Establishing the Circle of Polar Philately within the IPY - Sascut Gymnasium, Bacau County - October 5, Teodor Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute 
Establishing the Circle of Polar Philately will enable pupils and teachers in this school and other schools in Bacau County, by information exchange with the Polar and university communities, to be informed on the evolution of atmosphere warming impacts at the Earth Poles, the severe impact on species life, the anthropic impacts; 

8. Mihalea Scanteie Cotarlet "Studies of Antarctic microorganisms and related biotechnologies - Lower Danube University - Galati, Romania, October 7 

My PhD thesis is “Potential evaluation of Antarctic bacteria to produce amylases and proteases cold-adapted”. The studied Streptomyces sp. strains are isolated from soil and vegetation samples from East Antarctica. As result at climate change it will be possible that these enzymes will not be able to function at lower temperatures wouldn’t be possible saving energy. 

October 7, 2009
9. Alexandru Ioan Cuza” Iasy University, Faculty of Biology, Centre of for Sustainable Exploitation of Ecosystems:
- Dr. Teodor Gh. Negoita and Andreia Magdalin, “Antarctica, the continent of the future, is loosing its icecap”
- Cristian Secu, Lucian Faca and Ioan M. Ciumasu, “Global Warming – Causes and effects"
- Mihai Costica and I.M. Ciumasu,” Global Warming – Ecological Consequenses"
- Naela Costica and I.M. Ciumasu,”Global Warming & Sustainable Development"

 October 8, 2009
10. Bucharest University, Chemistry Faculty, Romania
“Influence of climate changes on the ecosystems”, Dr. Anca Iulia Stoica and Senior researcher Mihaela Cotta,  

Romania Marks March Polar Week

March 19, 2010   4 p.m.
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila”, Bucharest, Romania
ERICON Aurora Borealis Icebreaker future opportunities for study glaciers melting, by Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute
The Research Icebreaker AURORA BOREALIS will be the most advanced Polar Research Vessel in the world with a multi-functional role of deep-sea drilling and supporting climate/environmental research for the next 35-40 years.

March 14, 2010  11 a.m.
“George Tutoveanu” House of Culture, Barlad, Romania
Ice melting and the sudden climate changes in Romania
by Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, Romanian Polar Research Institute

We hope the massive forest plantations in the East Romania area should also protect the glaciers. National interest issues on a short and long term. We hope more oxygen from local sources could save the polar world/environment and fauna.   





