





Highlight of Korean Outreach Programmes 2009-2010





Highlight of Korean Outreach Programmes 2009-2010


1. Pole to Pole Korea 2009
The Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) has operated the “Pole to Pole Korea” programmes to raise public awareness of the importance of polar scientific research. Since its launch in 2005, the programme has recruited adolescents for the Arctic Experience Team, and science teachers, college students and artists for the Antarctic Team. In 2009, six middle school and high school students experienced the Arctic environment and undertook research activities through the programme.
(Contact point: Ms Jiyoung LEE, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr)
2. Korean Science Festival 2009 exhibition of Korea’s polar activities
KOPRI participated in the Korean Science Festival 2009, one of the most famous science exhibitions hosted by Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, which was held in KINTEX in Ilsan, Korea, in July 2009. This exhibition concentrated on introducing Korea’s icebreaker, Araon. There was an Araon structure at the exhibition that attracted the attention of many visitors.
 (Contact point: Ms Jiyoung LEE, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )
3. Exhibition to show a mock-up of the King Sejong Station
A big event, “Winter Story of Seoul Plaza”, was held to give people the chance to experience the King Sejong Station, Korea’s Antarctic research station located on King George Island. For the event, which ran from 19 December 2009 to 15 February 2010, the Seoul metropolitan government built four exhibition halls in front of the Seoul metropolitan City Hall in the centre of Seoul to display a mock-up of the King Sejong Station. Under the two major themes of Antarctica and the King Sejong Station, the event allowed visitors to experience the surroundings of Antarctica and the King Sejong Station as if they were part of the over-wintering staff.
In addition, the event showed off actual parts of Antarctic glaciers and Araon. The event also displayed aurora shows on a huge ice wall three times a day. Along a corridor between the exhibition halls was an “Experience Zone” that featured a blizzard that allowed the visitors to feel the severe storm conditions of Antarctica. There were approximately 1,000,000 visitors took part in and enjoyed the exhibition.
(Contact point: Ms Jiyoung LEE, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )



<Figure> Mock up of the King Sejong Station in front of Seoul metropolitan City Hall   


