





Initial Environmental Evaluation for Development of Approach Path at Proposed New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica





Initial Environmental Evaluation for Development of Approach Path at Proposed New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
Introduction
India established the second permanent research station “Maitri” at Schirmacher Oasis in 1989. In order to expand the scientific study in other parts of the Antarctica, India has proposed to establish a research station at Larsemann Hills in East Antarctica. In this regard a draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) report was submitted to the 30th Antarctica Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) held at New Delhi. Final CEE of the station will be circulated incorporating final design and suggestions obtained from various countries. Establishment of the station will commence in the austral summer of 2010-11. The site is situated at an unnamed promontory of Larsemann Hills area in between Broknes and Stornes peninsula which is spread over an undulated ground. 
It is proposed to make a path connecting the landing site to station site as well as fuel storage area. The width of the path will be approximately six to eight meters for easy movement of vehicles and materials from landing site to the station and other storage units. This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) Report for development of approach path, at Larsemann Hills in Antarctica has been prepared in agreement with Article 2 of annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Probable impacts due to development have been carried out as per the guidelines of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) for Environmental Impact Assessment. It has been concluded in the report that the impacts from development of path are of low category and therefore the IEE is sufficient to address the issue. 
Scientific Studies at Larsemann Hills
India has been conducting scientific studies   at the Larsemann Hills area since 2003/04 when it first short listed the area for its new Research Station. The studies are being conducted, during the austral summers, in the realms of following disciplines:
    • Earth Science
    • Upper Atmosphere 
    • Meteorology
    • Geomagnetism
    • Environmental Science and Biology
Need of Activity and Purpose
 The station site is located on an undulated area in the promontory of the Larsemann Hills. Materials from ship to the landing site will be transported to the bank of the promontory by Piston bully or barge depending on sea ice condition, from where it will be further transported to station site. Approach path is necessary to connect the landing site to the fuel dump and station to transport the materials using sea and land routes rather than using heavy duty helicopters. The area from landing site to the station and fuel dump being undulatory, it is necessary to adopt the cut and fill option for proper utilization of material and for easy movement of the machinery and materials. By this method the inclination angle of the path can be reduced.
Alternatives for the Location
Four alternate routes marked as A, B, C and D in the figure below, were considered for development of approach path. There are not many options for landing as the promontory exposes steep escarpment in the north, north-west and south- eastern parts.  Route A which originates in the south-eastern part was not considered suitable because the landing site is generally covered by thick fast ice for most part of the year and the total length of the path would be around 2.5-3 km. Route C with approach from northern part was not considered practical because of the steep vertical escarpment that would be required to negotiate to be able to reach the land from the sea. The path along the route “B”, being along a natural depression has the least gradient  and follows the contours but is covered by a thick blanket of loose snow ( 2 to 3 m), which will make vehicular movement very difficult. This would have been a natural alignment for summer period, when the snow would be gone. The alignment along the route “D” therefore, was considered as the best option and selected for this purpose because (a) it is the shortest route to station and fuel dump (b) requires minimum amount of cutting and filling (c) would cause minimum disturbance to the environment.

 
Figure 1: Alternate sites for development of approach path to the station 
Description of Area
The Larsemann Hills area is marked by persistent, strong katabatic winds that blow from east to southeast during austral summer. Daytime air temperature from December to February at times exceeds 4°C, with the mean monthly temperatures being a little above 0°C. Extreme minimum temperature recorded in the region so for was -400 C. Annual mean wind speed of 7 m/s and maximum wind speed 50 m/s were recorded at the nearby Zhongshan station. Annual mean gale days are about 171 (47%). Precipitation occurs as snow and is unlikely to exceed 250 mm water equivalent annually. Snow cover is generally thicker and more persistent on Stornes Peninsula than on Broknes Peninsula. The sea ice grows steadily during March – September, with the maximum growth seen during April – June.
Description of Activity
The proposed site for development of the station is situated around 225 meters from the edge of the promontory. Geological structure of the area consists of paragneisses and orthogneisses with criss- cross joint planes. It is proposed to construct the path from the landing site during the austral summer of 2009-10. The path proposed to be developed is six to eight meters wide and approximate 350 meters long. To maintain the gradient of path for easy movement of vehicles, cutting and filling are required along the route. The path is designed in such a way that almost all the cutting portion will be used for filling purpose at appropriate places. It is estimated that approximately three to four thousand cubic meter of the rock is required to be cut, and the same will be utilized for filling. It is expected that around ten workers will be carrying out the development work, which will be completed approximately in thirty days. 
Site preparation and path development  
The path development work will be completed in different phases. At the beginning, necessary equipment weighing about 2 to 3 tons such as rock drill, splitters and air compressor will be transferred from ship to the site by helicopter.  In the second phase, landing zone will be prepared for offloading the machineries viz. dozer, excavator, piston bully vehicles etc that would be driven on the fast ice after ascertaining its thickness. In the third phase, transportation of 50 ton Crane and cutting and filling of the rock will be taken up along the path leading up to the station and fuel storage area. 
Four living modules will also be placed at the site for use of workers. Though the expedition ship, MV Ivan Papanin will be used as the platform for living purposes, in case of any emergency the workers can take shelter in these modules. It has also been decided that heavy rock will be parted using special environmental friendly non-detonating (NoneX cartridges) compounds enclosed in a cartridge which conforms to the class UN1.4S. Advantages of using this technology are;
 a. minimal fly rock,
 b. minimal vibration, 
c. lower noise and overpressure levels, and 
d. negligible noxious gases. 
Site preparation will also be done for the storage of about   5 kL fuel for use in next year.
 Cumulative Impact Evaluation
Impact identification and evaluation, carried out for the proposed activity as well as the mitigation measures pertaining to activities are presented in Table 1.



Table 1: Impact Evaluation

Environ-mental Parameter/Indicator
Description of Potential Impact from Activities
Evaluation of Impact
Mitigation Measures
Air
Impact from ship, helicopter, bulldozer, excavator, crane and generator’s operation and movement










Airborne dust emission due to drilling operation and excavation and filling
Rock splitting and surrounding rock damage


Extent: low      
Duration:   
Medium
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
As the ship will be berthed away from the site there will not be any direct or indirect impact on the air quality at the site. Helicopters will have a total of about 50 sorties during the entire period of operation. The engines will be shut while at the site. The impact on the air is, therefore, expected to be minimal. Machineries viz. dozer and excavator will be operated with ATF which emits much lower particulate matter and exhaust gases as compared to the diesel fuel. However, care will be taken to operate the machineries to minimum required time and engine will be switched off while not in use. The portable generators to be used at the site conform to that of Central Pollution Control Board, India and USEPA emission standards. The emission levels are expected to be minimal. Moreover, the generators will be operated only for six to eight hours a day for about 35 days. 

Drilling for holes will be carried out by enclosing the area to arrest the dust and if needed, water will be sprinkled to reduce the possibility of generating air borne dust. .
Rock splitting will be carried out at minimum possible locations and only if essential. NoneX cartridges will be placed in the drill holes manually. The spoils will be removed and used for filling the depressions along the path. The detonation frequency will be 3-4 per day, or once every two days, depending on the necessity and removal of the spoils.  All major activities associated with rock splitting will be carried out taking due precaution of forming barriers to stop rock flying, if any. Rocks splitting produced by these cartridges are of low vibration resulting in significantly reduced damage to surrounding rock. 
Water
Airborne particulate matter due to drilling, excavation, filling  and vehicular movement operation may have impact on  surrounding small water bodies


Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Low
Care will be taken to put up barriers in the form of sheets in the leeward wind side to arrest the airborne particles. However, as the prevailing wind direction is mostly from east to south-east direction, the effect on the water bodies will be minimal as these water bodies are situated away from leeward side. 
Vehicles/machineries will be operated on ATF which emits minimal particulate matter and gases. Care will be taken to operate the vehicles during appropriate wind condition to avoid dispersion of the particulate matters in the ecologically sensitive area. Speed of the vehicle will be maintained less than 10 kmph to avoid higher consumption of fuel.
Noise
Helicopter, generator and machineries and rock splitting operations may affect the fauna of the area
Extent:       Low
Duration:   medium
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
Helicopter will not remain in air for long hours. At the landing site engine will be switched off. Helicopter will not fly over any breeding site of terrestrial fauna i.e. penguins, seals etc. Small silent generators of 2kVA and 1 kVA do not have potential to emit much noise. Low noise drilling machine will be used. Rock splitting will produce not more than 85dBA noise. However, suitable media will be used to absorb and reduce the propagation of vibration and sound.
Land
An area of  around 2500 square meter shall be developed for path
Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Low
The path is being developed only for approach road from landing site to fuel storage and station sites to facilitate the transportation of construction material and fuel to the designated area while station construction will be carried out later. Once construction of station is over the vehicular movement will be very minimal except those used for transportation of resupply materials.
Flora and  Fauna
Bird hit by helicopter flying

Alien species may be introduced from human clothing etc
Extent:      Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
The site does not fall under any observed migratory route of birds and the probability of bird hit is negligible.
It will be ensured that adequate cleaning and inspection of materials are done before sending these to Antarctica.
Wilder-ness and Aesthetic values
Path development may affect the aesthetic value of the area

Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
Since the path development is at the ground level by only cutting and filling, no higher structure on/along the path is being introduced which will affect the aesthetic value of the area 
HSM,ASPA, ASMA
Present site falls under ASMA 6
Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
No direct impact on the area, but the ASMA guidelines will be strictly followed.  

Supporting Bibliography
Antarctica Treaty, (2006). (In) CEP Handbook, pp 13-17.
Beg M.J., Das M., Shrivastava M., Singh J., Wanganeo A, (2006). A preliminary report on the scientific study and establishment of first structure in the area (Larsemann), XXIV-Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, NCAOR. 
COMNAP, (2005). Practical guideline for developing and designing monitoring programmes in Antarctica, COMNAP Secretariat, Hobart, Australia.
COMNAP, (2005). Guideline for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, COMNAP/ATCM.
Gillieson D. S., Burgess J., Spate A., Cochrane A, (1990). Atlas of the lakes of the Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, Antarctica, A N A R E Research Notes, No.74.
Hodgson D. A., Noon P. E., Vyverman,W., Bryant C. L., Gore D. B., Appleby P., Gilmour M., Verleyen E., Sabbe K., Jones V. J., Ellis-Evans J. C.,Wood P. B, (2001). Were the Larsemann Hills ice-free through the last glacial maximum? Antarctic Science, Vol. 13 (4), pp 440-454.
IP 26, (2008). Initial environmental evaluation for installation of earth station at Maitri, Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica, XXXI-Antarctica Treaty Consultative Meeting, Kyiv, Ukraine
Khandal R.K., Verma V.K., Niyogi U.K., Singh R.K., Pal N., Sharma B, (2008). Long-term environmental monitoring and impact assessment studies at new Indian scientific base, at Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, A Report, Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi.
Khwairakpam G., Singh R.K., Pal N., Sharma B., Verma V.K., Khandal R.K, (2007). Water quality of some lakes in Grovnes promontory (Larsemann Hills): East Antarctica, A Report, Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi.
Rao U.R, (1996). Expert group report on ten-year work profile of the Indian Antarctic Programme. (In) G.N.P, Publication and Information Directorate CSIR, India.
Ravindra R., Rajan S., Dhar A., Malhotra P, (2004). Prydz Bay: Voyage to select site for Indian Second research station in Antarctica. Report of First Task Force to Select Site for Indian Research Base, NCAOR, India.
Reddy C.D., Dhar A, (2008). Magnetic anomaly map for Bharati promontory, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Current Science, Vol. 94 (6), pp 715-717.
Singh S.M., Nayaka S., Upreti D.K, (2007). Lichen communities in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Current Science, Vol. 93(12), pp 1670-1672.
The Environmental Protocol, (1991). Protocol on environmental protection to Antarctic Treaty. (In) Committee for Environmental Protection,  Handbook-2006, pp 19-64.
Turner J ., Pendlebury S, (2004). The international Antarctic weather forecasting handbook, BAS, United Kingdoms.
U.S. EPA, (2000). AP-42 Emission Factors, Fuel Oil Combustion, Ver 8.0.
WP 4, IP 7, (2007). Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of new Indian research base at Larsemann hills, Antarctica. XXX-Antarctica Treaty Consultative Meeting, New Delhi.
WP8, (2007).  Larsemann Hills east Antarctica, Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan, (Australia, China, India, Romania and Russian Federation). XXX-Antarctica Treaty Consultative Meeting, New Delhi.



