





Volcanic risk on 
Deception Island




Volcanic risk on Deception Island 

    1- Recent volcanic activity on Deception Island 

Currently, in the South Shetland Islands – Antarctic Peninsula – Bransfield Strait region, only Deception Island has a recorded history of volcanic activity, with the most recent eruptions dating from 1842, 1967, 1969 and 1970, as well as other, unconfirmed eruptions in 1912 and 1917. 

From 1967 to 1970, intense volcanic eruptions destroyed Chile’s scientific research station at Pendulum Cove and the United Kingdom’s research station at Whalers Bay and also changed the island’s morphology through the creation of an islet in the region of Telefon Bay, which over time became joined to the main island.  The large amounts of ash emitted by the volcano were deposited on surrounding islands and can still be seen today on Johnson Glacier on Livingston Island. 

One immediate effect of the 1967-70 eruptions was that a halt was put to all scientific activity on the island, with the period immediately following the eruptions characterised by sporadic activities only.

Currently, specific, superficial signs of volcanic activity on Deception Island can be seen in the existence of areas exhibiting major geothermal anomalies, where a substantial level of seismic activity can be detected; this is due to the tectonic expansion of the Bransfield rift as well as to activity of volcanic origin, which each season causes an average of 1000 superficial, low-energy tremors measuring below 2 on the Richter scale. Higher-magnitude volcano-tectonic earthquakes, measuring 3 to 4 on the Richter scale, have been recorded in periods of seismo-volcanic crisis (1991-92 and 1998-99). These quakes were felt, recorded and described by the scientists present at the Gabriel de Castilla station at the time.

    2- The increase in scientific activity on the island

In1986, coinciding with the start of Spain’s activities in the Antarctic, scientific research of the volcano at Deception Island was resumed in collaboration with scientists from Argentina. This ongoing research focuses on the basic study, surveillance and monitoring of volcanic activity using geodetic and geophysical techniques and methods.

During the initial phase, the presence of the support vessel Las Palmas allowed for magnetic, bathymetric, gravimetric and seismic profiles to be made both in Port Foster and around the exterior perimeter of the island, as well as a hydrographic survey covering Port Foster and the region between Deception and Livingston Islands. 

Between December 31, 1991 and January 25, 1992, a substantial increase in seismic activity was recorded, with a total of 900 events, plus four earthquakes felt at Gabriel de Castilla station. This increase was interpreted as a reactivation process caused by a minor intrusion at less than 2 km depth in the region of Fumarole Bay. 

Following a number of minor seismic crises in 1994-95 and again in 1995-96, on January 3, 1999, another episode of significant seismo-volcanic activity began, characterised by a number of different signs and two earthquakes that could be felt, registering 3.3 (January 14) and 4.3 (January 20). 

The detected seismo-volcanic activity was restricted to the region between Fumarole Bay and Telefon Bay, at a focal depth of 1 km, and included both lengthy volcano-tectonic earthquakes and volcanic tremors that released an amount of energy that was substantially higher than that detected during previous seasons. 

From that moment onward, there was an increase in the number of multidisciplinary activities being carried out on the island, which included geophysical and geodetic measures such as the re-observation of deformations in the geodetic network, the creation of a seismic register, the sampling and analysis of fumarole gases, the collection of geomagnetic, gravimetric and bathymetric data and the development of a tomographic model of velocity and attenuation using the compressed air cannons installed on the oceanographic research vessel Hespérides as active sources and local and regional earthquakes as active (sic) sources. This work included modelling of the seismo-volcanic source to explain the seismic records obtained on the island and how they relate to the volcanic dynamics. 

One result of this work was the conclusion that the increase in activity was due to an intrusion of magma, with the lasting nature of the events and the tremors being explained as the result of the interaction between the island’s shallow aquifers and the high-temperature material being injected into them. 
 
In recent years, there has been a major change in the assessment of the indicators of volcanic activity, with discrete elements such as seismic activity of a volcano-tectonic nature being replaced by the continuous analysis of indicators that define the evolution of the status of the volcanic system over time, such as dynamic parameters, autocorrelation coefficients, fractal dimensions, variograms, etc.

    3- Surveillance of volcanic activity and evacuation routes 

Current significant superficial manifestations of volcanic activity on Deception Island can be seen in the existence of areas exhibiting major geothermal anomalies. In addition, there are a number of areas where substantial level of superficial seismic activity of volcanic origin can be detected; this activity is low-energy and at magnitudes registering below 2.

The surveillance system in place for the volcano at Deception Island consists of an array of telemetry seismographs that send their recordings to Gabriel de Castilla station, thermometric stations, and a geodetic network with 14 geodetic vertices distributed uniformly around Port Foster as well as vertices at Spain’s Juan Carlos I station and on Byers Peninsula, both on Livingston Island. The REGID (sic) levelling network, a network with geodynamic characteristics comprising 45 levelling marks, has been developed to provide real-time volcanic monitoring. The REGRID network has also been set up: this is a gravimetric network comprising the geodetic vertices of the REGID network plus the levelling marks of the RENID network.

Eruption patterns of the volcano at Deception Island: andesitic (basaltic) volcanism; effusive to Surtseyan eruption mechanisms; low magma volumes; current activity concentrated at Fumarole Bay, Telefon Bay, Pendulum Cove and Whalers Bay. Given the volcanic hazards and the heightened volcanic risk due to the high numbers of tourists in the area during the austral summer season as well as the presence of a considerable number of scientists and military technicians at the Gabriel de Castilla and Decepción stations, studies have been made of possible evacuation routes in case of a volcanic emergency on the island. 

A survey (Gosalvez, 2010) revealed that there are only three exterior beaches that can be accessed for evacuation by sea in all tidal and surf conditions: at North Kendall, Macaroni and Baily Head. The remaining beaches identified and surveyed are very rocky and difficult to access, etc., which means that air transport (helicopters) would most likely have to be used in the evacuation. 

It is recommended that the evacuation routes not run along the beaches, given that an eruption may be accompanied by high surf. An evacuation to Entrance Point using small, inflatable craft navigating along the coast might also be envisaged, as long as the surf is not high. Each evacuation plan includes: a sketch of the route, a route card (indicating altitude changes, distances and estimated times), a route profile and an annex with photographs depicting the route. All of the routes described can be taken by persons with no special training in mountaineering techniques and as such would be suitable as evacuation routes to deal with volcanic risk.

References


Alguacil, G., Almendros, J., Del Pezzo, E., García, A., Ibáñez, J.M., La Rocca, M., Morales, J. & Ortiz, R., (1999). Observations of volcanic earthquakes and tremor at Deception Island - Antarctica. Annals of Geophysics, 42: 417-436.

Correig, A.M., Urquizu, M., Vila, J. & Marti, J. (1997). Analysis of the temporal occurrence of seismicity at Deception Island (Antarctica). A nonlinear approach. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 149: 553-574.

García, A., Blanco, I., Torta, J.M., Astiz, M., Ibañez, J. & Ortiz, R. (1997). A search for the volcanomagnetic signal at Deception Volcano (South Shetland I, Antartica). Annal of Geophysics, XLn12: 319-328.

Gosalvez, J. (2010). Comunicación personal

Ibañez, J., del Pezzo, E., Almendros, J., La Rocca, M., Alguacil, G., Ortiz, R. & García, A. (2000). Seismovolcanic signals at Deception Island Volcano, Antarctica. Wave field analysis and source modelling. Journal Geophysical Research, 105 B6: 13905-13931.

Marti, J., Vila, J. & Rey, J. (1996). Deception Island (Bransfield strait, Antarctica): an example of collapse caldera developed by extensional tectonics, in McGuire, W.C., Jones, A.P. & Neuberg, J. (eds) Volcano Instability on the Earth and other Planets, Geological Society Special Publication, 10: 253-265.

Ortiz, R., García, A., Aparicio, A., Blanco, I., Felpeto, A., del Rey, R., Villegas, M.T., Ibañez, J.M., Morales, J., del Pezzo, E., Olmedillas, J.C., Astiz, M., Vila, J., Ramos, M.,Viramonte, J.G., Risso & Caselli, A. (1997). Monitoring of the volcanic activity of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica (1986-1995). In The Antarctic Region: Geological Evolution and Processes. C.A: Ricci. Terra Antarctica Publication, Siena. ISBN: 88-900221-0-8: 1071-1076.

Torta, J.M., Gaya, L.R., Sole, J.G., Blanco, I. & García, A. (1999). A new geomagnetic observatory at Livingston I. (South Shetland Islands). Implications for future regional magnetic surveys. Annals of Geophysics, 42, 2: 417-436.

Vila, J., Martí, J., Ortiz, R., García, A. & Correig, A. (1992). Volcanic tremors at Deception Island (South Shetland Islands. Antarctica). Jour. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 43:98-102.

Vila, J., Ortiz, R., Correig, A. & García, A. (1992). Seismic activity on Deception Island. In Recent Progress Antarctic Earth Sciences. Terrapub. Tokyo: 449-517.

Vila J., Correig, A.M. & Marti, J. (1995). Attenuation and source parameters at Deception Island (South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). Pure and Applied Geophysics, 244: 229-250.


