





A Proposal to Enhance Port State Control for Tourist Vessels Departing to Antarctica




A Proposal to Enhance Port State Control for Tourist Vessels Departing to Antarctica
This paper was considered as Working Paper 7 at the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area (December 2009). 
New Zealand is now submitting it for the information of the ATCM.



J N K Mansell (Principal Maritime Advisor to Maritime New Zealand)


Executive summary

The inspection of foreign-flagged ships in a State’s ports and anchorages for the purpose of monitoring compliance with international standards, known as ‘port State control’ (PSC), has become necessary due to ineffective control by some States over vessels flying their flag. This paper proposes a multilateral port State control regime for tourist vessels bound for Antarctic waters to mitigate the risks of a marine casualty or oil spill. The concept of port State control and its development from a unilateral reactive measure by coastal states to a multilateral proactive control mechanism supported by international law is recalled. It is concluded that it is possible to establish a co-operative port State control regime under existing memoranda of understanding or agreements that would ensure that all eligible tourist vessels bound for Antarctic waters would be inspected to ensure conformity with mandatory international pollution prevention instruments. 
Port State Control
In order to discuss the relevance and application of PSC as a monitoring measure for ships in Antarctic waters it is useful to understand the concept and historical development of PSC, which has been described as:
[t]he inspection of foreign ships in national ports for the purpose of verifying that the condition of the ship and its equipment comply with the requirements of certain international maritime conventions and that the ship is manned and operated in compliance with applicable national laws.

The catalyst for codification of port State control in international law was the grounding of the Torrey Canyon off Lands End, England, in 1967. A flurry of activity ensued within the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO), resulting in the adoption of a suite of conventions over the succeeding few years which addressed the pollution prevention and liability issues arising from this casualty. MARPOL 73/78 codified PSC for environmental protection matters. SOLAS 74 also codified PSC, reflecting the wording of MARPOL 73/78. IMCO adopted the first resolution on port State control in November 1975.
The authority for port State control is the national law of the port State based upon ratification of the various mandatory IMO instruments that contain PSC provisions. It is not possible to exercise port State control unless a State is party to the relevant instruments and has brought them into effect through its national law. This national law will reflect the key principles of PSC contained in IMO resolution A.787(19) including powers of detention, the requirement for clear grounds for detention, and the principle of no ‘more favourable treatment’ for ships below convention size (500 GT) or registered in States that are not party to the mandatory IMO instruments. All possible efforts must be made to avoid a ship being unduly delayed or detained. 

Status of port and flag States associated with Antarctica
In the context of ships proceeding into Antarctic waters, the traditional southern hemisphere countries of departure are all Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and are members of one or more regional memoranda on port State control. These countries of departure have all ratified SOLAS 74 and Annexes I and II of MARPOL 73/78 but there is uneven support for Annexes IV and V. 
Almost all of the 47 Parties to the Antarctic Treaty are active flag States with the majority also being members of various port State control memoranda or agreements. The majority of these Treaty Parties have good records in their capacity as flag States, as evinced by their positions on the White or Grey lists of either the Paris or Tokyo MOU. 
Prevention of ship-sourced pollution in Antarctic waters
MARPOL 73/78 has designated the Antarctic area, i.e. the sea area south of latitude 60 degrees South, to be a Special Area under regulation 10 of Annex I. The Protocol on Environmental Protection at its Annex IV largely replicates regulation 10 of Annex I of MARPOL. The Protocol is careful to incorporate MARPOL 73/78 by reference thus ensuring that Annex IV of the Protocol remains up-to-date. The primacy of MARPOL 73/78 as a mandatory International Maritime Organization (IMO) instrument is reinforced by article 14 of Annex IV of the Protocol where it is stated that  ‘…with respect to those Parties which are also Parties to MARPOL 73/78, nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the specific rights and obligations thereunder’.
MARPOL 73/78, which has been ratified by a very large percentage of world tonnage, is a relevant mandatory instrument under the memoranda of all PSC regimes, contains port State control provisions, and achieves the aims of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol.
The reach of port State control is extended into Antarctic waters by requirements in MARPOL 73/78 for ships operating in special areas, and Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol, for ports of departure and arrival for Antarctic waters to provide facilities for ‘reception of sludge, dirty ballast, tank washing water, and other oily residues and mixtures from all ships, without causing undue delay and according to the needs of the ships using them’. Flag States are required to ensure that ships flying their flag, before entering the Antarctic area, are fitted with sufficient tank capacity to retain all such wastes, and to have concluded arrangements to discharge such oily residues at a reception facility after leaving the area. Similar provisions, made in Annex II of MARPOL 73/78 for noxious liquid substances, and Annex V for garbage, also reflect requirements of Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) considerably expands the jurisdiction of a port State in matters of environmental pollution to the high seas; the great commons where the flag State has almost exclusive jurisdiction. MARPOL 73/78 contains two significant port State provisions; the power to inspect ships and report any evidence of a breach of the Convention outside of its waters (emphasis added) to the flag State, and the power to detain unseaworthy ships. Port States can investigate and, if necessary, institute proceedings under criminal law ‘in respect of any discharge from that vessel outside the internal waters, territorial sea or exclusive economic zone of that State in violation of applicable international rules and standards established through the competent international organization or general diplomatic conference’. Where the discharge is in the waters of another State UNCLOS requires the agreement of that coastal State, the flag State, or the State damaged or threatened by the discharge violation.  A coastal State that has experienced a discharge violation in its waters can request a port State to carry out an investigation. 
A proactive PSC regime for tourist vessels bound for Antarctic waters
It is proposed that a proactive PSC inspection programme at the port of departure for all tourist vessels bound for Antarctic waters be introduced through the existing three PSC memoranda of understanding that include southern hemisphere ports of departure. 
PSC inspection of a foreign-flagged ship at the port of departure for Antarctica can be assured, and enhanced, through simple measures that are not at variance with international law. Most port State control regimes have introduced targeted inspections based upon simple risk indicators that have proven to be valid through many hundreds of thousands of PSC inspections. Port States are given discretion by the various PSC regimes to vary the target factors according to nature of ships visiting their ports. It is entirely logical for States that serve as departure ports for ships bound for Antarctic waters to decide that such ships be awarded ‘high priority’ status and to put procedures in place to ensure that they undergo a PSC inspection at their port of departure. 
This PSC inspection would be enhanced by verification that the ship complies with the additional SOLAS and MARPOL requirements for ships proceeding into the Antarctic Special Area. An assessment could also be made of compliance with the extant voluntary IMO Guidelines on voyage planning for passenger ships operating in remote areas. In due course the departure PSC inspection would include compliance with the guidelines currently being developed by the IMO for ships operating in polar waters; due for adoption in December 2009, and the Unified Requirements developed by the International Association of Classification Societies (IACS) which, ‘in addition to general classification society rules, address all essential aspects of construction of ships for Polar Class’.
States will generally endeavour to inspect foreign flagged ships at their first port of call in order to assure themselves that the ship is compliant with the various mandatory IMO instruments that require the ship to be inter alia properly crewed and equipped, have adequate safety management systems in place (including passage planning), be safely navigated through the coastal State’s waters and not pose a threat to the marine environment of the coastal State. A foreign flagged ship departing a port in a country for Antarctic waters will have to traverse that coastal State’s internal waters, territorial sea and exclusive economic zone before departing that country’s waters and eventually entering Antarctic waters. 
In addition to pollution prevention requirements the PSC inspection will focus upon safety issues by verification that the vessel’s crew meet international standards, that it has a functional safety management system, that its charts are corrected and up-to-date, that it has undertaken passage planning for the duration of its time in Antarctic waters, that it has adequate lifesaving equipment and the means of making distress signals and that it has a search and rescue plan in place and lodged with a rescue co-ordination centre. 
Regarding the concept of an Antarctic MOU, the relatively small volume of shipping visiting Antarctic waters on a seasonal basis would not appear to justify administrative arrangements such as a Secretariat and annual committee meetings. It has been noted that the countries with ‘gateway ports’ for Antarctic waters are themselves members of three PSC regimes that work in harmony in accordance with IMO resolution A.787(19), attend each others committee meetings when possible, and also attend regular IMO workshops for PSC secretariats and database managers. There is, therefore, a functioning port State control regime in place that could, in conformity with international law and the aims of the IMO to foster harmonized global PSC, administer PSC for ships departing for Antarctic waters.
Administrative arrangements could be agreed between the Secretariats of the Indian Ocean, Tokyo MOU and the Vina del Mar Agreement to ensure access to each others databases for PSC data on tourist vessels proceeding into the Antarctic Special Area. High Priority status for such vessels would ensure that they were inspected at a maximum of three monthly intervals by at least one member authority of these three PSC regimes using common inspection guidelines. Individual port States have the ability to decide, as New Zealand has done for a number of years, to inspect vessels every time they depart for Antarctica, and upon their return, to monitor, in particular, oil  and garbage record books under Annexes I and V of MARPOL 73/78.   However for the most part it would be sufficient to ensure vessels are inspected at the commencement of their Antarctic season.
Apart from pollution of the marine environment the other ever-present risk in Antarctic waters is that of a serious marine casualty caused by grounding, collision with ice, stress of weather or any other of the multifarious hazards of the sea. Ships in Antarctic waters will often have to depend on other ships in such circumstances as, particularly in the Ross Sea area, dedicated rescue assets are not always immediately available. To complement preventative PSC it is suggested that the southern hemisphere countries of departure adopt the voluntary questionnaire developed by New Zealand for ships departing for Antarctica (copy attached at Annex A) and share this information. This questionnaire seeks information that would proactively assist the State in whose search and rescue area the casualty was located and also includes vital information on total quantities of fuel oil aboard in the case of a pollution incident. This information could be circulated to the relevant rescue co-ordination centres.
Conclusion
Legitimate concern exists among the Antarctic Treaty Parties about the burgeoning number of tourist vessels visiting Antarctic waters, and the threat these vessels pose to the pristine waters and fauna south of 60 degrees South latitude, and to their passengers and crew in the event of a marine casualty in a very hostile environment. These threats are exacerbated by the rapidly increasing size of such ships and a perceived lack of effective flag State control. A means is sought, within the existing framework of international maritime law, to mitigate these risks.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the Treaty Parties consider the development of a regime of proactive port State control, delivered collectively by southern hemisphere ports of departure through existing PSC memoranda of understanding or agreements.  It is suggested such a regime would provide the most effective means of ensuring that tourist vessels bound for Antarctic waters meet all international standards. This regime could be enhanced by assessments of compliance with existing voluntary Polar guidelines, and considerably strengthened when mandatory standards for ships in Polar waters are agreed by the IMO. It is also recommended that voluntary information to assist rescue coordination centres be collected from all Antarctic bound tourist vessels by PSC officers at the port of departure.  A draft questionnaire is attached for consideration.



