





Report of clean-up efforts by the Argentinian National Antarctic Program in the area of the Neko Harbour refuge (north-west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula)





Report of clean-up efforts by the Argentinian National Antarctic Program in the area of the Neko Harbour refuge (north-west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula).


At the end of the last summer season (2008/09), there was a violent storm in the Neko Harbour region. One result of this storm was that the Argentinian refuge that had been constructed on the site was completely destroyed, and the debris was scattered around the surrounding area. 
At the instructions of the National Antarctic Director, staff from Argentina’s Almirante Brown Antarctic Base went to the site on small craft to determine the scale of the damage to the former refuge and proceed to remove any debris that could be located.   
An initial inspection established that the complete destruction of the refuge was likely due to the fact that a casual visitor had not closed the door to the refuge properly, with the result that the strong gusts accompanying the storm were able to penetrate the structure and demolish it entirely. 
The amount of debris being considerable, photographs were taken of the damage and it was decided to undertake a clean-up effort of the site, involving collecting the debris from the refuge and removing any dangerous objects and then, at the beginning of the current season (2009-2010), to proceed to the complete removal of all remaining debris. This plan took into account the fact that the refuge in question was located very close to a colony of gentoo penguins.
All of the debris collected was subsequently removed by crew members of the ARA scout ship “Suboficial Castillo”, in the presence of the Chief Coordinator of the National Antarctic Directorate, in January 2010.  The debris, having been previously sorted into different waste types, was then transferred to the ARA transporter ship “Canal Beagle” for its definitive removal from the Antarctic continent.  
A small stone monument was erected marking the location of the Argentinian refuge in Neko Harbour. The intention of the Argentinian National Antarctic Program is to proceed to its reconstruction the near future. 


Photos taken prior to debris removal (summer 2009)










Photos of the removal of the refuge debris (summer 2010)































Photos taken after the removal of all debris from the former refuge (summer 2010)









