





Possible human impact on Deception Island





Possible human impact on Deception Island
Deception Island is an emerged volcano, the recent activity of which has created a unique environment of exceptional tourist appeal and scientific interest. 

This information paper presents a series of observations that reflect the complex variability of the conservation challenges faced by the island, given the large number of visits it receives, which tend to be concentrated in the most unique areas of the island during the austral summer season. 

1- Areas visited on the island
Four areas on Deception Island have accumulated a considerable number of visits since IAATO started systematically recording tourist activity in Antarctica. It is worth noting that while the visits to Whalers Bay (13,966 visitors during the 2008/2009 season) show a positive growth trend, the figures for Telefon Bay (3,496 visitors), Pendulum Cove (2,802 visitors in 2008/2009) and Baily Head (2,764 visitors in 2008/2009) have fluctuated in recent years, and in some cases have even gone down. 

At Whalers Bay, most tourists remain on the beach area, and so tidal movements ensure that any traces of their presence are regularly washed away. At the access area to Neptunes Window, one can discern a number of well-trodden paths created by visitors passing through the area: there are a number of secondary paths running along the main route. It would therefore be advisable to mark off the main route to prevent alternate routes from being created.  

At Pendulum Cove, the hot springs present at shallow depths along the coast offer visitors the opportunity to “bathe” in the hot water. For the past few seasons, IAATO has agreed that its members will not participate in the digging of pools for tourists to bathe in. This may be one reason behind the steady decrease in the number of visitors to this site. 

Telefon Bay is often visited by small yachts. An additional risk of landings here is that visitors may enter ASPA 140f. Organic waste residue has also been found on nearby beaches. 

The number of visitors permitted per day to Baily Head has been restricted, as has the maximum time permitted at the site; however, the accumulation of visits over the course of the season can have a cumulative impact. Add to this the new activities accessing the penguin rookery, and it is possible that there will be a change in the human impact on the site.  

The remaining locations on Deception Island are not considered to be of interest, either because they do not receive visitors (most of the island) or because they are sites where no landings occur (Neptunes Bellows, Fumarole Bay). However, visits to the penguin rookery at Punta Descubierta on the island’s west coast have now been detected for the first time, and these may increase in future.

2- Detected human impact (Benayas, 2010)
2.1 Trampling of the ground
The ground on Deception Island consists of poorly developed, very coarse, andosol-type volcanic soils (Bölter et al., 1999), and human impact is limited to slight changes to the colour, an increased compression of the substrate and increased wind and water surface erosion of the smaller materials (the effects of which are heightened by the slope). These soils possess a very low organic material content, and as a result there is no vegetation, and edaphic fauna is extremely residual (in 12 samples taken for the analysis of the presence of collembola, only a single specimen was found). 

2.2 Invasive species
In the coming seasons, it will be necessary to monitor the non-native species detected to date in the terrestrial ecosystems of Deception Island. One must consider that this area is extremely sensitive to colonisation by non-native species, both plant and animal, due to its unique geological nature, which raises the ground temperature, thus allowing for the invasion of species adapted to conditions at less extreme latitudes (Convey et al., 2000). 

As regards plants, two species from the Asteraceae family have recently been detected: Nassauvia magellanica and Gamochaeta nivalis. Both are present in Tierra del Fuego and in the Southern Patagonian regions of Argentina and Chile. During the 2009-10 season, there was a campaign undertaken to eradicate one case of Nassauvia magellanica in the vicinity of the abandoned British base at Whalers Bay, although there is not complete certainty that the invasive species was introduced by man in this case. 

Apart from these plants, other allochthonous organisms have been detected on Deception Island, although colonisation has not yet been established: the collembola Hypogastrura viatica, Folsomia candida and Protaphorura sp. Cases of aggressive invasion of Hypogastrura viatica have already been identified on a number of sub-Antarctic islands (Greenslade, 2006), and so it is urgent that its presence on Deception Island be confirmed as soon as possible. The other two collembolan species have already been detected on Deception Island (Greenslade & Wise, 1984), although their definitive colonisation has not yet been established. Convey’s team has taken samples this season to monitor these species. 
2.3 Maritime accidents
In recent years, there have been various accidents involving cruise ships, both in the greater Antarctic region and in the area of Deception Island. For example, on November 10, 2006, a storm that had started the previous night caused the cruise ship Orlova (110 passengers) to run aground on the beach. A few months later, on February 1, 2007, the cruise ship Nordkapp (297 passengers) hit the rocks at the entrance to Deception Island in the area of Neptunes Bellows. The double-hulled structure of the vessel played a key role in avoiding a fuel spill into Port Foster. 
2.4 Rubbish on the beaches 
Both scientists and tourists produce small amounts of rubbish, often unintentionally, that end up on the island’s beaches and existing paths. Most of this rubbish consists of wood fragments of varying sizes, although on occasion more unusual forms of rubbish, such as metal tanks, have been encountered. Another point worth mentioning here is that different types of rubbish are found at different sites: organic waste was the most common form of waste found at Telefon Bay, while at Pendulum Cove, plastic was most common, and at Whalers Bay, there was a considerable amount of wood and glass waste. Possibly one of the most critical issues on Deception Island has to do with the state of deterioriation of the buildings at Whalers Bay, which are the source of much of this waste material – wood, glass, metal, etc. – which ends up being spread out over the beaches in the island’s interior. 

3- The marine environment (Avila, 2006; 2009)

Recent studies have demonstrated the importance of Whalers Bay as one of the richest areas on the whole island in terms of the presence of marine invertebrates, which should be ensured protection and conservation due to their unique characteristics (Barnes et al., 2008).

Projects carried out under the Spanish Polar Program (Avila, 2006; 2009) have confirmed that Whalers Bay has the richest marine invertebrate community on the island, not only on hard substrate, but also on soft substrate. Dives performed by Avila’s group as part of these projects have confirmed the presence of highly-developed communities of suspensivores, including sponges and soft corals, as well as other groups such as tunicates, a wide variety of molluscs, echinoderms, polychaeta, nemertinea, bryozoa, etc. In addition to these invertebrates, there is also a wide variety of algal species, which are currently being studied. 

All of these benthic species of marine flora and fauna in Whalers Bay could be adversely affected by vessels’ anchors, which disturb the sea floor and tear the fauna and flora from the substrate. This could have devastating effects on these benthic communities, from which many groups of invertebrates would be slow to recover.   
 
All this means that the communities of organisms present in these shallow waters could be seriously affected by these disturbances during the most important phase of their life cycles, when most are in the period of reproduction.  

REFERENCES
Avila, C. 2006. Ecología: Ecología química de invertebrados antárticos. Proyecto de Investigación. Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (España).

Avila, C. 2009. Actividad ecológica de productos naturales marinos de organismos bentónicos antárticos: experimentos de ecología química in situ. Proyecto de Investigación. Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (España).

Barnes, D.K.A., Linse, K., Enderlein, P., Smale, D., Fraser, K.P.P., & Brown, M. 2008. Marine richness and gradients at Deception Island, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 20: 271–279. 

Benayas, J. 2009. Elaboración y puesta en marcha de un sistema de indicadores de seguimiento de las actividades humanas en la isla Decepción. Proyecto de Investigación. Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (España).

Bölter, M., Blume, H.P., & Khun, D. 1999. Soils and their microbiological properties from a transect from Cape Horn to the Antarctic Peninsula. Polar Bioscience, 12: 54-67.

Convey, P., Greenslade, P., & Pugh, P.J.A. 2000. Terrestrial fauna of the South Sandwich Islands. Journal of Natural History, 34: 597-609.

Curry, C., McCarthy, J., Darragh, H., Wake, R., Todhunter, R., & Terris, J. 2001. Could tourists transmit infectious agents in Antarctica? Washington, D.C.: International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).

Greenslade, P. 2006. The invertebrates of Macquarie Island. Kingston: Australian Antarctic Division, xvi þ 326 pp.

Greenslade, P. & Wise, K.A.J. 1984. Additions to the collembolan fauna of the Antarctic. Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia, 108: 203-205.

