





Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) on “Cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters”




Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) on “Cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters”
Introduction
Through its Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA), the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) plays an important role in contributing to safety of life at sea and the protection of the marine environment in Antarctica. This Report that provides a brief summary of the key coordination activities had since last ATCM; the status of hydrographic surveys and nautical chart production of Antarctic waters, conclusions and recommendations.
The IHO confirms its willingness to continue working closely with the AT System and other relevant international organizations to improve safety of life at sea, safety of navigation, and enhance its contribution to the efforts aimed at the protection of the marine environment and marine scientific research in Antarctica.  
1.- Key Coordination Activities
        1.1. Seminar on Hydrography at the Annual Meeting of COMNAP
On behalf of the IHO, the HCA participated in the Annual Meeting of COMNAP held in Punta Arenas, Chile, in August 2009 and delivered a short seminar on the “Importance of Hydrographic Activities in Antarctica”.  
26 COMNAP members and 4 international organizations were present with over 150 delegates.  The IHO participated with its HCA Chairman and IHB Director, Captain Hugo Gorziglia, together with RAdm Ian Moncrieff and Commander Enrique Silva, representatives of UK and Chile to the HCA, respectively.   
The objective of the seminar was: to raise awareness at the operational level on the importance of hydrographic activity in the Antarctica; to achieve a better understanding of COMNAP on the existing risks associated to the present status of charting in the region and to explore ways to jointly improve the situation.  
Two concrete initiatives were proposed to and agreed by COMNAP. One was to put in practice the “IHO Collection and Rendering of Hydrographic Data Form and the second one was to review and provide comments to the HCA on the existing Hydrographic Survey Priority List developed by the Commission.  

        1.2. The 9th Meeting of the IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica

This meeting took place in South Africa 12-14 October 2009.  Twelve HCA Member States (Australia, Brazil, Chile, France, Germany, Korea (Rep of), New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Spain, UK and Venezuela), were represented at this meeting, plus observers from COMNAP, IAATO, GEBCO/IBCSO and the South African DEAT. In total, 25 delegates were in attendance. The Republic of Korea and Venezuela were welcomed as new members of HCA, which brought its total number to 23. 
The Commission reviewed the action list agreed at the last HCA meeting and decided: to nominate Dr. Schenke (Germany) as HCA representative to the International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean in order to improve coordination with the scientific community;  to coordinate the visit of hydrographic surveyors from Argentina, Chile and New Zealand with at least one IAATO ship when calling in port on her way to Antarctica to advise on the collection and rendering of hydrographic data to ensure collected data can be used for charting purposes.    
The ATCM Secretariat, COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR submitted reports for consideration by the HCA. The HCA would like to thank the international organizations for the cooperation and collaboration, as well as the joint work in progress. Outcomes from the discussion had were: the convenience to address environmental and scientific issues in addition to safety of navigation issues and that HCA members interested in making use of IAATO ships, to coordinate directly with IAATO.  
The Commission examined the status of hydrographic surveys and nautical charts production, the details of which are provided under section 2 in this report. 
Also it was discussed how the HCA could contribute to the ATME that will examine issues surrounding ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in New Zealand, in December 2009, details of which are provided in section 1.3 of this report. 
Finally, the Commission decided to accept UK’s proposal to host HCA10 in Cambridge, 20 to 22 of September 2010. 
        1.3. Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME)

Pursuant to Decision 7 (2009), the ATME on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area took place in Wellington, New Zealand, 09-11 December 2009. The IHO was represented by HCA Chairman and IHB Director, Captain Gorziglia. 
The IHO submitted two papers.  One paper noted the role of IHO and the work so far undertaken by HCA.  The second paper dealt with the existing cooperation between ATCM and IHO. The meeting agreed to continue inviting IHO HCA to the annual ATCM meetings and where appropriate to be represented at IHO HCA meetings. 
In addition the Hydrographer of New Zealand submitted a working paper providing details on the hydro-cartographic activities New Zealand has conducted.  
Out of the recommendations adopted by the Meeting of Experts, two had direct relation with the IHO. The texts are as follow: 
    a) « That the AT Parties should continue to contribute to hydrographic surveying and charting information and consider advising vessels intending to operate in the AT area that many areas have not been surveyed to modern standards ».  
    b) « The IHO HCA should continue to be invited to annual ATCMs to report the status of hydrographic survey and nautical chart production in Antarctic waters. Parties also agreed that, as appropriate, the ATCM should be represented at IHO HCA meetings. Where an IHO HCA meeting was to be held in a country that was also Consultative Party, then that Consultative Party should consider attending the HCA meeting ».    
2.- Status of Hydrographic Surveys and Nautical Chart Production.
2.1 Hydrographic Surveys. 

Out of the 15 National Reports submitted to the last HCA meeting, only 7 indicated that some systematic hydrographic surveys have taken place during the season 2008/2009.  There is no assessment yet with respect to the 2009/2010 season.  
As these surveys are associated to a particular INT Chart we can expect an improvement on data availability to produce new charts. Nevertheless the Commission is fully aware that it is urgent to assign a high priority to hydrographic survey activities as the “only way” to ensure the timely production of the INT charts. 
It is expected that with the commission of new survey ships and modern equipment installed on hydrographic survey ships, in the near future there will be a better capacity to conduct surveys in Antarctica.   
The contribution by IAATO ships and other Ships of Opportunity, in hydrographic data gathering shall be assessed at the next HCA meeting. For the time being there is no indication that special hydrographic teams have used the opportunity to embark on IAATO ships due to the complexity in the coordination and doubtful cost / benefit ratio. 

Resolution 5 (2008) recommended AT Parties to clarify with HCA requirements for the collection of hydrographic data of sufficient quality for use in the development of electronic navigational charts and to identify priority areas for the collection of additional hydrographic and bathymetric data. The ATCM shall be aware that the “IHO Collection and Rendering of Hydrographic Data Form”, included as Annex B in this report, provides the minimum requirements that hydrographic data shall comply in order to be considered for cartographic purposes. 
The HCA Hydrographic Survey Prioritizing Working Group with cooperation from COMNAP and IAATO continues to progress its mandate and the preparation of graphics reflecting the status of hydrographic surveys assets, in the short list priority areas and related INT Charts. 
2.2 Nautical Chart Production. 
The situation with regard to chart production is provided in detail in Annex C. 
The INT Chart scheme includes 102 charts and 67 INT Charts have been produced or shall be finalized in 2010.  
Resolution 5 (2008) recommends to cooperate with HCA to improve hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region and endeavour to find additional resources towards improving hydrographic surveying and charting in the Antarctic region. It is evident that there is a willingness to progress in the production of new INT charts. This sentiment requires to be translated in an effective increase in the priority assigned by Governments to conduct hydrographic surveying and allocate resources to nautical chart production.  
With regard to the ENC production, the Commission confirms that small and medium scales have been agreed. Large scale scheme is under consideration.  It was agreed that producers of ENCs should be those of the corresponding INT charts. The Commission congratulates the following countries for their progress in ENC production:  Australia, Brazil, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Norway and UK.  14 overview; 6 coastal; 9 approaches, 10 harbour, and one berthing ENC are available. Other 35 are in production.  
3.- Conclusions.
1.-	The IHO/HCA recognizes the cooperation and contribution received from several international organizations to progress hydrographic surveying and nautical chart production of Antarctic waters, supporting the protection of the marine environment and the marine scientific research.  It is expected that ATCM will soon provide HCA its view with regard to the identification of priority areas for the collection of additional hydrographic and bathymetric data.   
 2.-	Despite the willingness expressed by AT representatives at different meetings, hydrographic surveys and production of nautical charts of Antarctica does not hold, in the practice, the required priority.  The IHO/HCA is concerned by the extremely low progress achieved in terms of nautical chart delivery covering an extremely vulnerable marine environment. 
3.-	Contribution expected from Ships of Opportunity operations should not be seen as THE solution, but as an opportunity not to be missed.   The “IHO Collection and Rendering of Hydrographic Data Form”, is a concrete step forward in this line. 
4.- Recommendations.
It is recommended that the XXXIII ATCM: 
    1. Takes note of the IHO Report. 
    2. Considers providing HCA the identification of priority areas of which hydrographic surveys and availability of INT charts could support to the protection of the marine environment and facilitate marine scientific research.   
    3. Instructs the AT System to make use of the “IHO Collection and Rendering of Hydrographic Data Form” as a follow up of Resolution 5 (2008).  
Monaco, March 2010.
ANNEXES (IN ENGLISH ONLY): 
A:	HCA Membership Situation.
B:	IHO Collection and Rendering of Hydrographic Data Form.
C:	INT Chart Present Production Status (March 2010).


