





An Environmental Management System for the Brazilian Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz”




An Environmental Management System for the Brazilian Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz”

The Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) recently approved the implementation of an Environmental Management System (EMS) for the Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz” (EACF, in Portuguese). 
The main objective is to strengthen the compliance with the principles governing the protection of the Antarctic environment established in the Madrid Protocol, thus limiting the negative environmental impacts on atmospheric, terrestrial and marine environments. The EMS for EACF will be implemented according to the requirements of  ABNT NBR ISO 14001:2004, a certifiable standard, which means that a certification can be granted if an audit by a certification body verifies that all the requirements are fulfilled. 
The EMS in a organization aims to diagnose the environmental aspects and to define the significant environmental impacts resulting from their activities, besides establishing procedures and creating plans to meet goals arising from the definition of feasible indicators. Everything is periodically reviewed, characterizing the process of continuous improvement. 
The development of the EMS is being conducted by the Brazilian National Science and Technology Institute on Antarctic Environmental Research (INCT-APA, in Portuguese). This includes the diagnosis, elaboration and the whole implementation phase of the EMS, all of which will be done with the supervision of the Ministry of the Environment (MMA, in Portuguese). By the end of this period, the Environmental Management System should be totally incorporated into the routine procedures of the Antarctic Station “Comandante Ferraz”, as part of the Brazilian Antarctic Program. 
EMS related activities started during Antarctic Operation XXVIII, in the summer of 2010, with the presence of INCT-APA and MMA representatives in the Brazilian Antarctic Station (EACF).  Work included the evaluation of the Station's level of compliance to the ISO 14001:2004 standards at this moment (i.e. before any action regarding its implementation), and the result was considered a good one, with 42.3% compliance. Besides the mapping of the relevant processes and activities conducted at EACF, the Environmental Aspects and Impacts Assessment and their respective significance evaluation was undertaken. This was done considering the risk analysis criteria – severity, magnitude and frequency. A total of 231 aspects and impacts was identified from the Brazilian Antarctic Station. Benchmarking related activities were also conducted and, at this initial approach, involved visits to other Stations of Admiralty Bay, such as Arctowski (Poland), Copacabana (USA) and Machu Picchu (Peru).
The Environmental Management System will provide benefits beyond those directly related to environmental aspects, such as the improvement of safety procedures and the efficiency of processes and control mechanisms associated to the Station's functioning. Therefore, it will bring cost reduction and many advantages for the main institutions of PROANTAR – Brazilian Navy, Ministry of Science and Technology and Ministry of the Environment – which will be strongly involved in the implementation of the EMS. 
