





Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2010





Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2010
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc., Co-Principal Investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory
Dr. Heather Lynch and Dr. William Fagan, University Of Maryland, Co-Principal Investigators,             Antarctic Site Inventory
Summary
This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2010. The Antarctic Site Inventory has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994.1 The project's methodology and results from previous field seasons were described and discussed in XXXII ATCM/INF1 and XXXII ATCM/INF32 and at previous ATCMs.2
1. Introduction
The Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994, examining whether opportunistic visits can be used:
    (1) to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists; 
    (2) to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and 
    (3) to determine how best to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
The Antarctic Site Inventory has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on expedition tour vessels and, occasionally, the United Kingdom ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance for logistics support. Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data.3
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all activities for which advance notification is required, including tourism,4 and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts. The Inventory’s primary objective is to identify and detect changes at the sites being monitored, and to determine whether any changes are naturally occurring or are caused by tourism or other human activities. Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative.5
In 2006, Oceanites, Inc. began a collaboration with the Fagan Lab at the University of Maryland to begin utilizing hierarchical Bayesian modelling and other statistical and geographic information system (GIS) techniques to analyze the Antarctic Site Inventory database in the context of other extant, long-term Peninsula datasets.6 
2. Results
In 16 seasons from November 1994 through February 2010, the Inventory has made 1,035 site visits and collected data at 128 Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the recently concluded 2009-10 field season, with Lindblad Expeditions’ National Geographic Explorer assisting the project, the Inventory made 81 visits and collected data at 40 sites.
In the 2009-10 season, as well as over the 15-year history of the Antarctic Site Inventory, there have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors,7 and to the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at recent ATCMs.8
3. Species Trends; Recent Papers
As noted, the Antarctic Site Inventory is primarily conducted by researchers being placed on tour ships and censusing sites during zodiac landings or, occasionally, during zodiac tours. The advantages of this approach include wide spatial coverage of the western and northeastern Antarctic Peninsula, and a negligible “footprint” on the landscape. The Inventory’s censuses add tremendous spatial and temporal coverage to existing census records and can be used in various analyses to describe regional penguin population changes.9
Because the Inventory’s timing of censuses is opportunistic, censuses are not always timed with the peak of egg laying or chick crèching as required by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program.10 Census correction involves knowing how the census is timed relative to the peak of egg laying, and how nest numbers change through the breeding cycle. In one of the Inventory’s recent papers,11 we present an analysis relating to both these challenges. Using clutch initiation data for four penguin breeding sites, we find that mean October temperatures constitute the most consistently significant factor related to the timing of clutch initiation for the three penguin species being examined (Adélie, gentoo, and chinstrap). These data also were used to develop a statistical model for determining the peak of clutch initiation, which, combined with a simple estimation of species-specific nest attrition rates, can be used to correct off-peak census counts.
In another recent publication,12 we report census data collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2007, updating earlier efforts reported in Naveen et al. (2000). This paper also reports new breeding populations of gentoo penguins13 and documents rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo and Adélie penguins where they breed sympatrically in the southwestern region of the Antarctic Peninsula.14 The rapid increase of gentoo penguins at Petermann Island is more fully described in a recent paper describing the Antarctic Site Inventory’s five-year austral field camp and reproductive study on the island, where the breeding productivity of Adélie and gentoo penguins were monitored to identify drivers of this rapid community change.15 Our efforts to track the shift between an Adélie-dominated ecosystem and a gentoo-dominated ecosystem in the vicinity of Petermann Island has resulted on an ongoing, successful collaboration with our colleagues at the Ukrainian station Akademik Vernadsky.16
In the Inventory’s three most recent field seasons, we have continued to explore and census new penguin breeding sites on the Peninsula that will increase the spatial extent and resolution of our efforts to monitor population changes.17
4. Analyses
In examining long-term changes in Antarctic Peninsula penguin and seabird populations, Oceanites’ collaboration with The Fagan Lab at the University Of Maryland intends to:
    (1) characterize decadal scale changes in these populations throughout the Peninsula;
    (2) discern how Antarctic species are changing in abundance, relative abundance, and spatial distribution;
    (3) identify the factors specifically driving these long-term changes; 
    (4) understand how Peninsula biological and physical processes, as well as direct/cumulative impacts from human activities, may connect;
    (5) identify the likely drivers of population shifts (both numerical and spatial); and 
    (6) forecast Peninsula-wide changes in the relative balance between the three pygoscelid penguin species. 
This effort should assist both management of the Antarctic Peninsula and provide information critical to the estimation and management of krill in the adjacent areas of the Southern Ocean. 
The Antarctic Site Inventory is the only project monitoring penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, and the only project regularly censusing the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at the last three ATCMs. Because the number of visiting tour ships, the sizes of such ships, and the number of visitors ashore continues to rise, this new approach uniquely assists Parties in determining whether any observed changes are Peninsula-wide trends, site-specific aberrations, and whether and how changes in penguin and seabird populations may relate to broader, global changes in this region. 
With regard to the tourism aspects, described more fully in XXXIII ATCM/INF2, a recent paper by the Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI), University of Maryland, and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) quantifies spatial and temporal patterns of tour ship traffic using 19 years of passenger landing statistics and five years of reconstructed itineraries, from the 2003-04 season to the 2007-08 season.18 The paper finds passenger landings and marine traffic to be highly concentrated and growing disproportionally rapidly at a few specific locations. It is hoped that this analysis and future, similar analyses may aid efforts to monitor and manage Antarctic shipborne tourism. 
5. Logistics
As noted above, the Inventory places research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer. Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with the longest Peninsula itineraries, whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities, and whose operations and expedition personnel enable Inventory researchers to reach as many sites and make as many site census visits as possible during each field season. By a cooperative arrangement with Lindblad Expeditions, Inc., Inventory researchers have collected census data from the 2000-01 season to date on all Antarctic departures of that company’s expedition vessels.
6. Geographic Coverage, Methodology
The Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into six subareas19 and collects three categories of data and information.20 The Inventory’s methodology as initially constituted is fully described in the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency.21 As noted above, because the timing of Inventory censuses is opportunistic, and because the intention is to analyze decadal scale changes in penguin and seabird populations, data are collected on all Inventory site visits and off-peak bias corrections have been developed to ensure the appropriate analysis of all collected data.22 
The Inventory is creating fully digitized and annotated GPS maps for all of the locations in the Inventory. These maps include both biologically relevant information such as the location and boundaries of breeding bird colonies, as well as information on zodiac landing sites, commonly used visitor trails, locations of historical sites and markers such as cairns and stakes. Where appropriate, map locations are associated with regular and repeated photodocumentation of sensitive features such as moss beds.
With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on the key biological variables of breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations. 
7. Dissemination of Data and Information, Publications
Biological data and site descriptions collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications. 
The most recent government report is the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency,23 which compiles site descriptions and data relating to the 82 sites visited/censused by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2003. Details include the number of visitor sites experiencing zodiac landings; where such landings are concentrated; the sites exhibiting the most species diversity; and the sites which are most sensitive to potential environmental disruptions. A third edition of the Compendium is planned for completion within the coming year.
Data and information about the Antarctic Site Inventory are also available on the recently launched Oceanites website — www.oceanites.org, and the Oceanites news/content site — http://oceanitesfeed.wordpress.com/, and the newly available Oceanites iPhone App that is freely available via Apple’s iTunes Store.
8. References
Abbott, S. and W.S. Benninghoff. 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner. 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Chesalin, M., R. Naveen, H. Lynch, I. Bullock, M. Rider, A. Miller, S. Forrest, R. Dagit, I. Dykyy, and V. Timofeyev. 2009. Long-term changes in populations of seabirds on Petermann Island and surrounding islands in Graham Land, Antarctic Peninsula. Marine Ecological Journal (In English and Russian) VIII(3): 5-13.
Emslie, S. 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Hofman, R.J. and J. Jatko (eds). 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2008. Censuses of Penguin, Blue-Eyed Shag Phalacrocorax Atriceps and Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes Giganteus Populations in the Antarctic Peninsula, 2001-2007. Marine Ornithology 36: 83–97.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2009a. Population trends and reproductive success at a frequently visited penguin colony on the western Antarctic Peninsula. Polar Biology, In press and available online. DOI: 10.1007/s00300-009-0726-y. 
Lynch, H.J., K. Crosbie, W.F. Fagan and R. Naveen. 2009b. Spatial patterns of tour ship traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science, In press and available online. DOI: 10.1017/S0954102009990654.
Lynch, H.J., W.F. Fagan, R. Naveen, S.G. Trivelpiece, and W.Z. Trivelpiece. 2009c. Timing of clutch initiation in Pygoscelis penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula: Towards an improved understanding of off-peak census correction factors. CCAMLR Science 16:149-165.
Naveen, R. 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R. 1997. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2000. Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2001. Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132.
Naveen, R. 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall). 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SCCAMLR). 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.



