





The concept of Human Footprint in the Antarctic





The concept of Human Footprint in the Antarctic

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand 

Summary
This paper seeks to build an understanding of the concept of human footprint in Antarctica and provide examples of its current status. The paper’s scope aims to stay within the normal practice of the Antarctic Treaty System and Parties to the Treaty. Footprint concepts can be divided into four classes according to whether they involve facilities or activities that last longer or shorter than one year, and are easily visible or are not apparent. The overall concept of human footprint in the Antarctic can be characterised by a “core” area of human presence and a surrounding “buffer” zone extending out to the distance at which the visually dominant core area or activity is no longer visible. Maps of the distribution of facilities in place for more than a year and activities that last less than a year illustrate some spatial and temporal characteristics of footprint. Eight definitions are suggested as practical for use in the Antarctic context for descriptive or quantitative purposes.
Introduction
The CEP has noted that we need to develop an agreed understanding of the terms "footprint" and "wilderness”. As a concept “footprint” is tangible and can be defined using objective methods, To reach a common understanding of it the concept needs to be refined. As a broad description it is the area of human presence (including facilities, activities, emissions, physical disturbance, loss of habitat, pollution and other local impact), rather than simply the impacts of local human activities on the Antarctic environment (e.g. Tin et al 2009). If necessary footprint can be measured using scientific methods. The data and information produced can be easily used for management. Developing a common understanding of footprint can assist us with understanding the concept of wilderness and how to protect Antarctica’s wilderness values as set out in the Protocol.  The footprint concept may also have several other applications relevant to the CEP’s work including being an indicator of human pressure, minimising environmental impacts, illuminating the concept of cumulative impacts including minimising spatial and temporal effects, and avoiding a proliferation of stations.

Developing definitions of human footprint in the Antarctic context will confirm we have common and practical understandings of what footprint is. This will help the CEP clarify what more, if anything, might more be done to manage our footprint. 
Scope of the paper  
This paper deliberately confines its scope to stay within the normal practice of the Antarctic Treaty System and the authorised operations of Parties to the Treaty. Its scope is primarily the spatial extent of the footprint of human activity in the Antarctic with a focus on human-made habitation and objects (such as scientific stations and scientific infrastructure), and activities (such as transport activity, corridors and landing sites). This scope is consistent with the earliest CEP papers on related topics at CEP I and II (Codling 1998 as UK 1998 IP 2, NZ 1999 IP 80 and Codling 2001). 

But the temporal extent of footprint also needs some consideration for two reasons. Human presence in a place may be for many years or for a season or less: the footprint of scientific activities and essential logistic operations undertaken at year round stations is different from than that of science and support activities or tourism and shipping which take place only in the summer operating season. Removing human objects no longer needed or restoring disturbed areas are management practices that promote environmental protection in the Antarctic and elsewhere, although some may leave chemical or biological traces that are not readily apparent. 

Influences from beyond the Antarctic, and other footprint concepts are outside the scope of this paper. Human influences from outside Antarctic including fallout of radioactive fallout from nuclear testing or lead or increased anthropogenic CO2 and the effect of ozone-depleting chemicals can not be considered. Such externally derived disturbances may be ubiquitous but they are beyond the control of National Antarctic Programmes or the Antarctic Treaty System.  Generally they are evident as background levels relative to local physical, chemical or biological disturbance in Antarctica. Similarly concepts including ecological, carbon or water footprints or National Footprint Accounts (or the definitions of these terms) may be relevant for some purposes but they are not useful in the current context of this item in CEP’s five year plan. 
Definitions of footprint and methods of quantifying and illustrating it
The definition of “footprint” is fundamental in determining its spatial extent using either a descriptive approach or quantitative scientific methods. In one of the most comprehensive spatial and temporal footprint studies in the Antarctic to date, GERG (2003) noted some of the multiple “footprints” that can be detected and quantified in different environments or habitats, including physical disturbance, chemical disturbance (e.g. Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons, trace metals), biological disturbance or contamination (e.g. changed populations of biota, enhanced E coli) and air quality. Tin et al (2009) summarised the wide variety of local impacts that humans have in the region. The range at which such disturbances can be detected may differ hugely, from several kilometres or more to being invisible and requiring chemical or biological assays. In addition sound and (to a less useful extent) smell are forms of disturbance that can be used to define human footprint in the typically quiet and non-odouriferous Antarctic environment. Measuring them is not as easy or robust as parameters which can be seen or measured directly from fixed objects or from samples.  
To clarify the different kinds of footprint it is necessary to classify them into different types (Table 1). Evidence of human activity that is easily observable or apparent (e.g. buildings, tracks or ship passages that can be seen, vehicles that can be heard) is the most easily understood. However other evidence of human activity is not apparent and may therefore be otherwise overlooked (e.g. hydrocarbon or trace metal concentrations in soil, radio-active isotopes used in scientific research, some biotic indicators, submerged or buried objects, borehole fluid). It is none-the-less real and measurable by scientific methods or technology. There is general agreement in the literature that the most important aspect of footprint involves long-lived (i.e. “permanent”) buildings or other evidence of present or past human presence such as roads linking buildings that are visible over a significant period. The classification adopted here is for buildings, infrastructure, equipment etc that are present year round and lasting for more than a year. In contrast activites such as short visits by scientists or tourists, and travel by air or ship generally have transient footprints. Between these two extremes are activites that do not operate year round, such as deployment of scientific apparatus, seasonal sea ice runways, over-snow travel, repetitive activities on some ice-free terrain and fishing, whose footprints are not transient but mostly last less than a year. This temporal scope is broader than some have used and less detailed than others but is consistent with the scope followed by NZ (1999), Summerson and Riddle (2000), Bastmeijer (2005) and Summerson and Tin (in press).

Table 1. A simple classification framework of human footprint 
Types and intensity of Footprint 
Visible or readily apparent
Not visible or apparent
Long lasting (i.e. “permanent,” in place longer than 1 year)
Main aspect of footprint 
Footprint may be significant although it can not be seen 
Short-lived (e.g. temporary or transient, in place less than 1 year) 
Footprint parameters may be obvious but only for a short time
Non-negligible footprint?
 
Indicators and illustrations of footprint that are simple to collect and portray may, in general, be most useful to the CEP. Many parameters and criteria have been discussed in regard to environmental monitoring or State of the Environment reporting by SCAR, CEP, COMNAP, CCAMLR and Parties have much more information on this (e.g. GERG 2003 [Table 4.1], AADC 2009). Some parameters such as air quality, melt water runoff or sound may only be useful for describing short-lived disturbance or appropriate in some locations only. Human population at sites or visitation rates may be easy to collect and useful in some situations but do not necessarily correlate well with footprint in all cases so may not be useful as direct measures of physical footprint. 
The overall footprint of operational Antarctic facilities and activities can be characterised by a “core” area of disturbance or activity and a surrounding “buffer” zone extending out to the distance at which the visually dominant core area or activity is no longer visible. The core area (e.g. of a station) consists of structures and zones of physical disturbance, with other disturbance occurring in patches. Between patches there may be no disturbance within the core area. This area lies within a describable perimeter encompassing normal operations (e.g. GERG 2003, AADC 2009). In the classification adopted here consistent with that used by AADC (2009) this includes aeronautical facilities, such as those on ice-free or permanent snow and ice involving ancillary buildings that are present year round. Air facilities on seasonal fast ice do not persist year round and so are not regarded here as being in the “core area”. Beyond the core area is a less rigidly definable “buffer”, comprising some less concentrated areas of chemical or biological contamination or discarded/unused material of human origin, and the sight and sound of the station and its core activities. Summerson and Riddle (2000) suggest that most noise (e.g. from diesel generators and helicopters) becomes inaudible by about 10 km. Beyond that some large facilities may be visible out to about 15 km in flat terrain or further from high vantage points. Most areas of chemical or biological contamination and debris fields will lie well within the range at which facilities and activities are visible (e.g. GERG 2003). The visible distance may be a suitable parameter for a simple conservative descriptor of the outer edge of footprint. 
Illustrating footprint and temporal change in footprint size
Some examples are useful to further explain or illustrate these concepts. At McMurdo where average summer populations have not changed much recently but winter populations have varied greatly, the spatial extent of buildings has generally increased in recent decades (see below) but the distribution of oil storage tanks and oil spills have been greatly reduced over the years while spatial measures of road extent, Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons and lead have either decreased or remained the same (GERG 2003). According to GERG (2003) McMurdo Station is at the low end of the intensity scale in relation to other human occupied sites world-wide, with a few exceptions such as Winter Quarters Bay (Lenihan 1992). The size of the core station on Hut Point Peninsula is a few square kilometres (GERG 2003), but the “total” core area of human disturbance in the area is larger when Scott Base, Williams Field and Pegasus air facilities and Black Island communication facilities are included. An irregular shaped buffer zone extends from the core as far out as at least 15 km in some directions. Of the three Australian stations Davis has the largest physical footprint (37709 m2 in 2001) while Mawson Station is generally more compact being constrained by the amount of ice-free terrain available to be built on (26750 m2, AADC 2009).  Casey is quite spread out (31037 m2) excluding any year-round facilities associated with Wilkins air strip. Individual scientific apparatus may be as small as a miniature data logger and out of sight.
Mapping is a useful way of representing data and information, with simple descriptive maps and data points having advantages for illustrating general patterns. For example a station map (Figure 1) is a basic tool for showing the layout and functions of facilities. GIS methods are a powerful tool and useful for individual station management, but it is not a trivial task to produce accurate maps based on data compiled from multiple international sources (e.g. Summerson and Tin in press and see AADC 2009). National Antarctic Programmes and IAATO have most of such data, and COMNAP and IAATO have proved valuable sources for many of these datasets. Maps of the distribution of facilities in place for more than a year (Figure 2) and activities that last less than a year (Figures 3-5) illustrate some spatial characteristics of footprint (See Appendix 1 for data sources and methods for compiling Figures 2 and 3).   

Time series of specific physical parameters may be directly useful for assessing the temporal change in footprint (e.g. Figure 6). Spatial depictions at different times can be very useful (e.g. Figure 7). While the total area of physical or visual footprints of stations and other facilities depicted in Figure 2 is undoubtedly still a very small percentage of the area of the Antarctic continent, the largest circular area with no such footprint may now have shrunk to only about 1000 km in diameter. Before IGY it was the width of the Antarctic. Similarly there are now many areas with intracontinental flight paths or over-snow routes less than 500 km apart (Figure 3).   
Conclusions about concepts of footprint for use in the Antarctic Treaty System
Based on the above, the following concepts and definitions may be most understandable and immediately practical for use in the Antarctic context for descriptive or quantitative purposes:

A. Easily Observable (Visible) footprints that have a lifetime longer than one year
    1. The physical footprint of a structure. The surface space occupied by a structure built by humans such as a building, drilling camp or scientific installation (e.g. an Automatic Weather Station). [Described as a point or map reference, or measured by physical dimensions as on a plan.] 
    2. The physical footprint of a permanent station. The area of land occupied by buildings and installations directly associated with an active or disused station or refuge, including tanks, staging areas, antenna, wind generators, scientific apparatus, equipment housings and aeronautical facilities within their general perimeter and roads or tracks connecting them which have a visible lifetime of at least one year. [Described as a point or map reference, or delineated by a perimeter or start-finish lines on a map, or a GIS polygon (e.g. AADC 2009 and Figure 1).] 
    3. The visual footprint of a building, station or other human object. Area from which a human structure or collection of structures can be seen. A footprint of visual dominance where such structure(s) may dominate the view (e.g. Summerson and Riddle 2000) may be a useful definition if further quantification is needed. [Described as a fuzzy area or buffer zone around a point or map reference depending on topography, or delineated by a perimeter or start-finish lines on a map or a GIS polygon or using a digital model of topography in suitable GIS tools with structure location and height data and size-distance rules or fuzzy set theory if necessary.]
B. Measurable But Not Normally Visible footprints that have a lifetime longer than one year. These types of footprint are likely to be inside or mostly inside the area of visual footprint and therefore may not need to be elaborated.   
    4. the chemical footprint of an individual structure or permanent station. The surface terrestrial space with chemical residues (e.g. as mapped by soil analyses), in and around structures built by humans such as a building, drilling camp or scientific installation. [Can be described as a point or GIS reference, or an extent measured by mapped contours of specific concentrations, although more complex descriptors such as statistical probability measures can be used.]
    5. the biological footprint of an individual structure or permanent station. The area with anthropogenic biota or biota disturbed by humans (e.g. sampled and mapped by analyses) in and around structures built by humans such as a building, drilling camp or scientific installation. [Can be described as a point or GIS reference, or an extent measured by disturbance parameters or contours of concentrations, although more complex descriptors such as statistical probability measures can be used.]
    6. the footprint represented by a debris field or abandoned equipment around an individual structure or permanent station which may itself be abandoned. The area with anthropogenic debris or abandoned equipment in and around structures built by humans (i.e. around a building, base, drilling camp or scientific installation. [Can be described as a point or GIS reference, but more normally as a debris field whose extent is measured by contours of concentration or minimum size of a piece of debris, although more complex descriptors such as statistical probability measures can be used.] 

C. Observable (Visible) or Audible footprints that have a lifetime typically less than one year 
    7. surface tracking or other non-transient marks lasting up to a year outside permanent stations. These are the physically discernable footprints of individual activities which leave a trace of their passing (e.g. tracked vehicle marks) and the visible non transient track or other marks left by human visitation such as landings via helicopter or boats. If repeated often enough in soft ice-free areas they may develop into marks such as tracks lasting more than one year with cumulative impact on soils and soil ecosystems (Ayres et al 2008 as US IP 15 CEP XII). Some tracks in snow or flagged routes may last for longer than a year. [Can be described as narrow lines on a map, points or GIS references.]
    8. transient footprints. The visible and invisible transient traces such as sound, contrails or exhaust along a flight path, supply route, vessel passage, or human visitation such as landings via helicopter or boats. Some anthropogenic emissions contribute to detectable levels of atmospheric pollution near the surface (Graf et al 2010). [Can be described as lines or zones on a map, points or GIS references.]
Acknowledgements
Several colleagues gave early guidance on the scope of this work. Tina Tin and others from ASOC and Rupert Summerson (University of Melbourne) gave substantial assistance on its direction.  COMNAP, IAATO, SCAR and others provided data which Rupert used to prepare draft Figures 2 and 3.
Literature cited 
Ayres, E, JN Nkem, DH Wall, BJ Adams, JE Barrett, EJ Broos, AN Parsons, LE Powers, BL Simmons and RA Virginia 2008 (US IP 15 CEP XII). Effects of Human Trampling on Populations of Soil Fauna in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica. Conservation Biology, 22: 1544–1551
AADC 2009. Australian Antarctic Data Centre http://data.aad.gov.au/aadc.soe
Bastmeijer CJ 2005. Managing human activities in Antarctica: should wilderness protection count? New Zealand Yearbook of International Law (second edition): 335-353.
Codling R 1998. Wilderness and Aesthetic Values in the Antarctic. (UK IP 2 CEP I). Also as R Codling 1998 Concepts of wilderness in the Antarctic. In: P Dingwall (Editor), Antarctica in the environmental era, Department of Conservation, Wellington, New Zealand, pp 31-37.
Codling, R 2001. Wilderness and aesthetic values in the Antarctic. Polar Record, 37: 337-352.
GERG 2003. Spatial and temporal scales of human disturbance – McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Geochemical and Environmental Research Group and Department of Geography, Texas A&M University, USA. 184 pages.
Graf, HF, SV Shirsat, C Oppenheimer, MJ Jarvis, R Podzun and D Jacob 2010. Continental scale Antarctic deposition of sulphur and black carbon from anthropogenic and volcanic sources. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 10; 2457–2465.
Lenihan HS 1992. Benthic Marine Pollution Around McMurdo Station, Antarctica: A Summary of Findings. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 25: 318-323
Lynch HJ, K Crosbie, WF Fagan and R Naveen 2010. Spatial patterns of tour ship traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science 22: 123-130
NZ 1999. Towards the designation of Antarctic wilderness areas. IP 80 CEP II.
Summerson R and M Riddle 2000. Assessing wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica. In: W Davidson, C Howard-Williams and P Broady (Eds), Antarctic ecosystems: models for wider ecological understanding, Canterbury University, New Zealand, pp.303-307.
Summerson R and T Tin (in press). Protection of the wilderness and aesthetic values of Antarctica: Geographical Information Systems as a tool. In: A Watson and J Murrieta-Saldiva (compilers) Ninth World Wilderness Congress Symposium, November 2009, Merida, Mexico.
Tin, T, ZL Fleming, KA Hughes, DG Ainley, P Convey, CA Moreno, S Pfeiffer, J Scott and I Snape 2009. Impacts of local human activities on the Antarctic environment. Antarctic Science 21: 3-33.

Appendix 1. Data sources and methods used to compile Figures 2 and 3 (R Summerson, University of Melbourne)

Continent and coastline: SCAR Antarctic Digital Database
Stations and facilities (active): COMNAP
Refuges, field huts: Antarctic Treaty Exchange Information (Permanent) (www.ats.aq)
Scientific apparatus: Antarctic Treaty Exchange Information (Permanent) (www.ats.aq)
Antarctic historic sites and monuments: Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website (www.ats.aq)
Automatic weather stations (AWS): University of Wisconsin (amrc.ssec.wisc.edu)
Land-based tourism facilities: various websites

Air routes
COMNAP Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)
Antarctic Treaty Exchange Information and links from there to National Antarctic Program websites (e.g. USAP, RAE, Australian Antarctic Division)

Over-snow semi-permanent routes
McMurdo – South Pole: digitised from NSF map (http://www.usap.gov/USAPgov/sciencesupport/GIS/documents/USAP_grundberg_fixedwing_v7.pdf)
Mirny – Vostok: (digitised from map on RAE website)
Cap Prud’Homme – Concordia: inferred
Zhong Shan - Kunlun: inferred
Syowa - Dome Fuji: inferred

Tourist landing sites: IAATO website (www.iaato.org)

Methods

The SCAR Antarctic Digital Database (ADD) coastline and continent GIS datasets were used as the base datasets on which all other sites were overlain. Point data sources, such as stations, huts, AWS and tourist landing sites can be entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and then imported into ESRI ArcGIS for mapping. The latitude and longitude coordinates are often in inconsistent formats, however, and need to be converted into a consistent format before importing into ArcGIS. IAATO publishes its lists of landing sites as Excel spreadsheets; the list of COMNAP sites can be copied and pasted into Excel, as can the list of historic sites and monuments. This is the preferred way to import locational data as it minimises errors. Where data is not published in lists, it needs to be extracted and compiled in an Excel spreadsheet with great care taken to avoid typographic errors. 

Lines are created in one of two ways. Where the coordinates that define the route are published, such as the flight routes in AFIM, these are compiled into a GENERATE file, which is a special formatted text file for loading data into ArcGIS from which lines are created. Where routes are only published on maps, digital image versions (e.g. jpg or pdf) of the maps are imported into ArcGIS, georeferenced and rectified and the route digitised on the screen. This is a standard procedure and can achieve accuracies of +/- 1 km of the original map.

Error checking

Where coordinate data has been entered manually, this has to be double-checked. A mistake in longitude coordinates, such as by placing it in the wrong hemisphere, for example by omitting the minus sign in western hemisphere coordinates, can place a site in a believable location in the eastern hemisphere. The most effective form of data checking, though, is a visual one; if a station or facility is not on land, for example, it is wrong. Errors in the source data do occur, however, for example Site 65 in the list of historic sites and monuments, where the published longitude is in the western hemisphere, which is incorrect. A more pervasive form of error is where the site doesn’t quite fit the ADD coastline. There are several possible reasons for this but the most likely is where the coordinates have been taken from a map which is either inaccurate or where the changes in datum and reference spheroid have not been correctly applied. It is also not inconceivable that the ADD is itself inaccurate at large scale in places, as it was digitised from medium scale source material (SCAR 2010) and generalisation may have resulted in small shifts in the coastline. As far as possible these errors have been corrected but some may remain. Ultimately, we are dependent on the source data being accurate.

Reference
SCAR. 2010. Antarctic Digital Database documentation. http://www.add.scar.org/addmanual/add3ch5.pdf. Accessed 5 March 2010.


Figures
Figure 1. Scott Base station map showing footprint of core area of facilities and roads (Gateway Antarctica). This excludes the wind generators (out of view on left) constructed during 2009/2010 within a larger area of existing human footprint on the southwest end of Hut Point Peninsula. 


Figure 2. Location of infrastructure with footprint that lasts longer than 1 year.Draft map for indicative purposes compiled using available data from COMNAP, Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange and Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments (se Appendix 1) but is not complete (R Summerson).

 

Figure 3 Location of activities with footprint that lasts less than 1 year. Some evidence of over-snow activities or repetitive visits may last longer than one year. Draft map for indicative purposes compiled using available data from the Antarctic Flight Information Manual, IAATO, Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange, USAP Grundberg and SCAR (see Appendix 1) but is not complete (R Summerson).



Figure 4. Landing sites planned to be used by helicopters operated by the US and NZ Antarctic programmes out of McMurdo Station and Scott Base in 2005/2006. A small proportion of these sites are associated with small research facilities or radio repeaters etc that are in place for more than a year. (Acknowledgement to the US Antarctic Program). 



Figure 5. Monthly mean December 2004 mixing ratio in ppbv of black carbon from ships (Graf et al 2010).


Figure 6. Graph illustrating an increase in the number and area of buildings after the establishment of McMurdo Station followed by a stabilisation in these parameters of footprint (GERG 2003).


Figure 7. Spatial depiction of passages of tourist vessels showing the total area covered by their transient footprints over successive seasons (Lynch et al. 2009). The increase in cumulative transient footprint can be seen.




