





Management implications of climate change in the Antarctic region – an initial Australian assessment





Management implications of climate change in the Antarctic region – an initial Australian assessment
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
In preparation for Australia’s participation in the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance, the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) held a workshop to undertake a preliminary Antarctic climate risk assessment. The workshop followed a standard risk assessment process and highlighted a range of implications for existing and future infrastructure, logistics and environmental values. The ATME welcomed Australia’s approach and recommended that Parties be encouraged to undertake and report on appropriate risk assessments. This paper presents the key findings of the workshop and the risk evaluation framework used by the AAD.
    1. Introduction
This paper is a modified version of a Working Paper with the same title submitted by Australia to the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance.
In its paper to the ATME, Australia noted that the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) had held a workshop to undertake a preliminary qualitative Antarctic climate risk assessment. Australia further noted that the workshop highlighted a range of aspects which Australia considers are likely to be of relevance to other Antarctic Treaty Parties and other national Antarctic programs. The key points include that: there is a high risk of substantial ecosystem-scale changes in both the terrestrial and marine domains, and coordination by Parties would be required to develop and apply some of the necessary risk treatments; significant risks to infrastructure and access/transport are predicted and responses will likely require considerable resources and long lead times; more accurate predictions of key parameters, rates and timing of changes, and regional variability would assist in reducing uncertainty and identifying and mitigating risks; and working together with other Parties to develop common approaches to common challenges would be highly valuable. In Australia’s view, the workshop findings demonstrate the value of bringing together people with appropriate expertise to consider the management implications of climate change.
In its paper to the ATME, Australia recommended: that the ATME draws on the key findings of the preliminary climate risk assessment conducted by the AAD; that other Parties undertake and report on similar risk assessments to assist collective thinking on the implications of climate change for Antarctic management; and that the Parties consider developing a system-wide risk assessment process involving all relevant organisations. As outlined in the Co-Chairs’ report, the ATME welcomed the risk assessment approach taken by Australia to identify potential climate change implications for current and future Antarctic infrastructure, logistics and environmental values, and recommended that Parties be encouraged to undertake and report on appropriate risk assessment processes.
ATME participants suggested that Australia submit a paper to the ATCM / CEP outlining its risk assessment approach. This paper presents the key findings of the workshop and the risk evaluation framework.
    2. Workshop background
The Australian Government has published Climate Change Impacts and Risk Management: A Guide for Business and Government (the Guide)1, to assist Australian businesses and government agencies to integrate climate change impacts into risk management and other strategic planning activities, and adapt to climate change. The Guide follows a standard risk management approach, consistent with the Australian and New Zealand Standard for Risk Management AS/NZS 4360:2004. 
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) is the government agency with lead responsibility for Australia’s Antarctic science, environmental protection and operational interests. The AAD adopted the approach outlined in the Guide to hold a workshop to discuss the implications of climate change for these interests. The following sections report on the process followed and the main outcomes. The quotations in italics in the following Context section are drawn from the Guide.
    3. Context
‘The context for risk management sets up a framework for identifying and analysing risks. It places the assessment on a clear foundation so that everyone works from a common understanding of the scope of the exercise, how risks are to be rated and how the analysis is to be approached.’
3.1 Climate change scenarios
‘To manage the risks of climate change it is necessary to define how climate is projected (or assumed) to change in the future. This is achieved by using climate change scenarios.’
The workshop focussed on the observed and expected changes in Antarctic climate variables outlined in the 2009 SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) report (e.g. air temperature, ocean temperature, snowfall, sea ice extent and duration, sea level, ice shelf status, ozone hole, permafrost, frequency and intensity of storm events, surface winds and ocean chemistry). As indicated in ATME Working Paper 1 Implications of Climate Change for Management and Governance of the Antarctic Region – An Overview (Norway, United Kingdom), the ACCE report provides a comprehensive review of current scientific understanding of how the Antarctic climate is changing, and how it is likely to change in the future, and serves as a useful starting point for considering future implications for management of the Antarctic region.
The ACCE report identifies limitations in understanding of regional variability, timing (including potentially non-linear rates of change), the way that changes to different parameters may interact with each other, and the relative uncertainty of predictions for some parameters. The risk management approach outlined in the Guide acknowledges that uncertainties are almost unavoidable, and the process is intended to identify where such uncertainties are a significant source of risk.
To simplify the workshop discussions, and acknowledging that the process comprised a qualitative assessment of climate change risks, the following assumptions were made:
    • changes observed in climate variables over the past 30-50 years will continue in a similar fashion;
    • the changes in climate variables predicted over the next 100 years will occur in a linear fashion; and
    • predicted changes to different climate variables will occur in parallel.
3.2. Scope
‘It is important to be clear what the assessment is to encompass and what it is to exclude.’
The AAD considered management issues arising from Australia’s status as a party to the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol, as well as considerations relevant to the management of the Australian Antarctic program. Discussions naturally focussed on Australia’s primary areas of operation in East Antarctica, but considered whole-of-continent and other regional data and implications as appropriate. Implications for Southern Ocean fisheries and marine conservation matters primarily addressed under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) were excluded.
3.3 Stakeholders
‘Stakeholders are any individuals, groups or organisations whom it is useful to take into account to achieve a successful outcome for your organisation.’
The assessment drew on the expertise of AAD personnel, including staff with responsibility for, and experience in, a wide range of Antarctic science disciplines, environmental management and station, field, ship and air operations. Participants also sought to contribute input representative of external stakeholders (e.g. the broader Antarctic science community, external contractors, Australian tourist operators and other government departments).
3.4 Evaluation framework
‘It is necessary to define how risks will be evaluated by clarifying the objectives and success criteria for the organisation and establishing scales for measuring consequences, likelihoods and risk priorities. An organisation’s objectives are linked into the risk management process via criteria for measuring success.’
The workshop considered climate change implications within the context of the over-arching objectives for the Australian Antarctic program. Like other Parties and national Antarctic programs, these include:
    • ensuring the safety of national program personnel and Australians in Antarctica;
    • protecting the Antarctic environment;
    • taking advantage of the special opportunities Antarctica offers for scientific research; and
    • complying with relevant national and international laws.
The AAD utilised its own risk management guidelines, which are consistent with standard risk management frameworks, to determine risk scales and ratings (see extract at Attachment A).
3.5 Key Elements
‘To ensure that the process of risk identification is systematic and efficient, break the issues facing your organisation into discrete elements or areas. Key elements are a set of topics that can be considered one by one during the risk identification step of the process.’
The following key elements were identified:
    • environmental values (terrestrial and marine, including scientific values and heritage values); 
    • access / transport; and
    • infrastructure.
    4. Key findings
A completed version of the climate change risk assessment template utilised at the workshop is provided at Attachment B. The following is a summary of the key points raised, structured in accordance with the ATME Terms of Reference:
4.1 Implications for environmental management
    1) Climate change impacts on Antarctic environmental values are likely to be complex, and may compound or counteract each other. For example, sea level rise and increased snow fall might reduce the total area of coastal ice-free habitat for Adélie penguins, but snow/ice melt may result in an increase in such habitat. The lack of clarity about whether predicted changes in climate variables will occur simultaneously, or will be staggered or synergistic, significantly complicates consideration of effects on environmental values. Nevertheless, the workshop identified a high risk of substantial ecosystem-scale changes in both the terrestrial and marine domains.
    2) The workshop agreed that the inherent uncertainty should not be a reason to delay action, but rather to take steps on the basis of the best available information to employ protection and management measures that will minimise the anticipated effects of climate change, while also gathering further information to resolve or reduce uncertainty.
    3) To help prioritise responses, it will be important to better identify key regions, habitats, species, heritage values and scientific values most vulnerable to climate change (e.g. low-lying coastal habitat that may be lost with sea level rise). Some sites or values may be robust to the effects of climate change, and may warrant protection as refuges (e.g. emperor penguin colonies located on land rather than sea ice). The environmental values protected within existing protected and managed areas may also be significantly affected by climate change. Such effects may need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis, and as part of the periodic review of area management plans.
    4) The likely impacts of climate change provide greater impetus for a broader systematic approach to spatial management. For example, identifying vulnerable environmental features, and developing a more comprehensive, adequate and representative system of Antarctic protected areas. 
    5) Temporal aspects of environmental management will also require consideration, because many operational procedures and guidelines provide for activities to be undertaken only outside specific periods of high environmental sensitivity (e.g. to avoid wildlife breeding periods and other sensitive stages in life cycles) and the duration and timing of these sensitive periods may change. 
    6) Climate change exacerbates the high risk to Antarctic biodiversity associated with the establishment of non-native species. High priority should continue to be afforded to work already underway to develop and implement quarantine measures and to better understand risks.
    7) Responses to risks to infrastructure (e.g. replacement of affected buildings) may place additional pressure on plant and animal habitat, compounding the adverse effects of other climate changes. With such uncertainties, and in any event, it seems most appropriate to manage human activities in a way that minimises competition for plant or animal habitat.
    8) Some sources of important or unique scientific information may also be affected as the environment is modified by a changing climate (e.g. loss of habitats, species or ecosystems in lake, desert, or low lying areas, disturbance of lacustrine sediment records in anoxic basins through hydrological changes, modifications to intertidal communities). It may be necessary to ‘fast track’ scientific research reliant upon such locations and features before the influence of external pressures diminishes scientific values. This may also have implications for the environmental management of research and support activities.
    9) As well as considering trends in climate change variables, the workshop noted high risks for environmental values arising from extreme climate events such as unusually high temperatures, high snow accumulation, drought or high melt. It may be helpful to establish mechanisms to identify and monitor such events, inform other stakeholders, and quickly employ environmental management measures, perhaps on a short-term, interim or as-needed basis. 
4.2 Implications for management of human activities
4.2.1. Infrastructure
    10) Changes in climate variables such as snowfall, melt, sea level rise and freeze/thaw are likely to have considerable implications for the maintenance and operation of existing infrastructure.
    11) Overall, the workshop considered that climate change implications for infrastructure could be managed, but probably with considerable effort and lead times, and at higher cost.
    12) Civil surveys of existing infrastructure are likely to be required to assess climate change risks to infrastructure, and these would greatly benefit from improved, regionally relevant observations and predictions of climate change. The workshop identified high risks associated with key infrastructure (e.g. station buildings, fuel farms) located on permafrost, or that which would be subject to inundation from sea level rise or melt water flooding, or physical isolation due to snow/ice melt.
    13) Both positive and negative implications for renewable energy generation and water supply are possible. For example greater opportunities for wind power generation arising from increasing winds may be offset by the need to strengthen equipment to cope with stronger extreme wind events. Less energy may be required for heating if temperatures increase, but more energy may be required to keep food and scientific samples frozen. Snow accumulation and increased melt may improve water supply, but water storage infrastructure (e.g. tanks, dams) may also be impacted by increased melt.
    14) Some risks to infrastructure will also have environmental implications, such as climate change affects on the integrity of fuel tanks and related infrastructure, or the release of contaminants from thawing of past waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites. Similarly, risks to human safety will need to be considered in future approaches to infrastructure.
    15) Consideration should be given to identifying practical guidelines for establishing and maintaining Antarctic facilities and infrastructure that take predicted climate changes into account. Such guidelines could also seek to ensure that responses to climate change risks to infrastructure do not result in increased environmental impacts (e.g. preferably avoiding areas that represent likely future habitat for Antarctic wildlife affected by climate change).
4.2.2 Access and transport
    16) The workshop identified both risks and opportunities arising from climate change, but considered that the risks are likely to outweigh the opportunities. Climate change implications for access and transport can likely be managed, but probably with considerable effort and lead times, and at higher cost.
    17) The effects of climate change on all components of the current logistical support network (water / air / surface transport) are likely to require changes in the mix of logistic support (e.g. more helicopter or boating operations to support sites that are currently accessible by land or sea ice), with implications for providing the necessary associated infrastructure.
    18) There is high risk that changes in snow accumulation and melt patterns will have implications for the use maintenance of ice and snow surfaces for inter- and intra-continental fixed-wing air transport.
    19) Decreasing sea ice may improve ship access to coastal locations and reduce costs associated with ice-breaking. This may be countered by the increased prevalence of icebergs which may in themselves, or by affecting local sea ice concentrations, hinder access to shipping routes and anchorages. Expected regional variations in sea ice are not clear and it would be useful to determine if some areas may experience more difficult sea ice conditions, including in parts of East Antarctica.
    20) Surface transport, station resupply and field access relies heavily on snow and ice surfaces (including sea ice) and there is a high risk that increased snow accumulation, surface melt, increased crevassing and decreased sea ice extent and duration will adversely affect such activities.
4.3 Need for monitoring, scenario planning and risk assessment
4.3.1 Monitoring
    21) A better basic understanding of Antarctic biodiversity and ecosystem function would assist with thoroughly assessing the environmental effects of climate change, including at the regional and local levels.
    22) Objective-driven and focussed monitoring of climate-related changes to key elements of the Antarctic environment would be useful, particularly where the results of such activities can assist to distinguish between influences of climate and local human activities. Such monitoring programs would likely require the establishment of references areas in which the possibly confounding influences of local human activities are minimised. The value of monitoring activities established for other purposes in assessing climate changes should also be considered, as should the likely impact of climate change on the value of existing monitoring programs.
    23) As well as targeted ‘scientific’ climate change research and monitoring, there may be considerable value in collecting and assessing operational monitoring information. For example, long-term records of dates when sea ice is no longer safe for over-ice travel or too thick for vessel access, or when a snow runway is operable. Exchanging such information between national programs would be useful.
    24) Information on climate changes will be of greatest benefit if supported by a sound data management framework and if standards to gather, store and access data are agreed.
4.3.2 Scenario planning
    25) Much business planning uses a 10-25 year horizon (including because of the operating life of major assets). It would be very valuable to be able to identify reasonable climate change scenarios for that time horizon, by refining the SCAR ACCE 100 year estimates.
    26) Information about the relative timing of expected climate changes would be useful, as would information about the rate an linearity (or otherwise) of change over time (e.g. will increase in ice free area from melt be offset by decrease from sea level rise?)
4.3.3 Risk assessment
    27) This paper reports on the AAD’s initial consideration of climate change implications. The AAD plans to give more detailed consideration to the key issues identified in this first step. Nevertheless, undertaking an initial assessment has been a start to considering climate change risks and what response measures might be necessary. 
    28) The workshop recognised the value of engaging with other Parties and operators to develop common approaches to common challenges, and agreed that it would be useful to test and further develop these ideas with experts from other Parties. In particular, there would be value in drawing on the experiences of nations operating in areas subject to early effects of climate change (i.e. the Antarctic Peninsula region, and possibly also the Arctic).  
    29) In AAD’s experience there was considerable value in involving people with a broad range of responsibilities and experience of Antarctic science, operations and environmental management. At the broader scale, it is likely that discussions would benefit from engaging all relevant Antarctic Treaty system bodies (e.g. ATCM/CEP, SCAR, COMNAP and CCAMLR).

