





Southern giant petrel monitoring in ASPA 167, Hawker Island, using automated cameras




Southern giant petrel monitoring in ASPA 167, Hawker Island, using automated cameras
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Consistent with Resolution 5 (2009) Protection of the Southern Giant Petrel, Australia is trialling the use of three digital automated cameras to monitor the breeding colony of southern giant petrels in Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 167, Hawker Island.  The cameras, previously used successfully to monitor Adélie penguins in Antarctica, have been mounted on tripods at locations at the edge of the colony and programmed to take a series of photographs of the nest sites each day for about six months. The cameras were set up in the austral spring of 2009, before the birds arrived, and the images will be downloaded in April or May 2010 after the birds have left.  In addition to reducing disturbance during the critical breeding period, it is expected that the cameras will provide a cost-effective way of obtaining accurate and consistent data to help determine breeding chronology and population levels and trends. 
Background
At Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XXXII, Parties adopted Resolution 5 (2009) Protection of the Southern Giant Petrel, which recommended that Parties:
    1) encourage regular population counts of southern giant petrels at Antarctic breeding locations using the standardised methodology prepared by the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP);
    2) encourage the submission of southern giant petrel population data to ACAP;
    3) review the adequacy of site-specific measures, such as management plans or Site Guidelines, with a view to appropriately managing access and human disturbance to southern giant petrel breeding sites and as required develop and implement further measures; and
    4) monitor progress on the above actions and the conservation status of the southern giant petrel at a future meeting.
There are three known breeding colonies of southern giant petrels in Australia's area of Antarctic operations. All colonies are relatively small, ranging in size from a few dozen to a few hundred birds, and all are located within ASPAs, some of which are logistically difficult to access. Since the earliest visits in the 1950s, when the focus was to band chicks to determine their distribution once fledged, numerous efforts have been made to record the numbers of breeding pairs, eggs and chicks. The value of the data collected has been limited by inconsistencies within and between sites, including in the survey methods used and the timing of counts; the latter being heavily influenced by logistical constraints.  Historically, most counts were recorded in paper notebooks, which offer limited ability to re-examine data to check accuracy or extract new information.  The potential for surveys and other human activity at breeding sites to disturb birds, including to cause some to abandon their nests, is also widely recognised.
In an effort to minimise or solve these problems, Australia – through the Australian Antarctic Division – is trialling the use of digital automated cameras to monitor the breeding colony of southern giant petrels in ASPA 167, Hawker Island. Because the colony is small, it is expected that three cameras will be able to observe the entire colony. Each camera is mounted on a tripod, secured to a mat approximately 1.2 m2 and weighted with rocks, and has its own power supply.  It is also hoped that, with only minimal maintenance, the cameras and associated equipment will have a field life of about five years, long enough to make a significant contribution to the data needed to define breeding chronology and establish a population trend.  
If the current trial on Hawker Island is successful, the intention is to progressively establish cameras at other breeding colonies, including in ASPA 102, Rookery Islands.  Further information can be obtained from the project's chief investigator, Mr Ian Hay (Ian.Hay@aad.gov.au).
