





Conservation and Management of Mawson’s Huts, Cape Denison, King George V Land, ASPA 162, ASMA 4 and HSM 77





Conservation and Management of Mawson’s Huts, Cape Denison, King George V Land, ASPA 162, ASMA 4 and HSM 77
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
This paper provides a summary of recent work to conserve and document the Mawson’s Huts historic site at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, King George V Land. A major conservation works program has largely secured the structural integrity of the main hut, allowing the focus of attention to shift to the mapping, conservation and cataloguing of artefacts. Considerable effort has been put into developing educational materials, and a range of information about the site is publicly available on websites managed by the Australian Antarctic Division and Mawson’s Huts Foundation.
Background
The Mawson’s Huts historic site at Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, King George V Land comprises the remains of the main base of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) of 1911 to 1914. The AAE was the only Heroic Era expedition organised, manned and supported by Australians. The historical significance of the site has been recognised through its designation as:
    • Historic Site and Monument No. 77; 
    • Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 162; and
    • Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 4.
The Australian Government works in partnership with the Mawson’s Huts Foundation, which was established in 1997 as a self-funded charitable institution to ensure the preservation of Mawson’s Huts. The Australian Government has provided grants totalling $2.41 million to the Foundation to fund conservation works on the huts, under the supervision of the Australian Antarctic Division. To date nine conservation expeditions have been undertaken by the Australian Antarctic Division and the Mawson’s Huts Foundation. The Australian Government is grateful to the French Antarctic program for its support in deploying and retrieving conservation teams.
Conservation
A major works program was carried out in 2006/07 to preserve the structural integrity of the main hut. During that season the failing roof over the hut’s living section was completely encapsulated, with new Baltic pine cladding fixed over the original timber. The cladding was applied in such a way that it can be removed in the future to allow access to the original roofing timbers. The work has all but stopped the ingress of snow and ice, allowing the conservation program to move on to the next phase which includes excavating ice from within the huts, further documenting the huts, and mapping, conserving, and cataloguing artefacts. The Australian Antarctic Division has established an Antarctic Heritage Register database that includes data on Cape Denison artefacts.
During 2007/08 work commenced to construct a laboratory adjacent to Sorensen Hut, to support the ongoing conservation and preservation of artefacts. Sorensen Hut was also expanded to provide improved accommodation facilities for future expeditions. A computer visualization and photography program of the huts was initiated, involving three-dimensional (3D) digital recording of parts of the interior of the main hut, and external panoramic visuals.
During the 2009/10 season activities included the ongoing maintenance of the main hut, continuation of a materials conservation program, and completion of the extension of the works at Sorensen Hut. The computer visualization and photography program continued and included stereoscopic aerial photography of Cape Denison and the huts, high definition video, full dome stereoscopic time-lapse visualisation, and experimental Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) scan of the Transit Hut. Ground penetrating radar was successfully trialled and used to determine structure of the ice on the floor and map artefacts in the ice of the hut. A search using ground-penetrating radar was also undertaken to locate the remains of the first aircraft used in Antarctica. Some fragments of the aircraft were located at the shore of nearby Boat Harbour. Monitoring of the internal conditions in the Main Hut (temperature, humidity and vibration) also continued. A ten-year dataset now exists of the internal conditions of the Main Hut.
A further two expeditions are currently being planned for 2010/11 and 2011/12. 
Visitation
Some 40 ships/yachts and approximately 2400 tourists have visited Cape Denison in the period 2001 to 2010, making it one of the most visited sites on the East Antarctic coastline. In accordance with the management plan for ASPA 162, access to the Main Hut is limited to three visitors plus a guide at any one time. Australia is giving consideration to developing Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for the area.
Further information
Home of the Blizzard website: http://www.mawsonshuts.aq/ 
Mawson’s Huts Foundation: http://www.mawsons-huts.org.au/ 
Antarctic Heritage Register database: http://data.aad.gov.au/aadc/artefacts/ 





Figure 1. Mawson's Huts 2008 showing overcladding of the Main Hut (rear).
Figure 2. Overcladding of the Main Hut. December 2006.


Figure 3. Conservationist documenting ice removal from a bunk in the Main Hut. December 2009.
Figure 4. View of south east interior of the Main Hut, Frank Hurley’s darkroom to the left, bunks to the right. December 2009.


