





Blood Falls, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land: an initiative towards proposal of a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area





Blood Falls, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land: an initiative towards proposal of a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area
1. Introduction
Blood Falls (77° 43' 19.7"S, 162° 16' 17.3"E) is a saline, iron-rich discharge of subglacial1 origin at the snout of the Taylor Glacier in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica (Figure 1). The feature consists of a surface component of ice and brine, which forms a red-orange liquid at the snout of the Taylor Glacier (Figures 2 and 3), and a subglacial brine reservoir, estimated to be located between 1 and 6 km up-glacier from the terminus (Map 1). 

Figure 1.Taylor Glacier, Blood Falls, and Lake Bonney (Photo: C. Harris, 11 Dec 2009).

Figure 2.Primary outlet of Blood Falls discharge at Taylor Glacier terminus (Photo: C. Harris, 10 Dec 2009).
The Blood Falls discharge and brine reservoir have been identified to possess values that may merit special protection as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA). Blood Falls is located within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, which provides management guidance for activities in the region, although Blood Falls may merit additional protection on the grounds of its unique biochemical and physical configuration, its ancient origin, and high scientific value. The site has received significant scientific and media attention in recent years. A draft Management Plan for a Blood Falls ASPA is currently under development, in close collaboration with the scientific community.
2. Reasons for designation
The special values that have thus far been identified at Blood Falls are as follows:
    • The physical configuration of Blood Falls is thought to be unique. The highly saline, iron-rich discharge at the glacier snout is fed by a subglacial reservoir of ancient marine brine, which is thought to have become enclosed approximately 3 to 5 My B.P. (Mikucki et al. 2004; Keys 1979).  
    • The Blood Falls discharge contains a unique microbial community, apparently of marine origin. The bacteria may be capable of metabolising iron and sulphur compounds, allowing them to survive in the subglacial environment for millions of years (Mikuki et al. 2009). On account of its high iron and salt content, the Blood Falls ecosystem provides a potential analogue for exobiological studies associated with ice features on Mars.
    • The Blood Falls subglacial reservoir is comparatively accessible for study and the episodic discharge events provide a unique opportunity to sample the properties of the subglacial reservoir and its ecosystem without direct contact.
    • Blood Falls discharges into Lake Bonney, Taylor Valley, exerting considerable influence over the lake geochemistry and microbiology (Lyons et al. 2005; Mikucki et al. 2004).
    • The behavior of the Taylor Glacier is unique among the Dry Valley glaciers, as the subglacial reservoir supplying Blood Falls may lubricate the glacier base.
    • The Area possesses outstanding aesthetic values and significant educational value, as the site has been the subject of a range of articles in the media in recent years.
3. Boundary options
The Blood Falls subglacial reservoir is believed to be located close to the Taylor Glacier terminus, and discharges primarily from a single outlet at the Taylor Glacier terminus (Map 1 and Figure 2). Boundary options for a protected area need to consider protection of both the subglacial environment and the main area of surface discharge at Blood Falls, and potentially surface catchments that may be hydrologically connected. 

Figure 3. Location of primary Blood Falls discharge site, Taylor Glacier (Photo: C. Harris, 10 Dec 2009).
The exact location and nature of the subglacial reservoir remain uncertain, although geophysical investigations suggest that the reservoir may be located in a bedrock depression between 3 and 6 km from the Taylor Glacier terminus (Map 1) (Hubbard et al. 2004). Earlier studies indicated that the brine reservoir could extend as close 1 km from the Taylor Glacier terminus (Keys 1980; Robinson 1984), and more recent investigations have revealed a series of subglacial depressions beneath the Taylor Glacier, where the glacier base could potentially be unfrozen over small areas (Kavanaugh et al. 2009). Furthermore, the connectivity of the marine reservoir with other parts of the hydrological system of the Taylor Glacier is unclear, with small areas of unfrozen bed potentially allowing for subglacial water movement. 
In order to incorporate the uncertainty surrounding the location of the subglacial reservoir and its connectivity to the surrounding environment, a number of different approaches are under consideration to define a potential boundary for a protected area at Blood Falls. Approaches have included:
    • A broad surface catchment-based approach, with the intention of protecting as much of the sub-aerial2 catchment associated with Blood Falls as is practical, including terrestrial and glacial environments;
    • Protection of variously sized sections of the glacial environment of the Taylor Glacier, including both its sub-aerial and subglacial components; and
    • Protection of extensive areas of the subglacial environment of the Taylor Glacier, in combination with a small sub-aerial protected area encompassing the Blood Falls discharge.
Thus, a subglacial protected area might cover the subglacial environment only (i.e. sub-surface, and would not necessarily restrict activities or movement on the glacier surface), while a sub-aerial ASPA would have boundaries at the land surface (glacial and ice-free). An important reason for the distinction relates to the need for ASPA entry permits: if the boundary is sub-surface, a permit for entry might not be needed to cross the glacier surface. A subglacial ASPA might, for example, prevent drilling into the subglacial environment without a permit, or otherwise conducting activities on the surface that could damage the subglacial environment. Such an approach could make a large subglacial ASPA more practical to manage in a region where a lot of surface activity is taking place such as on the Taylor Glacier.
Other options, perhaps including parts of the adjacent lake environment, may be considered. Initial consultations with the scientific community have indicated support for an approach that includes an extensive subglacial component with a modest sub-aerial section focused on the Blood Falls discharge (Map 1). The subglacial component of the protected area would encompass the estimated location of the Blood Falls subglacial reservoir and areas of the Taylor Glacier that could potentially connect to the reservoir. One suggestion has been that the subglacial environment could include the area from 100m below the surface of the Taylor Glacier extending to the bedrock. The depth of 100 m was suggested on the basis that melting is unlikely to occur above this depth and that crevasses generally do not extend below this depth on the Taylor Glacier (Severinghaus pers. comm. 2010), meaning that the integrity of the subglacial reservoir should be protected. Due to the uncertainties surrounding the connectivity of the glacial hydrological system, the subglacial ASPA would include the entire ablation zone of the Taylor Glacier.
In all options thus far discussed, the sub-aerial component of the ASPA would include protection of the area immediately surrounding the Blood Falls discharge. A number of boundary options, ranging in size from the area immediately surrounding the discharge outlet, to a significant sub-aerial component of the Taylor Glacier snout, are under consideration (not all of these options are illustrated on the attached map).
4. Process of Blood Falls protected area development
The United States has established an open consultation group to discuss options for the protection of the Blood Falls environment. This consultation group has initially focused on discussing the scientific aspects surrounding the feature, and the merits of different boundary options.
A comprehensive review of scientific literature relating to the site has been completed. In addition, site visit reports have been consulted and interested parties have contributed through personal communications. This process has helped to identify key issues and management options for discussion within the scientific community. Work has been initiated on a draft Management Plan, although conclusions on the important questions such as boundaries and any special restrictions that might be desirable have yet to be made. Responses made in the consultation process will play a key role in influencing the ultimate form of the protected area, and consequently on the content and policies in the draft Management Plan.
The United States recognizes that significant uncertainty remains about the nature of the Blood Falls system and this uncertainty has influenced the approaches considered for its protection. The primary uncertainties surrounding Blood Falls are:
    • The location and nature of the subglacial brine reservoir; 
    • The connectivity of the brine reservoir with the sub-aerial environment and the hydrological system of the Taylor Glacier;
    • The potential existence of additional outlets of Blood Falls, on the terrestrial margins of the Taylor Glacier and / or at the Taylor Glacier snout, below the surface of Lake Bonney;
    • The physical controls on release events; and
    • The impact of the Blood Falls brines on the evolution of Lake Bonney.
Despite the uncertainties surrounding the feature, the need for its protection has been recognised and management options have been considered on the basis of the best scientific knowledge available. Blood Falls is the subject of continuous and active scientific research, which could inform management provisions as needed at five-yearly reviews of the Management Plan, as required under the Madrid Protocol.
The United States notes that a Code of Conduct for subglacial aquatic environments has been initiated by SCAR and is currently under consideration. This follows on from the United States National Research Council report on subglacial Antarctic environments (CPESESSE, 2007). The Code of Conduct provides guidelines for the exploration and research of subglacial aquatic environments and is thus highly relevant to the protection of Blood Falls. It is hoped that approaches developed through the Code of Conduct and inputs from the broader scientific community can be used to help develop practical and effective measures for special protection at Blood Falls.
5. Selected references
CPESESSE (Committee on Principles of Environmental Stewardship for the Exploration and Study of Subglacial Environments, 2007. Exploration of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments: Environmental and Scientific Stewardship. Polar Research Board, National Research Council, National Academies Press, Washington D.C. (http://www.nap.edu/catalog/11886.html).
Hubbard, A., Lawson, W., Anderson, B., Hubbard, B. & Blatter, H. 2004. Evidence of subglacial ponding across Taylor Glacier, Dry Valleys, Antarctica. Annals of Glaciology 39: 79–34.
Kavanaugh, J.L, Cuffey, K. M. Morse, D. L., Conway, H., and Rignot, E. 2009.Dynamics and mass balance of Taylor Glacier, Antarctica: 1. Geometry and surface velocities. Journal of  Geophysical Research 114, F04010, doi:10.1029/2009JF001309.
Keys, J.R. 1979. The saline discharge at the terminus of Taylor Glacier. Antarctic Journal of the United States 14: 82-85.
Keys, J.R 1980. Salts and their distribution in the McMurdo region, Antarctica. Chapter 8 in unpublished PhD thesis held at Victoria University of Wellington NZ, and Byrd Polar Research Center, Columbus, Ohio: 240-282.
Lyons, W.B., Welch, K.A., Snyder, G., Olesik, J., Graham, E.Y., Marion, G.M. and Poreda, R.J. 2005. Halogen geochemistry of the McMurdo dry valleys lakes, Antarctica: Clues to the origin of solutes and lake evolution. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69 (2): 305–323.
Mikucki, J.A., Foreman, C.M., Sattler, B., Lyons, W.B., and Priscu, J.C., 2004.  Geomicrobiology of Blood Falls: An iron-rich saline discharge at the terminus of the Taylor Glacier, Antarctica. Aquatic Geochemistry 10:199-220. 
Mikucki, J.A., Pearson, A., Johnston, D.T., Turchyn, A.V., Farquhar, J., Schrag, D.P., Anbar, A.D., Priscu, J.C., and Lee, P.A., 2009. A Contemporary Microbially Maintained Subglacial Ferrous “Ocean”. Science 324 (5925): 397-400. 
Robinson, P.R. 1984. Ice dynamics and thermal regime of Taylor Glacier, South Victoria Land, Antarctica. Journal of Glaciology 30 (105):153-160.

