





Antarctic Navigation Course 
(Offered by Argentina)





Antarctic Navigation Course 
(Offered by Argentina)
Once again Argentina provides ATCM participants with information regarding its Antarctic Navigation Course offered in Buenos Aires by the Naval University Institute of the Argentine Navy. The course will take place from August 23rd to September 3rd 2010 at the National Nautical School.  

Registration and additional information may be obtained through the course website at:  http://www.navantar.escm.edu.ar
General Objectives of the Course

 
To share the Argentine experiences in Antarctica and compile accumulated and available state-of-the-arts knowledge on the region so as to 
Understand  the relevant synopsis of survival on land and at sea, first aid, and prevention of oil spills and pollution in the region, 

Apply  acquired knowledge as a useful reference to undertake Antarctic maritime operations correctly, 

Use  all resources in Antarctic regions regarding environment, patience and maneuvering both in good and harsh weather conditions, 

Value  Argentine activities in Antarctica, 

Relate  experience with a permanent updating of knowledge, and a painstaking, preparation throughout the training toward a successful performance in Antarctic latitudes, and 

Assess  the complexity, hardship, unpredictability and harshness of the Antarctic environment, as well as the impending need to protect it, applying the most demanding behaviour codes in our planet.  

Course Background
  
All the previous ice navigation courses have kept an almost constant flow of civilian and warfare professionals related to seamanship, who have shown specific interest in the curricula developed at the course, which is designed for Captains, Commanding Officers and Officers, at large, of both Merchant and Warfare Navies, able to work "at the bridge" of large merchant vessels. 
The classes and lectures are delivered in Spanish and interpreted simultaneously into English. Year after year these classes feature the participation of about 30 instructors and lecturers with outstanding professional and academic background, sound specialized knowledge, expertise and real life experience in Antarctica. Many of these currently belong to work groups, committees, etc., of international organizations related to Antarctica in general, to Earth Sciences, Environmental and Oceanographic Sciences, conservation and preservation of the Environment and of Living Resources. The aforementioned professionals consolidate the quality of the academic curricula of the course and integrate it coherently. They belong to the following Argentine Organisations and bodies: 
    • National Antarctic Directorate  - Argentine Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Dirección Nacional del Antártico)
    • General Directorate of Antarctic Affairs – Argentine Ministry of Affairs (Dirección General de Asuntos Antárticos)
    • Argentine Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Argentino).
    • Argentine Antarctic Army Command (Comando Antártico del Ejército Argentino).
    • Argentine Navy (Armada Argentina).
This latter Institution is particularly committed to the contribution from all the Argentine Navy agencies and units involved in activities in Antarctica, with a special role carried out by commanding officers and officers who have participated in recent operations undertaken in this polar region. Furthermore, there have been additional lectures from foreign Navy Officers with Antarctic Experience, Senior Officers from the Chilean Navy and from the United Kingdom Royal Navy. 
The syllabus is subject to constant review in light of knowledge progress, breakthroughs in technique and science and of experience. It encompasses the different disciplines or areas relevant to Antarctica grouped into seven large modules: (i) Antarctic environment, (ii) ecology, (iii) maritime pollution, (iv) International Law and Antarctic Legislation, (v) Nautical Safety, (vi) nautical expertise and recent commanding experience, as well as (vii) survival. 
Throughout ten intensive days the course activities are mainly geared to offer an international professional forum of exchange in accordance with Antarctic Treaty, to sum up and share worldwide know how on the region, convey Argentine Antarctic expertise and for the attendants to understand the theory of operations and nautical safety in Antarctica, to learn the generalities of disciplines related to the region’s environment, go over the relevant synopsis of survival on land and at sea and prevention of oil spills and of pollution in Austral polar regions.
One of the main goals the course has is to enhance and consolidate community of professional seamen interested in maritime operations in the region and respectful of the Antarctic environment, once again reinforcing comradeship of civilian and military seamen. Hence, the fraternity and crews’ shared know-how of 626 seamen from Germany, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, South Korea, Chile, USA, Ecuador, Spain, Guatemala, Holanda, India, Italy, Mexico, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, South Africa, Uruguay, Venezuela, New Zealand, Great Britain and Argentina has consolidated throughout their participation in NAVANTAR’s previous years. 
It is also worth mentioning that one of the special goals in this course is to fully comprehend the complexity, difficulty, unpredictability and severity of the Antarctic environment as well as the paramount importance of its adequate protection by abiding to the strictest and most demanding rules of conduct on the planet.
In brief  NAVANTAR preserves its saying:
Knowledge, training, experience and cumulative expertise are success factors in nautical risk management in Antarctica
And its corollary remains: Protection of the natural Antarctic environment, its fauna and living marine resources.










Antarctic Navigation Course – 2010 Program.


1.     ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
1.     Introduction to the natural environment. 
    i. General knowledge on Antarctica and its natural habitat. 
    ii. Geographical factors and physical characteristics present in the continent, islands and adjacent seas and their interaction with operations. 
2.     Meteorology and climatology. 
    i. Climate of South American region, Antarctic Peninsula, Bellingshausen and Weddell Seas.
    ii. Oceanographic factors and their interaction with the atmosphere.
    iii. General Circulation.
    iv. Mean passage of lows, cyclogenetic zones, migratory anticyclones and blockage (whiteout) weather conditions.
    v. Deranged wind patterns, katabatic effect, local circulations.
    vi. Meteors and local phenomena.
    vii. Meteorological aspects applied to navigation in the Drake Passage and the Weddell and Bellingshausen Seas.
    viii. Special phenomena impacting on operations.
    ix. Grounds for satellite image interpreting and weather systems.
3.     Sea Ice and icebergs 
    i. Identification of sea ice and icebergs.
    ii. Development stages, forms, deformation processes, openings in the ice, topography, stage of melting, ice surface features.
    iii. Physical constitution of sea ice, remarkable characteristics, special features of the region.
    iv. Drifting of icebergs to South Atlantic and Weddell and Bellingshausen Seas.
    v. Sea ice Codes and terminology.
    vi. Observation from ships and helicopters.
4.     Glaciology (ice of land origin). 
    i. General characteristics of dynamics, morphology and influence of continental ice on Antarctic ecosystem.
    ii. Ice shelves and glaciers.
    iii. Larsen, Filchner-Ronnie ice shelves.
    iv. Participation in balancing of the ocean-atmosphere system. Variation index and global changes.
5.     Antarctic geology 
    i. Geological constitution of the continent and islands.
    ii. Continental platform.
    iii. Seismic data.
    iv. Potential Antarctic Resources.
6.     Oceanography 
    i. Physical characteristics of Antarctic waters.
    ii. Tides and Tidal Currents.
    iii. Circulation and water masses, currents and waves.
    iv. Antarctic Polar Front Zone.
7.     Fauna 
    i. Antarctic Marine Ecosystem.
    ii. Environmental Factors.
    iii. Phytoplankton and zooplankton.
    iv. Invertebrates and vertebrates.
2.     INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND LEGISLATION
1.     Foreign affairs
2.     International law 
    i. Navigation laws within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
    ii. Knowledge and data needed to work properly within the "political environment", given the international status in force.
    iii. Ice as an object subject to international legal regulation.
1.      Ice as a natural resource.
2.      Ice and environmental protection.
3.      Navigation in iced seas.
4.      Reference to ice within an area subject to legal instruments.
3.     Antarctic Treaty 
    i. General description.
    ii. Rules.
    iii. MARPOL – Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental protection – Law 24216.
1.      Legal background and rules in force to prevent shipping pollution.
2.      Drafting of contingency plans to enforce in case of incidents Antarctic shipping pollution.
3.     ECOLOGY
1.     Preservation of live resources 
    i. Background. Commissions and conventions regulating exports.
    ii. Convention for Antarctic Marine Live Resources Preservation (CCRVMA- CCAMLR).
    iii. CCRVMA Concepts and regulatory standards.
2.     Environmental protection and preservation in Antarctica 
    i. Scientific and political background on preservation of Antarctic environment.
    ii. Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection Annexes.
    iii. Main features of the Antarctic environment.
    iv. Tourism in Antarctica and environmental protection.
4.     SEA WATERCONTAMINATION
1.     MARPOL. Response to oil spills in Antarctica 
    i. Changes in society.
    ii. Contamination.
    iii. Shipping pollution.
    iv. National legislation.
    v. International Agreements.
    vi. Contingency Plan.
2.     Real life experience of spill control and cleanup activities in Antarctica 
    i. Initial situation.
    ii. Outstanding actions.
    iii. Recommendations toward development of similar tasks.
    iv. Conclusions.
           5.     NAVIGATION AND NAUTICAL SAFETY
1.     General characteristics of ships fit for Antarctic navigation 
    i. Type of vessel.
    ii. Design of hulls.
    iii. Propulsion systems.
    iv. Ancillary elements.
    v. Maneuverability.
2.     Ice ship classification 
    i. Introduction.
    ii. Reinforcement requirements for operations on ice.
    iii. Reinforcement for icebreakers.
    iv. FINNISH-SWEDISH ICE RULES.
3.     Ship readiness and preparation 
    i. External weather impact on material and crew.
    ii. Overhaul. Specific items.
    iii. Extra equipment to consider.
    iv. Preparation of material before setting sail and during transportation.
    v. Training of Personnel. Equipment.
4.     Operations at easy area 
    i. Nautical characteristics of the area. Nautical instruments.
    ii. Overall features of anchorage sites, maneuvers and stay.
    iii. Use of smaller vessels.
5.     Operations at difficult area 
    i. Approach, entry and workings in the pack.
    ii. Working the pack.
    iii. Trapped ship and Stranded ship. Maneuvers and general considerations.
6.     Operations with low ice class ships 
    i. Specific precautions for the area.
    ii. Local navigation characteristics and maneuvers.
    iii. Preparations to improve safety.
    iv. Operations in sea iced waters.
7.     General characteristics of icebreakers 
    i. Hull.
    ii. Propulsion.
    iii. Ancillary systems.
    iv. Maneuverability.
8.     Operations with icebreakers 
    i. Independent operations.
    ii. Rescue operations.
    iii. General characteristics of Convoy ops.
9.     Operation with helicopters from ship deck 
    i. Characteristics of helicopters fit for Antarctic operations.
    ii. Vertrep (vertical replenishment).
    iii. Search and rescue.
    iv. Glaciological Flights and recognizance.
    v. Common factors influencing operations from helicopters.
10.Navigational aids 
    i. Hydrographic surveys.
    ii. Antarctic Nautical charts.
    iii. Electronic charts.
    iv. GPS (Global Positioning System).
    v. Radar Use in Antarctica.
1.      General features.
2.      Capabilities and constraints of modern equipment.
    vi. A.R.P.A.
 
6.     NAUTICAL AND RECENT COMMAND EXPERIENCES
1.     Preparation, planning, command of a Campaign to Antarctica 
        i. Plan.
        ii. Task definition, purpose and situations.
        iii. Drafting.
        iv. Supervision.
        v. Recommendations.
2.      Operations with auxiliary vessels. 
3.     Operations with a scientific research ship.
4.     Last Antarctic Campaign.
5.     Other own experience in Antarctica.
 
7.     SURVIVAL IN ANTARCTICA
1.     Survival on land 
        vi. Procedures to follow in light of emergency.
        vii. Refuge/shelter.
        viii. Rules to live in the shelter.
        ix. Area of Crevasses.
        x. Necessary elements and accessories.
        xi. Signals.
2.     First aids. 
        xii. Recommendations against cold.
        xiii. Fractured bones.
        xiv. Burns.
        xv. Hypothermia and Frostbite.
3.     Survival at sea 
        xvi. Abandonment in cold waters.
1.      Evacuation scenarios.
2.      Equipment and procedures for ship abandonment.
3.      Survival on land.
4.      Water and food supplies.
5.      Means of Communication.
        xvii. Immersion in cold waters.
1.      Loss of body heat due to immersion.
2.      Hypothermia.
3.      Polar diving and diving below ice.
4.      Suitable diving equipment for Antarctica.
8.     GENERAL DISCUSSION
1.      Fostering of exchange of experience and knowledge among lecturers and attendants to validate course goals.


