





Management Report of Narębski Point, ASPA No. 171 (2009-2010)






Management Report of Narębski Point,
ASPA No. 171 (2009-2010)
Introduction
The XXXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, commemorating its historic 50th Anniversary, adopted Measure 13 to designate Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island, as its 71st Antarctic Specially Protected Area in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
To further promote the aims and objectives of the ASPA as indicated in the Management Plan, the following management activities were undertaken by the Republic of Korea to protect its ecological, scientific, and aesthetic values of the Area as well as to increase public awareness on Antarctic Environment.
Management Activities
As provided for in the Management Plan, all personnel entering into the King Sejong Station and in particular those accessing the ASPA were given instructions as to the importance of protecting the ASPA and the contents the Management Plan. For this purpose, various educational materials including in-pocket brochure, ASPA manual, ASPA ecological map, and video clip were made jointly by Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) and the Ministry of Environment, to be distributed not only to those at home but also to all those at the Station.
In addition, annual monitoring of biological conditions including census on penguins and other birds’ populations of the Area was undertaken for the year 2009-2010. Nest number of gentoo penguin in 2009/2010 (2,289 nests) increased by 24.9% compared to estimated number in 2006/2007 (1,719 nests). In contrast, that of chinstrap penguin (2,572 nests) decreased by 13.1% than the previous survey (2,961 nests).
Last but not least, the signs indicating the start of the ASPA were erected just outside the two of its frequent access routes. Paying close heed to the environmental impact, the signs were specially designed to achieve the high degree of durability so that they would endure and not wear out throughout the Antarctic years.




Figure 1: ASPA signs erected at the two frequent access routes of Narębski Point, ASPA No. 171

Public Awareness on Antarctic Environment
Designating an ASPA nearby the King Sejong Station has proved very useful in raising public awareness on Antarctic environment in Korea. The press release by Ministry of Environment following the adoption of Measure 13 has provided a good opportunity for the general public to reflect upon the importance of Antarctic biological diversity and the impact of climate change and human interference to the invaluable species and its natural surroundings. Moreover, the educational materials mentioned above were made available to the public and also on the Korean website (www.antarctica.go.kr).
Future Plans
Following the designation of ASPA no. 171, a new mid- and long-term strategy was prepared in 2009 to support and further improve the current annual research activities within and around the Area. The research activities will be undertaken accordingly and further awareness-raising activities are also envisioned, thereby aiming not only to achieve better understanding of the Antarctic environment but also to contribute in developing regional and global conservation strategies for the species.


