





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Thirteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Thirteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection
Introduction

Reporting Format

    1. Following the endorsement by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR of the recommendations of the Joint SC-CAMLR/CEP Workshop held in Baltimore, from 3 to 4 April 2009 this report focuses on the following five issues of common interest identified by that workshop: 
        a. Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
        b. Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
        c. Antarctic species requiring special protection
        d. Spatial marine management and protected areas 
        e. Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
    2. This report also follows the reporting format introduced by the CEP Observer to SC-CAMLR XXVIII (SC-CAMLR-XXVIII/BG/16) following agreement by both committees that a common format for reciprocal observer reports provided a useful means for exchanging information on the topics listed in paragraph 1. 


General 
    3. The Twenty-Eighth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 26- 30 October 2009.  The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR  website  www.ccamlr.org. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR XXVIII is provided in Appendix 1. 

    4. The next meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 25 to 29 October 2010.

    5. SC-CAMLR recognized the importance of maintaining momentum on the issues identified by the Joint SC-CAMLR/CEP Workshop and recommended that the Chairs of the respective Committees should liaise during the intersessional period in order to consider and suggest to their respective committees:
• options for making progress on the various recommendations from the Joint Workshop;
• options for further joint meetings and workshops, and possible timing of such meetings;
• how to improve coordination on other intersessional meetings and workshops that may be of common interest;
• in doing so, take into account the recommendations from the CCAMLR Performance Review Panel on how to improve coordination with the Antarctic Treaty System.
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
    6. In response to the recommendations of the CCAMLR Performance Review Panel report  SC-CAMLR considered burden sharing to be one the most important institutional issues currently faced by CCAMLR and identified three essential steps in a process to identify incentives to burden sharing and to develop capacity within SC-CAMLR:

        a. identify difficulties that Members may have in contributing to the scientific process;
        b. identify potential mechanisms to facilitate burden sharing amongst Members;
        c. building capacity amongst Members to participate in the work of the SC‑CAMLR. 

    7. Following a generous offer by Norway to provide A$100 000 CCAMLR established a ‘General Science Capacity Special Fund’ to progress the points raised in paragraph 6 and to facilitate the provision of the best scientific information available to the Commission by
        a. securing wider participation, not least from young scientists, in the work of the Scientific Committee, 
        b. promoting burden sharing and build capacity within the Scientific Committee, through assistance with the collection, study and exchange of information. 
        c. encouraging and promoting  the conduct of cooperative and collaborative research in order to extend knowledge of the marine living resources of the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

    8. The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 



Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment 

    9. SC-CAMLR is actively engaged in considering the potential impacts of climate change on the management of Antarctic marine living resources. Central to this is the recognition that climate change has the potential to induce rapid change within ecosystems and that aligning CEMP with a broader suite of parameters collected as part of  multiple research programs would be beneficial to the detection of climate impacts.
    10. SC-CAMLR recognises the difficulties associated with obtaining  resources for additional data collection. In particular,  where new monitoring sites are required a number of years of monitoring will be needed to establish baselines for comparison with data from current monitoring sites. Reviewing the role of CEMP in monitoring the effects of the krill fishery in an era of rapid climate change would be timely given forthcoming meetings such as the United Nations Climate Change Conference and the ATCM  Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (at which SC-CAMLR will be represented by the CCAMLR Science Officer).

Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 

    11. There was no discussion of the issue of non-native species by SC-CAMLR other than to note that the CEP would be the lead-body on this issue and would liaise with SC-CAMLR as appropriate.

Antarctic species requiring special protection 

    12. Monitoring of the incidental mortality of birds and mammals associated with fisheries remains a key part of the work of SC-CAMLR  and the CCAMLR Scheme of International Scientific Observation.  The observed  incidental mortality in the Convention Area  during the 2008/09 fishing season was: 

Seabirds
Subarea 48.2 – 10 cape petrel (Daption capense) 
Subarea 48.3 - 1 grey headed albatross (Thalassarche chrysostoma), 7 southern black browed albatross (T. melanophrys) and 5 white chinned petrels (Procellaria aequinoctialis)
Division 58.5.2. - 1  cape petrel  
French EEZ in Subarea 58.6  - 19 white chinned petrels (P.  aequinoctialis), 3 northern giant petrels (Macronectes halli) and one grey petrel (P. cinerea)
French EEZ in Division 58.5.1 - 99 white chinned petrels and 6 grey petrels 

Marine mammals
Subarea 48.3 – 1 southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina), one sperm whale (Physeter macrocephalus) and one killer whale (Orca orcinus). 
Subarea 48.2  - 12 Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) 
Subarea  88.1  -2 crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus)
Division 58.5.2  -2 southern elephant seals.

    13. The mortality of Antarctic fur seals reported in paragraph 11 occurred on a single krill vessel in  Subarea 48.2 and the specific circumstances were related to the failure of the mitigation device that is mandated by CCAMLR.  

    14. The number of incidental mortalities of seabirds in the French EEZs  has declined substantially in the past 3 years with the implementation of France’s action plan to address seabird interactions with fisheries. However, the relative impact on the grey petrel in particular continues to be a serious concern given the critical conservation status of this species.  

    15. The Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fisheries (WG-IMAF) has been extremely important to the work of CCAMLR in reducing the incidental mortality of seabirds and marine mammals in CCAMLR fisheries.   Given the very much reduced level of such incidental mortality in the CCAMLR managed fisheries WG-IMAF will now move to a biennial meeting schedule. This will also allow greater involvement of WG-IMAF participants in ACAP, which is aiming to address incidental mortality of albatrosses and petrels, including Convention Area seabirds, in fisheries managed by adjacent RFMOs.

Spatial marine management and protected areas 
Marine  protected areas (MPAs)
    16. The establishment of a representative system of MPAs across the Convention Area is a high priority for the Scientific Committee and the Commission. There is a recognition that significant further work is required to progress the establishment of a representative system of MPAs by 2012, within the timeline agreed by the WSSD.
    17. SC-CAMLR recognized that a proposal for marine spatial protection to be implemented around the South Orkney Islands, would contribute towards the conservation of biodiversity in Subarea 48.2, and  was an important contribution to this process. Following agreement by the Commission this became the first high-seas MPA in the Convention Area (Conservation Measure 91-03 (2009)). All types of fishing would be prohibited within the proposed area, however, scientific research activities would be permitted under conditions agreed by SC-CAMLR.
    18. The MPA  was selected on the basis of a systematic conservation planning analysis, the initial results of which were presented to SC-CAMLR in 2008 and considered by WG-EMM in 2009; the method had also been endorsed by the CEP in 2009.  It includes representative examples of two pelagic bioregions occurring in Subarea 48.2, and incorporates an area of key importance for winter penguin foraging and unique oceanographic frontal systems. 
    19. SC-CAMLR  agreed a set of milestones to guide its work towards the achievement of a representative system of MPAs within the Convention Area by 2012:
(i)	by 2010, collate relevant data for as many of the 11 priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate), and characterise each region in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities;
(ii)	by early 2011, convene a workshop to review progress, share experience on different approaches to the selection of candidate sites for protection, and determine a work program for the identification of MPAs in as many of the priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate);
(iii)	by 2011, identify candidate areas for protection in as many of the priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate), based on the collated data and regional characterisations, and using appropriate selection methods;
(iv)	by 2011, submit proposals for areas for protection to the Scientific Committee;
(v)	by 2012, submit proposals on a representative system of MPAs to the Commission.

Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)

    20. In 2008 CCAMLR introduced conservation measures as part of its approach to avoiding significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems (VMEs) from bottom fishing activities (Conservation Measures 22-06 and 22-07).  These measures were introduced in response to United Nations General Assembly Resolution 61/105, adopted on 8 December 2006, that called on regional fisheries management organisations or arrangements with the competence to regulate bottom fisheries to adopt and implement measures to prevent significant adverse impacts of bottom fisheries on VMEs. 

    21. In order to implement these measures CCAMLR agreed upon a set of  ‘VME indicator organism’ http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/sc/obs/VME-guide.pdf and defined a VME indicator unit as either one litre one kilogram of those VME indicator organisms . It also agreed a trigger level of 10 or more VME units per segment, a segment being a section of longline that is  either 1.2 km or 1000 hooks. 

    22. In the 2008/09 fishing season seven Risk Areas, all in the Ross Sea,  were closed to fishing. A Risk Area is a 1 nautical mile radius around the mid-point of the segment that contained at least 10 VME units. 
    23. There were also 28 VMEs,  reported from  research surveys in the Antarctic Peninsula and South Orkney Islands (using video observations and trawl by-catch),e were added to the CCAMLR VME  registry. In the South Orkney region management areas A, C, E  of the experimental harvest program for crabs were closed in order to protect the known VMEs and in recognition of the likelihood of  others in nearby areas. 
    24. In addition to the measures described above CCAMLR has also  agreed a framework for reviewing and enhancing the effectiveness of its overall approach to conserving VMEs. This review mechanism, that explicitly recognises that the process is likely to remain data-poor,  includes consideration of the relative catchability of different VME indicator taxa, the suitability of current trigger levels and an approach to evaluate management strategies by simulation in order to achieve the long-term protection for VME’s in Southern Ocean.
CEMP sites
    25. SC-CAMLR agreed that the Conservation Measure 91-02 (Protection of the Cape Shirreff CEMP site) be rescinded with the protection of Cape Shirreff continuing under the management plan of ASPA 149. As the management plans for Cape Shirreff were due for review by CCAMLR in 2009 and by the ATCM in 2010 this assists in harmonising protection under CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty and avoids duplication of effort on the part of researchers, national governments and the secretariats of CCAMLR and the ATS. 
    26. With the lapsing of Conservation Measure 91-02, there are now  no sites afforded additional protection under the provision of Conservation  Measure 91-01 and CCAMLR has agreed to give this matter further consideration in 2010.


Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 

New Monitoring sites 

    27. SC-CAMLR welcomed new initiatives for CEMP monitoring at Cumberland Bay, South Georgia, and at Petermann Island on the Antarctic Peninsula as well as  the provision of  data, collected in a manner consistent with the CEMP standard methods, from penguin colonies used to monitor tourism impacts on Goudier Island. Ukraine, UK and Russia were congratulated on these new initiatives.
    28. SC-CAMLR noted that a broad monitoring network would be required for the work of CCAMLR, particularly in managing the krill fishery in the face of climate change and that the joint SC-CAMLR/CEP workshop  had highlighted the importance of exploring new and innovative ways to augment existing resources dedicated to ecosystem monitoring

Ecosystem anomaly at South Georgia 

    29. A strong ecosystem anomaly at South Georgia during 2009 was manifested in very low breeding performance of land-based krill-predators,  the lowest krill density in a c20 year time-series from research surveys as well as  extremely low catches of krill (total catch 50 kg) and icefish Champsocephalus gunnari in the commercial fishery.
    30. Ecosystem monitoring at South Georgia, including CEMP monitoring, had allowed the early detection of this anomaly, demonstrating the value of such monitoring for management purposes.

Marine Debris 

    31. Long-term monitoring by CCAMLR of marine debris on beaches from three sites in Area 48 indicated that in 2009 there had been an increase in the amount of debris in Subareas 48.1  and 48.2 and a slight decrease in Subarea 48.3;  at all three sites monitored  the majority of debris was categorised as non-fishing items. 


CCAMLR representative to CEP 

    32. CCAMLR   reflected on the career of Dr Denzil Miller, the outgoing Executive Secretary noting his dedication, honesty and integrity agreeing that he had represented  the embodiment of CCAMLR and had been an asset to the Antarctic Treaty System and would be missed very much. Mr Andrew (Drew) Wright was elected to be the new Executive Secretary and will take up this appointment at CCAMLR in April 2010.  

    33. Dr David Agnew (UK )was  unanimously elected to the position of Chair and Dr Christopher Jones (USA) to position of vice-Chair of SC-CAMLR, both for a term of two regular meetings (2010 and 2011).  A very warm welcome was extended to the incoming Chair and Vice-Chair.  Dr Viacheslav Bizikov (Russia)  will continue as Vice-Chair for one additional meeting (2010).

Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR XXVIII


CHAIR,
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE
Mr Svein A. Iversen
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen, Norway
sveini@imr.no

ARGENTINA
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

AUSTRALIA
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

BELGIUM
Mr Daan Delbare
Institute for Agriculture and Fisheries Research
Oostende 
daan.delbare@ilvo.vlaanderen.be

BRAZIL
Mr Alberto Fonseca
Embassy of Brazil
Canberra, Australia
alberto.fonseca@brazil.org.au

CHILE
Dr. Javier Arata
Instituto Antártico Chileno
Punta Arenas
jarata@inach.cl

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

FRANCE
Prof. Guy Duhamel
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
Paris
duhamel@mnhn.fr

GERMANY
Dr Karl-Hermann Kock
Institute of Sea Fisheries
Johann Heinrich von Thünen Institute
Hamburg
karl-hermann.kock@vti.bund.de

INDIA
Mr Perumal Madeswaran 
Ministry of Earth Sciences
New Delhi
mades-dod@nic.in

ITALY
Prof. Marino Vacchi
Museo Nazionale Antartide
Università degli Studi di Genova
Genoa
m.vacchi@unige.it

JAPAN
Mr Masashi Kiyota
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama
kiyo@affrc.go.jp

REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Dr Kyujin Seok
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
Busan
pisces@nfrdi.go.kr

NAMIBIA
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

NEW ZEALAND
Mr Neville Smith
Ministry of Fisheries
Wellington
neville.smith@fish.govt.nz

NORWAY
Mr Harald Steen
Norwegian Polar Institute
Tromsø
steen@npolar.no
POLAND
Ms Izabela Janas-Kotlewska
Fisheries Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Warsaw
izabela.janas@minrol.gov.pl

RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Dr Viacheslav A. Bizikov
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries
and Oceanography 
Moscow
bizikov@vniro.ru

SOUTH AFRICA
Dr Robin Leslie
Marine and Coastal Management
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Cape Town
rwleslie@deat.gov.za

SWEDEN
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

UKRAINE
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

UNITED KINGDOM
Dr David Agnew
Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd
London
d.agnew@mrag.co.uk

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

URUGUAY
Prof. Oscar Pin
Dirección Nacional de Recursos Acuáticos
Montevideo
opin@dinara.gub.uy


OBSERVERS – INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

ACAP
Dr Marco Favero
ACAP Secretariat
Tasmania, Australia
marco.favero@acap.aq
CEP

Dr Neil Gilbert
Antarctica New Zealand
Christchurch, New Zealand
n.gilbert@antarcticanz.govt.nz

IWC
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm, Sweden
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

SCAR
Prof. Mark Hindell
University of Tasmania
Hobart, Australia
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au


OBSERVERS – NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ASOC

Ms Verónica Cirelli
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentino
Buenos Aires, Argentina
oceanoaustral@vidasilvestre.org.ar


Ms Adriana Fabra
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Barcelona, Spain
afabra@yahoo.es


Ms Lyn Goldsworthy AM
ASOC
Canberra, Australia
lyn.goldsworthy@ozemail.com.au


Ms Nina Jensen
WWF-Norway
Oslo, Norway
njensen@wwf.no


Mr Robert Nicoll
WWF-Australia
Sydney, Australia
rnicoll@wwf.org.au


Mr Richard Page
Greenpeace
London, UK
richard.page@uk.greenpeace.org


Ms Genevieve Quirk
Greenpeace
Sydney, Australia
genevieve.quirk@au.greenpeace.org


Ms Ayako Sekine
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Tokyo, Japan
ayakos04@yahoo.co.jp


Dr Rodolfo Werner
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Bariloche, Río Negro
Argentina
rodolfo.antarctica@gmail.com




