





Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”





Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”

Introduction
Even in Antarctica invasions by non-native species are now recognized to constitute a serious risk to the region (see the recent NNS Guidelines Draft Report by the Intersessional Contact Group on “Non-Native Species” (NNS) of the Committee of Environmental Protection). Poorly known is the anthropogenic influ­ence on the terrestrial biota of soil and on other substrate on land. Neither the role of human activities in the unintentional introduction of non-native species, nor the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic by visitors is sufficiently studied. The same applies to the effi­cacy of boot washing and other preventive and precautionary measures practiced on cruise ships visiting Antarctica. 
The Research Project
The research project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic” was commissioned by the German Federal Envi­ronment Agency and is carried out by the Senckenberg Museum of Natural History Görlitz, Germany, in close co-operation with international experts on soil invertebrates. It is friendly supported by two cruise tour operators and their expedition leaders. The main goal of the project is to assess the potential influence on Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems by mainly ship-based tourism. The project aims at estimating the anthropo­genic influence on the distribution of organisms within as well as on the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica, both in areas frequently visited by tourists and near research stations. Furthermore, the effi­ciency of preventive and precautionary measures will be studied and evaluated as far as possible. For more information see the project summary (see Annex) or contact CEP-contactpoint@uba.de.
Invitation for co-operation
Germany would highly appreciate the co-operation with other Antarctic Treaty Parties with respect to all issues of this project. This includes any comments, proposals and hints, especially from those Antarctic Treaty Parties having own experiences and knowledge in that field. Further, we would like to ask those par­ties for co-operation which were requested to tolerate the taking of soil samples from the near surrounding of their scientific bases in the Antarctic. 
Annex: 
The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic 

Senckenberg Museum of Natural History Görlitz, Germany
Commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency

Project summary

Goals
The main goal of the present project is to assess the potential influence on Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems by increasing tourism. The project aims at estimating the anthropogenic influence on the distribution of organ­isms within as well as on the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica, both in areas frequently visited by tourists and near research stations. Furthermore, the efficiency of possible preventive and precau­tionary measures will be investigated and evaluated.
Approach
Changes in species’ distributions are best considered within the framework of landscape ecology, which is, however, difficult to study in continents such as Antarctica. Due to their very small radius of action and their extreme habitat fidelity, soil organisms allow the study of landscape-level processes at very small spatial scales. Taxonomically, soil organisms have been relatively well studied in Antarctica and are important, spe­cies- and individual-rich components of terrestrial ecosystems, especially in biotically relatively simple eco­systems as in Antarctica. Therefore, the present study will concentrate on soil organisms (flora and fauna), allowing the research questions to be answered in a necessarily limited area of the Antarctic continent.
Although literature concerning Antarctic soil flora and fauna as well as biological databanks for the Antarc­tica exist, with which taxonomic results can be compared, data from the possible origins of neobiota, e.g., the southern regions of South America, is practically non-existent. It is thus nearly impossible to evaluate whether detected but unknown species are undescribed endemics of Antarctica or originate from southern hemispheric continents. The evaluation of possible anthropogenic affects on species’ distributions will there­fore be approached indirectly at different levels: 
        ◦ Changes in the ß-diversity, i.e. the biodiversity of different microhabitats, within single locations. Especially in fragile and ecologically limited ecosystems as in Antarctica, undisturbed sites contain diverse microhabitats. These microhabitats harbour different species compositions and community structures, i.e. ß-diversity is high. In locations with high tourism pressure, species introduction can be higher between microhabitats of a single location than between continents, resulting in a biotic homogenisation of microhabitats and an overall reduction in the ß-diversity of a location.
        ◦ Zoogeographical distribution patterns. Different locations along the coast of Antarctica will be sampled, allowing the evaluation of the biogeographical distribution patterns of the registered species at larger spatial scales. In sites with high tourism pressure, a species composition containing more species with a wide distribution range and fewer locally endemic species than undisturbed sites, can indicate an anthropogenic influence on the distribution patterns of Antarctic organisms. Depending on the presence of locally endemic or more widely distributed species, possibly endangered locations (i.e., those with high levels of endemism) will be identified that should be exempted from tourism.
        ◦ Possible direct proof of introduced species. Despite the lack of taxonomic knowledge of southern-hemispheric soil organisms, introduction of some non-native species in Sub Antarctic islands, where the climatic conditions are not as harsh, is known. Registration of these species on the Antarctic continent – while not very probable due to climatic differences – will directly and explicitly indicate the introduction of non-native species.
        ◦ Evaluation of possible direct mechanisms of species introduction (“bootwashing”). A likely mechanism of species’ introduction is direct dispersal by, i.e., the footwear of visiting tourists. Therefore, the shoes and boots of tourists will be sampled and studied before and after visiting locations on the Antarctic continent for the presence of soil organisms.
Methods
The studies will evaluate the following functional groups of soil organisms:
        ◦ Cryptogam flora (mosses, lichens)
        ◦ Microfauna (Tardigrada, Nematoda)
        ◦ Mesofauna (Collembola, the acarine groups Oribatida, Actinedida and Gamasida)

Sampling will be undertaken by expedition leaders (scientists) present on up to three cruise ships taking tourists to Antarctica during the Antarctic summers of 2009/2010 and 20010/2011. The soil flora and fauna will be sampled in up to 20 different locations. The studied sites will be evenly distributed between:
        ◦ homogenic and heterogenic (= microhabitat-poor and -rich) locations, to allow the evaluation of ß-diversity in Antarctic soil communities;
        ◦ locations frequently and rarely visited by tourists, to allow the evaluation of the degree of anthropogenic influence on soil communities;
        ◦ locations with research stations and those only visited by tourists, to evaluate possible differences between the influence of research stations and pure tourism.

Within each location, microhabitats (i.e. stream banks, moss-rich soils, open soils and sands) – in so far as they are present – will be sampled in replicate. In microhabitat-poor locations, replicate samples will be taken of the available habitat-types to allow comparison of locations. All samples will be flown to Germany, where the soil animals would be extracted with taxon-specific methods, sorted into different taxonomic groups and sent to various European taxonomic specialists for species identification. Cryptogam flora will be studied directly.
Besides direct comparison of the identities of registered species with known non-native species, the biologi­cal data will be analysed using various biodiversity parameters (α-, β- and γ-diversity) of microhabitats, locations and all locations together. Comparison of the ß-diversity within anthropogenically influenced and relatively uninfluenced sites will allow identification of the level of disturbance on species’ distributions and thus potential introduction of species at small spatial scales. Based on the observed distribution of registered species throughout all sampling sites, species will be indentified that have wide and limited (= “locally endemic”) distributions. The proportions of these species groups will then be evaluated for each sampled location. A comparison of these proportions in touristically frequently and infrequently visited locations will provide an indication of anthropogenic species dispersal at larger spatial scales. 
Proof of organisms on footwear through boot washing in the ports of origin of tourism ships will indicate the potential danger of species introduction into Antarctica, even if registered organisms are not identified on the continent itself. Proof of organisms on footwear through boot washing after visiting Antarctic locations will indicate potential human dispersal of species between localities, which can also represent a major distur­bance of local Antarctic ecosystems. Furthermore, the efficacy of boot washing methods will be evaluated.

