





Enhancement activities 
for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”





Enhancement activities for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”
Summary
This paper summarises the work done by Argentina during the 2008/09 and 2009/10 seasons to contribute to the enhancement of the Historic Site and Monument 38 “Hut on Snow Hill Island”. This paper is intended as a complement and follow-up to the report made to CEP VI (Madrid, 2003) in IP 57 (Argentina) and the adoption of the Site Guidelines for Visitors for Snow Hill (Resolution 1, 2007), originally proposed by Argentina and Sweden.
Introduction
Generally speaking, the activities carried out at HSM 38 over the course of the last two seasons fall into two main categories: 1) the assessment of environmental management and tourism in the region; and 2) the management and conservation of the historic heritage at HSM 38.  
Assessment of environmental management and tourism 
Activities in this category covered aspects such as hut use, waste management, the current distribution and zoning of existing installations and activities, the information available to the public and tourism management, in compliance with the Site Guidelines for Visitors established for this site. 
These activities, undertaken to monitor and assess compliance with the relevant rules, have contributed to the collection of information that will allow for the drafting of future proposals for the design and implementation of additional management measures, which in turn will foster more effective compliance with the rules of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
Management and conservation of historic heritage
Conservation activities carried out at HSM 38 over the course of the last two seasons included establishing and updating an inventory of the objects on display in the Snow Hill hut, determining their state of conservation, and taking preventive measures for their conservation.  
The preventive conservation measures1 taken at HSM 38 during the 2008/09 and 2009/10 Antarctic summer seasons followed the parameters established by various international institutions that act as governing bodies in the field, such as the International Council of Museums (ICOM) and the Museum Documentation Association (MDA), among others. Likewise, the guidelines established in current international legislation on the management of cultural heritage were also respected. 
In keeping with these guidelines, the various tasks comprising the Preventive Conservation Plan for the material collection were carried out in the following stages:
    a. Recording and documentation
In order to create a standardised record of the material collection that covered all the most relevant aspects, a digital inventory was designed that included a photgraphic record of each item as well as information on its techno-morphological characteristics and state of conservation. This inventory allowed for the documentation of the preventive conservation actions performed on the collection as well as any follow-up. 
    b. Exploration / Intervention and Stabilisation
An initial “inspection and cleaning” allowed for the removal of sediment and any other agents that could lead to the deterioration of the items. During this phase, a number of physical methods were applied to a large percentage of the material collection, including: glassware, organic material, textiles, metals, etc. A series of chemical methods were also applied during the 2009/10 summer season as part of the ongoing inspection and cleaning work on textiles, metals and organic material. 
As regards the stabilisation work, temporary supports were constructed for each item in the collection during the 2008/09 summer season. The definitive supports were designed and constructed during the following season. The appropriate materials were selected for these supports, taking into account the size, shape and material of each item, as well as its degree of fragility. Then the technical reserve (repository) was designed, organised and assembled, a process which involved cleaning the space in question and monitoring its basic ambient conditions such as relative humidity and temperature. Basic furnishings were also designed and constructed for holding the supports. 
Once the supports had been completed and the repository had been prepared, the material collection was stored there.  
Conclusions
The tasks described in this report have achieved the following two objectives: 1) the site’s management has been adapted to the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and its annexes; and 2) major progress has been made in recovering objects for the material collection of HSM 38, maintaining an up-to-date inventory of this collection and defining the necessary conditions for its preventive conservation. To illustrate the point: prior to the two seasons in question, the site’s material collection included some 30 items, whereas it currently has over 300 items, all of which have been duly recorded, stabilised and stored in compliance with internationally accepted standards. 
The work done by Argentina at HSM 38 will be continued in the years to come, with a view to implementing additional measures for the site’s management as part of a comprehensive plan for the appropriate administration of activities on the site and for the protection and dissemination of the site’s values. Depending on the results to be achieved, these measures may include a review of the current Site Guidelines for Visitors for Snow Hill.   

