





The Uruguayan Antarctic Institute’s educational and awareness-raising activities in 2009-2010 





Introduction
On the basis of Resolution 2 (1996) of ATCM XX, Utrecht (1), which recommends the “promotion of understanding and appreciation of the values of Antarctica, in particular its scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values, including through: a) Educational opportunities, in particular for young persons, and b) The contribution of writers, artists and musicians”, the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute runs an educational and awareness-raising campaign each year. The following are highlights of the activities carried out as part of this campaign during the 2009-2010 intersessional period. 
“The Uruguayan Antarctic Institute in schools” project
In the UAI’s Rules of Organization and Functioning (Decree 555/994), paragraph 2. FUNCTIONS reads: 
“-2.3. To promote and disseminate knowledge of national Antarctic interests through collaboration with different levels of the National Educational Authorities. -2.4. To participate in the dissemination of national Antarctic activities through exhibitions, mass media programs, literary and artistic activities, publications, the distribution of information and other activities related to this mission.”
To fulfill this function, each year the UAI appoints a team of individuals to go to visit schools or educational institutions that request their presence.
These visits include the screening of an awareness-raising documentary film followed by an interactive lecture, during which the audience is invited to ask questions or make comments about activities in Antarctica.  
In addition to the official awareness-raising and educational activities described above, there are also other institutions with links to Antarctic activities that receive the support or patronage of the UAI, including the following: 
Exhibition at the LATU’s Espacio Ciencia: “A Trip to Antarctica” 
This exhibition recreates a trip to the Antarctic Continent, in which visitors are informed about the activities carried out by Uruguay in Antarctica, the location of the Artigas research station, how to get there, and the prevailing flora and fauna. 

Visitors board a plane for a simulated flight to King George Island: once there, they are taken to Artigas Base, where the outside temperature is about -10ºC. 

On their last stop, visitors are shown around a wannigan, a shelter where scientists live, and are told about the work that scientists do.

For more information: http://latu21.latu.org.uy/espacio_ciencia/es/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=94&Itemid=105 
“Science Clubs” project
Antarkos, a non-profit association, organises different cultural and awareness-raising activities each year.   
In 2009, it organised the “Antarctic Knowledge Contest”, with the prize being a visit to the Artigas research station. This activity was aimed at secondary school students, who had to search the internet to find the answers to the questions, which meant that the young contestants had to research, read and analyse the information available on the web. 
In 2010, Antarkos is organising Science Clubs on Antarctic topics in conjunction with the “Projects for the Popularization of Science, Technology and Innovation” Program2 of the National Agency for Research and Innovation (ANII), the aim of which is to present scientific and technological knowledge in a way that it can be understood by people with no background in the specific fields. 
The Antarkos website also publishes stories for children that take place in Antarctica. These stories have been taken up by the Ceibal portal, with the added feature of educational content prepared especially for access by children using their XO computers from the Ceibal Plan.     
These stories are adapted by a team of teachers specialised in the use of IT tools, who add the educational content. Children are invited to read the stories, analyse the topics or places described, and then answer questions or do educational exercises. 
The stories can be read here: www.antarkos.org.uy/marosa 
To access the Ceibal portal: www.ceibal.edu.uy 
For more information: www.antarkos.org.uy 
“Educa - Antarctica” project
This project is an initiative of the Uruguayan Antarctic Association. This is a publication with great potential that promotes research and dissemination of Antarctic activities. 
A digital version of the educational content is being developed at the same time, and access to the site will be possible using the above-mentioned XO computers from the Ceibal Plan. 
The content is being developed by education professionals using accessible lenguage to facilitate understanding on the part of children and young students, and it should be ready before the end of 2010. 
“Broadcast to Antarctica” radio program
Every Sunday from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m., the “Broadcast to Antarctica” radio program can be heard on the SODRE station CX26 Radio Uruguay. This program establishes contact with staff deployed on Artigas Base,  with a view to providing information on the week’s activities and cultural topics in general. 
The program is also broadcast from educational centres, where students and invited guests can chat with Base members.  
Eminent guests from the fields of science and politics participate in studios, as well as students of all disciplines who are involved in the field or have visited the Base. 
For more information: /www.radiouruguay.com.uy/

