





The Czech research activities on the James Ross Island  and Antarctic Peninsula in 2009/10





The Czech research activities on the James Ross Island  and Antarctic Peninsula in 2009/10

climatology and glaciology

The climatological and glaciological activities were carried out in area of the Czech Johann Gregor Mendel Station (hereafter Mendel Station) in January and February 2010. The research activities are part of the long-term program focused mainly on the following objectives: 1) to estimate an effect of atmospheric factors on the solar UV radiation, 2) to study atmospheric circulation and climate change along the Antarctic Peninsula, and 3) to evaluate impacts of regional atmospheric warming on the deglaciation processes. The present research is supported by the project 205/09/1876 “Recent deglaciation of the northern part of James Ross Island, Antarctica”, provided by the Czech Science Foundation. 

UV radiation monitoring
Since 2006, the measurement of solar UV radiation and the other meteorological observations have been performed at the Mendel Station. From the beginning, special attention is devoted to monitoring of UVA, UVB, erythemally effective UVB, global UV and photosynthetically active radiation. In austral summer 2010, maintenance and/or replacement of meteorological instruments, parts of the sensors and their ventilation units were done according to the WMO regulations, instrument service guide. Dismounted radiometers were sent to certificated laboratories of Kipp-Zonen BV and Solar and Ozone Observatory of the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute in Hradec Králove for annual calibration and service check. The quality control by several tests and statistical methods were performed on the preliminary data sets.
In 2009 the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute purchased a Brewer spectrophotometer Recomatic Mk III and installed the instrument in February 2010 at the Argentinean Marambio Base to monitor the total ozone content and UV light intensity. The data are currently transmitted on-line to the Solar and Ozone Observatory of the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute, accessible at  http://www.antarktida-ozon.cz/. 


Microclimate monitoring
At present, seven automatic weather stations (here after AWS) are operated in the ice-free area of Ulu Peninsula, James Ross Island. The AWS are situated at different altitudes ranging from the seashore level up to mesas, located hundreds meters above sea level. All sites are in open environments with little or no influence of local topographical factors and terrain inter-shielding. At all localities, there are measured basic meteorological parameters such as air temperature and relative humidity, near surface ground temperatures at depths of 5 to 30 cm. Extended measuring program at the Mendel station and Johnson mesa station consists of the measurement of incident and reflected global solar radiation, wind speed and direction at 10 m, atmospheric pressure, surface ground temperature, soil heat flux, and soil temperatures at depths of 5 to 150 and 5 to 50 cm respectively. Furthermore, the soil volumetric water content is measured at the depths of 5 and 20 cm in the vicinity of the Mendel station. 

Glaciological survey
In 2010 austral summer, glaciological investigation was performed at the Davis Dome and the Whisky Glacier in the territory of Ulu Peninsula. At the both glaciers, snow water equivalent and ablation/accumulation rates were studied using snow tubes, bamboo poles, and GPS instruments. Furthermore, ice thickness measurements of both glaciers were carried out using a ground penetrating radar (GPR) manufactured by MALÅ Geoscience. GPR data allow for determination of glacier volumes which will be used for mass balance investigations. Additionally, two meteorological stations were serviced and enhanced on the Davis Dome ice cap (530 m a.s.l.) and on the upper part of Whisky Glacier (356 m a.s.l.). The fully automatic regime and long-term operation on both stations was supported by additional solar panels and spare batteries.


Plant biology and ecology

Manipulated warming experiment
Plant physiology team was involved into long-term investigation of  moss and lichen responses to manipulated warming of terrestrial ecosystems using an open top chamber (OTC) approach. Majority of OTCs were installed in 2007 and, therefore, long-term data set exists on microclimate variation inside/outside OTCs. The OTCs are located in three ecosystems of the northern coast of the James Ross Island differing in structure of vegetation cover: (1) moss-dominated coastal vegetation oasis, (2) table mountain plateau with lichens of Usnea and Umbilicaria genera, and (3) glacier forefield with initial stage of biological colonization.
In austral summer 2010, data on annual courses of air humidity, air, surface, soil and vegetation temperature were downloaded from data loggers located inside OTCs and at outside control plots. The data allowed to quantify temperature differences caused by the OTC construction. Vegetation inside OTCs and at the outside control plots was photographed so that changes (2007-2010)  might be identified by image analysis. Soil samples were taken for further microbiological analyses in order to evaluate OTCs effects on soil microorganisms. 

Photosynthesis in mosses and lichens
In situ photosynthetic studies on Antarctic mosses (Bryum sp.) consisted of two parts. The first one was devoted to yearly variation of primary photosynthetic processes, the other one focused on photosynthetic performance of Bryum sp. exposed to artificial warming during austral summer season. Yearly courses (March 2009 – January 2010) of effective quantum yield of photosynthetic processes in photosystem II were measured by fluorometers permanently installed in the field. The data enabled evaluation of physiologically active time within the year in Bryum sp. as well as critical points of moss responses related to extremes in local climate. Another fluorometric system was used to evaluate differences in the moss photosynthetic performance within austral summer as dependent on OTC-induced warming.  

Diversity of  microfungi 
In austral summer 2010, similarly to previous seasons, samples of soil crusts, rocky and other substrates were collected in several habitats with different microclimate and water availability (narrow creeks, wet rock walls, bird colonies). The samples were transferred to laboratories in Brno to study the diversity of filamentous fungi. In the datasets from samples collected in 2007-2009,  we have yet identified 25 species within 17 genera. 

Lake ecosystems
Lakes on the James Ross Island represent a unique set of diverse ecosystems in the transitional zone between maritime and continental Antarctica. In austral summer 2009/2010, concentration of dissolved oxygen in Lake Lachman II (NE coast of the James Ross Island, 63.7998683 S, 57.8087317 W) was measured by an oxygen electrode repeatedly in 5 days step in order to evaluate seasonal and actual weather-related variation. Amount of dissolved oxygen was considered both biological and physical factor affecting life development in the lake. Yearly data (2009) on water temperature were downloaded from data logger.
 



EARTH  SCIENCES

The geoscientific research on reconstruction of the Antarctic landscape evolution carried out by researchers from the Czech Geological Survey and Charles University, Prague focuses on several topics:

    1. Geological mapping of James Ross Island as background for further geoscientific insight.
The geological map of the N part of JRI being produced in collaboration with geologist of  the Instituto Antártico Argentino will comprise petrological, geochronological a palaeontological dat.

    2. Palaeoclimatological and palaeoenvironmental reconstruction of Holocene glaciation and global changes at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary.
Geomorphological mapping at 1: 25.000 reflecting evolution of glaciation and periglacial processes on JRI, assessment of recent glacial processes, palaeontological documentation of environmental changes at K-T boundary.

    3. Palaeozoic and Mesozoic geological processes forming the Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula.
Reconstruction of the provenance and evolution of the N part of Antarctic Peninsula Batholith, petrology and geochemistry of plutonic rocks, magmatic and superposed fabrics and tectonic regime concurrent with emplacement of plutonic bodies.


ad 1.	Geological mapping of James Ross Island as background for further geoscientific insight.
The geological mapping over the last two seasons covered  the northern parts of James Ross Island accessible from the Mendel base by foot and boats. The areas included Monolith Lake surroundings, Sharp Valley, Hallozetes Valley, SE slopes of Lachman Crags – San José Pas – N slopes of  Cerro St. Martha a SW margin of deglaciated area of Whisky Bay – Stickle Ridge – Torrent Valley The Czech party worked mainly in the volcanics while the Argentinean colleagues documented the Cretaceous sediments. The Argentinean party arranged a joint field camp at Brandy Bay. Samples were collected for radiogenic dating, fission tracks analyses and for measuring anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility to determine directions of volcanic flows. Important stratigraphic boundaries were accurately located using GPS. The map will be in print by the end of 2010. 

ad 2.	Palaeoclimatological and palaeoenvironmental reconstruction of Holocene glaciation and global changes at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary.

Geomorphological mapping is based on remote sensing including aerial photographs, and field observations. A unified methodological approach was developed and applied to deglaciated areas of the N part of JRI to describe the glaciation evolution. Glacial and glaciofluvial diamictites within the JRI volcanic group were documented. On Davis Dome and Whisky Glaciers the rate of ablation and  changes in spatial extent were measured. Thermal sensors were installed in the active layer of permafrost to measure its depth at a profile from J.G.Mendel Base through Johnson Mesa to Abernethy Flats. Morphology of the Davis and Whisky Glaciers base was mapped by means of ground penetrating radar. At selected sites solifluction and regolith temperature were monitored. The field work was carried out in areas of Lachman Crags, Abernethy Flats, Phormidium Lake, Rockfall Valley and Bajo de la Angustia.

Palaeontologists documented 56 important sites in Cretaceous sediments on JRI in areas of Dinn Cliffs, between Santa Martha Cove and Torrent Valley (Santa Marta Formation, Herbert Sound Beds),  San Jose Pass and around Monolith Lake (Santa Marta Formation, Lachman Crags Beds), S and SW of Brandy Bay (Whisky Bay Formation, Lewis Hill and Brandy Bay Beds, Hidden Lake Formation), N and E of Abernethy Flats (Santa Marta Formation, Lachman Crags Beds), Crame Col (Santa Marta Formation, Lachman Crags Beds), and tract between Crame Col and Mendel Base (Hidden Lake Formation).  Outstanding are collections of the first fossil sponge found in Antarctica (Hidden Lake and Whisky Bay Formations), fossil leaves from the Hidden Lake and Santa Marta Formations, and collections of invertebrates and vertebrates from the Upper Cretaceous sediments.

ad 3.	Palaeozoic and Mesozoic geological processes forming the Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula.
The field work centered on three locations on the Trinity Peninsula: Crystal Hill, Camp Hill and Botany Bay, and Pitt Point in the setting of the Trinity Peninsula Group low-grade metamorphic, Jurassic sediments and intrusions. The study concerns tectonic evolution of the back-arc basin zone, Jurassic opening of the Weddell sea basin and interplay between magmatic and volcanic activity of the Antarctic Peninsula batholith, 






For the purpose of field research acivities on the northern part of Ulu Peninsula, James Ross Island, a topographic map of this area at a scale 1:25.000 was produced and published by the Czech Geological Survey and Geodis Brno, Ltd. in 2009. The map is bilingual, in English and Spanish, and geographic names were consulted with the British Antactric Survey and Instituto Antártico Argentino. In the cartographic processing aerial photographs obtained from British Antarctic Survey were used. A copy this map is provided to parties to the Antarctic Treaty at the current meeting by courtesy of the Czech Geological Survey



Acknowledgement

The Czech researchers highly appreciate the logistic support, assistance, collaboration, commitment,  and hospitality of colleagues from   of the Dirección Nacional del Antártico - Instituto Antártico Argentino and the Instituto Antártico Chileno, as well as of  the Fuerza Aérea Argentina personnel at the Base Marambio. Without the their contribution this research would not have been carried out.


