





Young Scientists Fully Aware of the Importance of Antarctic Environment 





Young Scientists Fully Aware of the Importance of Antarctic Environment

(1)
International Education and Outreach
ERASMUS scholarship students worried by glacier melting

The meeting was organized by Andreia Magdalin (Romanian Polar Research Institute) in Spain. 
The Erasmus Students from more than ten countries (Austria, Germany, France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Romania, Chile, Mexico, and China) and Andreia Magdalin (Romanian Polar Research Institute) have celebrated March Polar Week 2010 in Arctic and Antarctic Museum in Valencia, Spain.
All the Students could see the biological systems, remarkably adapted to cold, ice, UV radiations and long periods of darkness. Being informed of the various changes in Polar Regions, they could recognize the impacts of polar changes on our global systems, on our climate - the balance between the tropics and the poles, and on many parts of the world. So many students in different faculties from all around the world could understand that WHAT  HAPPENS AT  THE  POLES AFFECTS US ALL  !!!

Submitted by: 
Andreia Magdalin, Erasmus Architect Student, Romanian Polar Research Institute, APECS member;
Eng. Teodor Gh. Negoita , PhD., Senior Researcher I, Director of the Romanian Polar Research Institute, President of the Romanian Antarctic Foundation

(2)
Grant of APECS
Nature as a permanent source of  fundamental values in Polar Architecture
1Andreia Magdalin ; Teodor Gheorghe Negoita2, Mihaela Cotta3
1Facultatea de Arhitectura “G.M. Cantacuzino”, Universitatea Tehnica “Gheorghe Asachi” Iasi, Romania
2 Romanian Polar Research Institute, 1 Libertatii Blvd, Bucharest, Romania
3Romanian Antarctic Foundation, Bucharest,  Romania

The understanding of techniques and strategies that use Nature as inspiration for the creation of forms generate new artistic sensitivity in the architecture of polar zones. Under the current rapid changes of polar environment from the climate, social and economic points of view, implementation of bionic principles can generate new suggestions in architecture and engineering.

The aim is to synthesize knowledge derived from the biotechnological analysis of natural forms and vital systems. Research to date made possible a range of new options, previously unimaginable, that provide innovative contributions to polar architecture, weather applied to high-tech or traditional construction.

Implementation of bionic architecture principles in the location, design, and building of new structures in polar areas, such as research stations, cultural or residential buildings, irrespective to the area or country, can minimize the impact on the extremely sensitive environment and the influence on the wonderful polar landscape. For the new human settlements, the rehabilitation of the existing structures and construction of the new scientific objectives, the architect’s purpose will be the development of sustainable social and technological progress, through a balance between Technology and Nature.
	
Polar bionic architecture, correlated with the provisions of the international environmental protection legislation, can be a new target in the observance of the polar environment in its specificity. 





(3)
Romanian Projects “Polar Research and Protection – a Priority”,
and “Ways of Greenland”
Teodor Gh. Negoita1, M. Cotta1, A. Magdalin2, P.A. Iordache1
1Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania; 2Architecture Faculty Iasi, Romania; negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

In the conferences organized by RPRI and the Romanian Academy in 2009, pupils described, also by their drawings, their understanding of the effects of global warming and possible remedies.
 These dissemination and outreach activities produced volumes of abstracts, conferences at the Romanian Academy, Romanian Research and Education Agency, universities in Romania and abroad, as well as events at libraries and schools in Romania, radio and TV broadcasts on IPY, Polar Week and Polar Day, papers, information on websites, video clips on You Tube., and a book by Dr. Teodor Gh. Negoita, “The Romanian Embassy in Antarctica – Law-Racovita Station”, published in 2007, which shown Romania close cooperation with Australia and the Russian and Chinese scientists in Antarctica, all reported to IPY and SCAR.
The “Ways of Greenland” project aimed at raising Romanian public awareness about the importance of the Arctic areas, and the need for their environmental and cultural protection. RPRI organized in 2009 a series of exhibitions in 10 Romanian cities, of the photographs taken within Romanian Greenland Expedition 2008 by Eng. Paul-Andrei Iordache. 

(4)
Polar Zones and the Danube Delta – Educational Activities for Schoolchildren
and Youth in the Spirit of IPY
Teodor Gheorghe Negoita
1Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania
negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

A circle of studies “The Danube Delta and Law-Racovita Romanian Antarctic Station” was set up, under the coordination of Teodor Gheorghe Negoita, a Romanian polar scientist and Lieder of the Romanian Base in Antarctica, at the C.A. Rosetti School and its seven satellite schools in more isolated areas of the Danube Delta Natural Reserve, a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve of 2.590 sq. km.

The aim of this circle as an educational tool is to improve the efficiency of students preparing to use their knowledge to protect the nature through ideas and facts in the spirit of IPY. We acted, along with teachers, pupils, students and authorities, to protect the Danube Delta, in correlation with our scientific activities and environmental protection in Antarctica, the European and polar regions legislation, developing relationships with similar groups in neighbouring countries. Activities included unique flora and fauna protection; campaigns organized by youth to discourage excessive fishing; removal by the participants of the huge piles of PET bottles brought by the Danube River from Europe, as actions meant to develop the responsibility for areas unique in the World, Antarctica included, where significant changes could occur as anthropic impacts.  
Information on the IPY website and videoclips posted on YouTube under the title “Romania Marks October Polar Week” show some activities, reported to IPY/SCAR.


