





The Meeting Report of the 10th AFoPS





The Meeting Report of the 10th AFoPS

Submitted by China
The 10th Asian Forum of Polar Science (AFoPS) was held from July 9 to 10, 2009 in Shanghai,China. AFoPS is an Asian polar summit meeting participated by the national Programme leaders and scientists in the area of Arctic and Antarctic research, and it aims to promote the communication and cooperation among the Asian countries for polar research.
The 10th AFoPS was hosted by Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC), and Dr. Yang Huigen from PRIC was the rotating president of the year. There were altogether 34 representatives from five formal member countries (China, Japan, Korea, Malaysia and India) and one observation country (Vietnam) attending the meeting.
There were four sections in the meeting, including National Presentations on Polar Research Activities and Plans, IPY Products and Outcomes, Collaborations among AFoPS Countries and Other Topics. Dr. Volker Rachold, the executive secretary of International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), introduced IASC and its activities by phone.
In addition to discussing the communication and cooperation among Asian countries, there were the following agreements achieved.
    • The Annual Plan of AFoPS 
It is decided that the Business Meeting of AFoPS representatives will be held every spring, and AFoPS will be an annual meeting. The 11th AFoPS will be held in June, 2010 in Shanghai, China.
    • The WG of AFoPS
It is required that each scientific group convener should strengthen the collaboration and cooperation among the group members, encourage them to hold more symposiums so as to develop the academic exchanges among these countries effectively.
    •  The Young Scientists
 It is encouraged that the AFoPS countries invite the young scientists from the non-polar Asian countries to carry out the field work in their research cooperation agencies and the stations.
    • The Proposal Discussion
After discussion, the proposal of setting the Special Interest Group (SIG) was approved. The way of raising fund and defining the Young Scientist were determined. It is agreed that the researchers who have got the doctorial degree less than five years or who are under the age of thirty-five years old can be defined as the Young Scientists. The proposal of establishing the AFoPS journal was also discussed.

