





The Bulgarian Antarctica Project about Multimedia Installation





The Bulgarian Antarctica Project about Multimedia Installation
Project Description
The purpose of the project will be to collect visual and conceptual material for an art installation that conveys an understanding of Antarctica, the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski there, and the research of the scientists there. The project will develop as a parallel between art and science and will focus on the work of the Bulgarian scientists as a group and as individuals surrounded by the landscape and climate of Antarctica. The final installation will be exhibited in 2010-11 at Sofia University and the gallery at the National Academy of Fine Arts in Bulgaria, as well as in the university galleries at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio in the United States. 

“The Bulgarian Antarctica”
Is this notion something individual or something universal? Isn’t Antarctica already revealed, described and shown in numerous books, films, photographs, works of art, etc? A variety of media has saturated the public space with a wide range of publications about Antarctica, from brief reportages to in-depth scientific publications. The Internet is teeming with thousands of sites presenting texts and live-camera views of multiple locations on the continent. Yet one niche remains neglected. Almost everything that can be seen, heard, or read about Antarctica focuses on “the big Antarctica”—the epic stories of the major polar discoveries or the operations of the large, well-funded and developed Antarctic bases of the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, Argentina, Chile, China, Brazil, Australia etc. Information about “the small Antarctica,” the small base like the Bulgarian one, funded by wind and fed by sheer enthusiasm, is largely absent. 
Our project will convey a sense of the life and the ambitions of the people who work in a small base and will draw attention to the significance of their efforts. We will focus on the questions of who these people are, what their motivation is, why they are interested in the explorations of this distant and hostile continent, and why they’re willing to live and work in such a severe setting. Perhaps each of these people has an individual, private motive. Do the technician maintaining the power generators and the geologist surveying tens of square kilometers of iced land have something in common? And can they share interests with the tourist who has spent thousands of dollars to sail among the icebergs of the Southern Ocean? What does the polar explorer have in common with the sailor who has circled the world in a small boat, the alpinist who has climbed on a high peak, or the traveler who has crossed Sahara? It is clear that not everyone would pay the price—in discomfort, risk, solitude, or finances—to do these things. Who, then, are these people? What is their shared profile? Can the profile of the Bulgarian polar explorer take on a collective image? 
We will try to find the answer to these questions for ourselves. Our presence at the base as members of the crew will allow us to understand the cycle of life there and the nature of both the exploratory and the scientific processes, as well as the daily ones.
The installation
The final form of the project will be an installation that will combine sculpture, photography, and video projections with a collection of scientific data, logistical devices, and ordinary objects from the base. For example, sculpture and video projections of images and light, in combination with recorded sounds, will describe and reenact the landscape and the climate. Against this background, geological samples (fossils, soil, etc) will be shown with portraits of the people and their individual stories. 
 “The Bulgarian Antarctic” represents the need for an understanding of our global problems and the role played by the smaller components in the large mechanism of the world’s survival. We hope that the completion of this project will draw a wide range of responses from social and cultural groups in Bulgaria as well as abroad. We hope that the project will leave a mark in a time of universal concerns with the ecology of the planet, global climate change, and the preservation of the poles. In addition, we hope that it will lay the foundation for a future museum collection presenting the Bulgarian polar explorations and will initiate a dialogue between the scientific and the cultural institutions in Bulgaria. 




The Bulgarian Antarctic Base “St. Kliment Ohridski” at Livingston Island (view from South Bay)


The Bulgarian Antarctic Base “St. Kliment Ohridski”, where Art Project will be installed 

