





Three strategies to talk about Antarctica and science. When nobody knows what you are talking about






Three strategies to talk about Antarctica and science. When nobody knows what you are talking about

The science and technology issues have little presence in the Chilean mass media. It's a double challenge the disclosure of those issues associated with Antarctica, including the International Polar Year. Besides, the Chilean public is unaccustomed to consume scientific and technological news.
Therefore, INACH has developed three strategies: in 2004 INACH created the ANTARCTIC SCHOOL FAIR AND ANTARCTIC SCHOOL EXPEDITION, scientific events that promote the dissemination and appreciation of Antarctic science among Chilean teenagers. The first stage involves a research competition. Students must submit a research proposal in one of two categories (experimental or bibliographic). These are assessed according to established criteria. Selected students earn the right to participate in the Antarctic School Fair (Feria Antártica Escolar, FAE). The second stage is the Antarctic School Fair, where selected students present their work at the Fair that is held in Punta Arenas. The two teams of students rated highest in each of their categories win the right to participate in the Antarctic School Expedition (Expedición Antártica Escolar). In addition, recognition awards are presented for third and fourth place in each category. The third stage is the Antarctic School Expedition itself. This consists of the travel supported by the Chilean Air Force (co-sponsor of the events) of the four winning teams from the Fair -including students and teacher guides- to Antarctica, to participate in a program specially prepared for them, where young scientists show the students why and how develop science in that continent. These events have involved more than 2,500 students, 300 teachers, 60 scientists and 7 universities.
The second strategy is a joint effort since 2008 with the National Association of Early Childhood Education Centers (Junta Nacional de Jardines Infantiles, JUNJI) in order to INTEGRATE ANTARCTICA TO PRESCHOOL EDUCATION. This innovative strategy has considered science workshops for preschool teachers and several artistic competitions (poems, paintings, sculptures) on Antarctic themes, reaching 16,000 children nationwide. One of the biggest legacies of this work has been the publication in 2010 of the first book for children in Chile with Antarctic Tales, “Antarctic Fantasy. Tales for children”, written by outstanding authors. This book has been delivered in all the Kindergartens nationwide.
From the literary point of view, this book takes up the work of national historical writers such as Eugenio Orrego, Salvador Reyes, Miguel Serrano, Francisco Coloane and Oscar Pinochet de la Barra, among others. Thus, it is also expected payoff the debt of Spanish speaking literature, since the vast majority of books on Antarctica are written in English. Therefore, the editorial effort is even more valuable.
Finally, we are creating a NEW INACH WEBSITE (www.inach.gob.cl) for promoting and stimulating the interest of people in the Chilean science and Antarctica, and its capacity for dialogue, share and collaboration in building new knowledge. The thematic pillars are science and education. In the case of Science, we put special emphasis on creating spaces for the dissemination of current science and expert opinion of members of the Chilean Antarctic community. It seeks to empower researchers and top-level information sources, and to contribute to the discussion of the major national issues from the perspective of science. It also will open a new space entirely dedicated to dialogue between citizens and science. The aim is to put scientists in a context of direct and fluid communication with citizens - children and adults-through audio-visual resources about current issues or who can impact heavily on people's lives. On the other hand, has enabled an educational zone with several educational resources, a "virtual classroom", etc. We want to increase significantly the participation of all segments in the activities carried out by the institution.


