





Progress on Designation of Broad-scale Management System in the Vernadsky Station Area





Progress on Designation of Broad-scale Management System in the Vernadsky Station Area

Informational Paper submitted by Ukraine 

Agenda item – CEP 7 (f)

At the VIII CEP, Stockholm, 2005, Ukraine introduced informational paper containing draft proposal for discussion concerning potential ASMA for Petermann Island, Wilhelm Archipelago (ATCM ХХVIII IP-098). Several National Antarctic programs and non-governmental organisations have strong scientific interests on this Island which designated as extremely important site for long-term environmental monitoring. At present a multiple-use is typical not only for Petermann Island but also for surrounding islands, where the scientific activity and subsidiary logistic support are widened for the last years and the continuing growth of tourist visits is also registered. This stipulates the necessity of elaboration of a broad-scale and comprehensive management system with regards not only to separate islands but to the whole area being under the influence of Vernadsky station (ATCM ХХХII IP-062).
On the preliminary stage it was identified that the basic measures for environmental protection and minimise cumulative impacts should be on-site visitor management (in view of the observed spatial trends in ship-borne tourism) as well as coordinated research activities at representative sites which play a key role in regional ecosystem processes. The most preferable for the presented volume of information is the step-by-step approach approved by German colleagues in the Fildes Peninsula, King George Island. In this connection, the German Academic Exchange Service supported the research visit at the Institute of Ecology, University of Jena, for one of the research officer from the Ukrainian Antarctic Scientific Centre in July, 2009. In this Institute was successfully carried out the research project by scientists of the Polar and Bird Ecology Group under the supervision of Dr. Hans-Ulrich Peter. The main findings of this project commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency is a draft of management plan for proposed ASMA ‘Fildes Peninsula Region’. During this research visit it was investigated the methodology used by German colleagues concern comprehensive study of the environmental situation in specific Antarctic areas, risk analysis procedures as well as procedures on establishment of a new ASMA, revision and evaluation of existing areas with specially regime of management, establishment of zoning system and code of conduct for scientific research and for visitors.
As a first result under the step-by-step approach it might by the Site-Guidelines for HSM No 62 ‘Base F’, approved by means of the Resolution 4 (2009).
At present Ukraine invites all interesting Parties to take part in further discussion on possible management system for this multiple-use area.

