





Topic Summary: Footprint





Topic Summary: Footprint 
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
To facilitate the CEP’s work to ‘develop an agreed understanding of the term footprint’, Australia reviewed CEP meeting reports and meeting papers and compiled references to the term ‘footprint’ (see Appendix A). This paper also highlights several points from earlier discussions that, in Australia’s view, are worth recalling.
Background
The CEP five-year work plan includes a priority 2 task to ‘develop an agreed understanding of the terms “footprint” and “wilderness”’. At CEP XII (2009) New Zealand presented WP 31 Updated analysis of representation of Annex V categories and Environmental Domains in the system of Antarctic Specially Protected and Managed Areas. New Zealand indicated that it would present further work on human footprint and wilderness at CEP XIII, and noted that it would be useful to have a topic summary for that meeting. 
Past CEP discussions of footprint
Australia reviewed CEP meeting reports and meeting papers available from the document archive on the Secretariat website. Extracts from meeting papers referring to the term ‘footprint’ (and links to the papers) are provided at Appendix A. References to ‘footprint’ date back to the first CEP meeting in 1998, and the topic has received more detailed consideration as part of the Committee’s relatively recent strategic planning.
During discussion at CEP VIII (2005) the Committee developed an Aide Memoire which listed ‘Human footprint in Antarctica’ as a major environmental theme (Final Report, Annex 6). The term footprint was raised again at the CEP Futures Workshop held immediately prior to CEP IX (2006), which discussed ‘increase in the human footprint in Antarctica’ as an environmental pressure, and identified ‘overall footprint of Antarctic activities’ as a key environmental issue arising from human activities in the Antarctic.
Over the following two years the Committee further developed the ideas raised at the workshop into a prioritised five-year work plan. The issue of footprint was carried into the five-year work plan adopted at CEP XI (2008) as part of the priority 2 action ‘Develop an agreed understanding of the terms “footprint” and “wilderness”’.
CEP XIII is the first CEP meeting with an agenda item dedicated to discussion of human footprint.
Observations
In Australia’s view, the following points raised in earlier meeting papers are worth recalling in the CEP’s continuing work to develop an agreed understanding of the term ‘footprint’:
    1) The term footprint appears in many papers, often within quotation marks. Consistent with the CEP’s recognition of the need to develop an agreed understanding of the term, only a few of these papers include any definition or discussion (CEPI/IP34; CEPVI/WP6; CEPVII/WP25; CEPVIII/WP26; CEPX/IP111; CEPXIP125; CEPXI/IP118; CEPXI/IP122).
    2) Several categories of footprint have been identified, including ‘carbon footprint’, ‘human footprint’, ‘physical footprint’, ‘environmental footprint’, ‘ecological footprint’, ‘visual footprint’. Most references appear to consider footprint as a measure of the spatial extent of physical disturbance.
    3) Footprint is referred to in several draft comprehensive environmental evaluations (CEPVI/WP2; CEPVII/WP25; CEP VIII/IP30; CEPIX/WP25/IP22; CEPX/WP4; CEPXI/IP4).
    4) Most references relate to national program activities. The footprint of tourism activities is also discussed in several papers (CEPX/IP83; CEPX/IP121; CEPX/IP134; CEPXI/IP19; CEPXI/IP41; CEPXI/IP86; CEPXII/WP12).
    5) Several papers discuss the desirability of measuring and monitoring footprint, which is identified as a possible environmental indicator for operational monitoring (CEPI/IP34; CEPVIII/WP26; CEPIX/IP114; CEPX/IP111) and state of the environment monitoring (CEPV/IP54; CEPVIII/WP10).
    6) The ‘Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica’ developed by COMNAP (CEPVIII/WP26) identify the suitable parameter for measuring footprint as ‘Area subject to human activity, e.g. spatial coverage of buildings and associated including roads, pipes etc; number and location of field expeditions’.
    7) Some papers discuss ways to reduce or minimise footprint, including:
    8) establishing principles for station / camp design (CEPVII/IP41);
    9) use of facilities zones (CEPVI/WP27; CEPVIII/IP28);
    10) scientific cooperation, sharing resources and pursuing joint operations (CEPVIII/WP32); and
    11) delivering education and training on reducing footprint (CEPIX/IP78).


Appendix A. References to the term ‘footprint’ in past CEP papers
Meeting / Paper
Reference to the term ‘footprint’
CEP I (1998)

IP 034 Developing an Environmental Monitoring Program – a Work in Progress (United States)
States that the planned monitoring program will involve defining and documenting ‘the boundary/extent of the “footprint” of anthropogenic impacts resulting from station operations (e.g. air emissions from the power plant)’ and developing a ‘monitoring program that will detect changes in the “footprint” directly related to station operations.’ 
Notes that ‘Monitoring the footprint of station operations will provide background information for future planning as well as data needed for status and trend analysis. It should also be noted that the definition of “footprint” will be very much related to the media under consideration. For example, air borne particulates might be the indicator of choice for detecting the extent of a station footprint on land while some other constituent might be the indicator of choice for a marine area adjacent to a coastal station. Use of such an indicator might yield a different “footprint” than use of carbon soot from power plant operations. The footprint, then, would be related to what indicator is chosen and how that indicator is transported.’
Outlines the hypotheses driving the monitoring program, including ‘[t]he areal extent the impact from the presence of a station as an operational facility is bounded and the boundary limits can be determined’ and ‘[c]hanges in operations and activities will be reflected in changes in the selected indicators.’ Indicates that the first phase of the program will ‘identify and evaluate possible models for defining the probable extent of the station’s “footprint”’ and that ‘the second phase will include the development and implementation of a statistically valid study plan, including a pilot sampling design, to verify the predicted footprint area’.
CEP III (2000)

IP 020 1999/2000 Southern Ocean Expedition (ASOC)
The initial environmental evaluation for the expedition indicates that the option of using a different type of vessel has been considered, including replacing the vessel with one with a lower environmental ‘footprint’, such as a sailboat.
CEP V (2002)

IP 032 A New Waste Water Treatment System for New Zealand’s Scott Base - Rationale, Selection Process and Outcome (New Zealand)
Notes that waste treatment system was, among other things, chosen for its compact format and minimal “footprint”.
IP 038 Antarctic Protected Area System: Proposed Antarctic Specially Managed Area in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Ross Sea Region (United States, New Zealand)
States that an objective of the proposed ASMA is to ‘Minimize the footprint of all facilities established in the Area, including the proliferation of field camps.’
IP 054 Antarctic State of the Environment Reporting (Australia)
Notes that state of the environment indicators adopted by the Australian Antarctic Division include ‘Station footprint for Australian Antarctic stations’ and ‘Annual variations in the visibility footprint of structures’
CEP VI (2003)

WP 02 Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of the ANDRILL Programme (New Zealand)
The draft CEE states that ‘The footprint of the core support camp will be 24.5 m x 16.5 m (405 m2). The footprint of the tents used for the mess and recreation will be approximately 70m2. The footprint of the accommodation units will be 150 m2. Fuel storage will be approximately 45 m2. The final area of the camp will be much larger than the footprints of the buildings as there will be vehicles, paths, and some equipment stored around the area.’
WP 06 Final Report from the Intersessional Contact Group on Cumulative Environmental Impacts (United States)
The report identifies, as a priority for future studies, ‘Determining the “footprint” of human impact for multiple activities and operators’ (with specific activities involving ‘Local, regional or continent-wide monitoring and reporting’ and ‘Development of databases’).
Appendix 1 Annotated Summary Past And Continuing Studies Examining Cumulative Environmental Impacts provides a summary of a project ‘Monitoring and remediation of human impact at the former site of Greenpeace’s World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica’, which notes that several people were involved in ‘Footprint study design’ and that ‘The initial footprint study covered several aspects of human impact.  ‘
WP 27 Antarctic Protected Area System: A Draft Antarctic Specially Managed Area Plan for the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land (United States, New Zealand)
The draft management plan states:
An aim/objective is to ‘Minimize the footprint of all facilities and scientific experiments established in the Area, including the proliferation of field camps.’
‘The establishment of new Facilities Zones should be considered and coordinated by the Management Group, and should be designed to minimize the footprint of facilities and associated materials.’
‘The footprint of installations should be kept to the minimum practicable.’
‘The footprint of campsites should be kept to the minimum practicable.’
CEP VII (2004)

WP 01 Review of draft McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan: Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (New Zealand)
The draft management plan includes several references to footprint, as per ATCMVI/WP27 above.
WP 025 DRAFT Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the concept of upgrading the Norwegian summer station Troll in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, to permanent station (Norway)
States that the monitoring program will include establishing the ‘geographic extent of impact, and assess any changes to this “footprint”’.
IP 041 Practicing Environmental Stewardship in Antarctica (United States)
States that ‘long-range site planning, zoning, and consolidation have reduced the physical footprint that is at risk of contamination’ and that, for field camps, ‘camp design principles suggest minimizing the size, number of structures, and footprint of the camp, while designing space for proper storage and separation of waste.’
IP 078 SCAR Report on Marine Acoustic Technology and the Antarctic Environment (SCAR)
Notes the SCAR Action Group’s comment that ‘reduction of environmental footprints is good practice wherever possible but that acoustic technology provides fundamental and indispensable tools for understanding the marine environment.’
CEP VIII (2005)

WP 010 State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting System: Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (Australia, New Zealand)
In the context of station of the environment reporting, identifies ‘station footprint’ as a possible pressure indicator for the issue ‘habitat loss / alienation’.
WP 022 Proposal for Classifying Historical Site No. 46 Port Martin (Adelie Coast) (66°49’ S / 141°23’ E) as a Specially Protected Area (France)
The boundaries of the proposed Area are defined in the draft management plan by ‘the external footprints of the constructions’.
WP 26 Working Paper on 
”Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica” (COMNAP)
The attached ‘Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica’ identifies ‘footprint’ as a potential indicator for use in monitoring programmes in Antarctica, with the following description of the associated parameter: ‘Area subject to human activity, e.g. spatial coverage of buildings and associated impact including roads, pipes etc; number and location of field expeditions’.
WP 032 Report of Joint Inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol (Australia, Peru, United Kingdom)
Notes that promoting scientific co-operation among stations, sharing resources and pursuing joint operations ‘would produce a more cost-effective delivery of science and a significantly smaller human footprint’.
IP 028 Antarctic Protected Area System: McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA Management Group (Italy, New Zealand, United States)
Notes that ‘Facilities Zones have so far proven to be a very positive means of managing the footprint of activities’.
IP 030 Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) Rebuild and Operation of the Wintering Station Neumayer III and Retrogradation of the Present Neumayer Station II (Germany)
States that ‘The environmental footprints of the proposed activities are minor, and the initial environmental reference state will be regained only a few years after when Neumayer III has been decommissioned.’
CEP IX (2006)

WP 25 / IP 022 Construction and operation of the new Belgian Research Station in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) (Belgium)
States that the project will use a ‘low environmental footprint design based on sustainable technology and high energy efficiency.’
Attached draft CEE document states that: 
‘the station is designed to have a low environmental footprint with low energy consumption and minimal waste output’
‘Baseline data was collected during the Belare 2004 and 2005 site survey expeditions, in order to obtain reliable information about the initial clean state of the environment and to establish the “footprint” of the station.’
Expansion of 'footprint’ is identified as a predicted impact of site visits for science.
WP 42 Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges A summary report of the CEP Workshop, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9–10 June 2006 (United Kingdom, Australia, France)
Reports on the workshop finding that ‘Overall footprint of Antarctic activities’ is a key environmental issue arising from human activities in the Antarctic.
IP 078 McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 2) Management Group Report (Italy, New Zealand, United States)
Notes that training modules under development include information on minimizing footprint.
IP 094 Station Sharing in Antarctica (ASOC)
Notes that the CEP has started discussing limiting the human footprint in Antarctica, and expresses ASOC’s view that such discussions are ‘crucial to the future of the Antarctic environment, are long overdue and should be encouraged and accelerated.’
IP 113 Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges Report of the CEP Workshop, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9–10 June 2006 (United Kingdom, Australia, France)
Identifies ‘Increase in the human footprint in Antarctica’ as an environmental pressure.
IP 114 COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIX (COMNAP)
Attachment on ‘Antarctic Operational Indicators’ identifies ‘footprint’ as possible operational indicators for airfields, year-round stations, seasonal stations, heritage/historic sites, emergency depots, powerhouses, wharves/unloading facilities, wind power sites, solar photovoltaics sites, solar hot water/heating sites and fossil fuel depots.
CEP X (2007)

WP 03 Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole (United States)
Draft management plan includes a statement regarding the footprint of buildings remaining on site when the current phase of construction is completed at the South Pole Station.
WP 04 Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica (India)
Notes that published baseline data on Larsemann Hills as well as that generated in the course of fieldwork at the site of the proposed new Indian station were used to establish the ‘footprint’ of the station.
The draft CEE itself contained several references to footprint, including:
Noting that the proposed station was designed and located to ‘reduce the footprint on the area’ and that the ‘detailed footprint may vary depending upon the implementation of the final design’.
Stating that ‘specific project activities including energy, water supply, waste management, scientific activities and associates logistics etc. have been clearly defined to demarcate station footprints.’
Discussing expected physical disturbance impacts and visually depicting the likely footprint of the activity in figures. 
Identifying human footprint as one of the expected major impacts.
WP 05 Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X: Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin (United States)
The draft management plan includes the following statements:
‘Minimize the footprint of all facilities and scientific experiments established in the Area, including the proliferation of field camps and boat landing sites.’ (aim / objective)
‘The footprint of installations should be kept to the minimum practical.’
‘The footprint of campsites should be kept to the minimum practical.’
WP 15 A Five-Year Work plan for the CEP: Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (New Zealand)
Reports on intersessional contact group discussion of a CEP work plan, and notes that responses indicated that tasks relating to human footprint / wilderness management and area protection could be grouped together.
The attached draft work plan includes as a suggested action ‘Develop an agreed understanding of the terms “footprint” and “wilderness”’.
IP 010 Unites States Report of Inspections (United States)
The attached inspection report indicates that that the Inspection Team was shown the building site of proposed new buildings at an existing station and confirmed that new construction will all take place within the ‘footprint’ of the existing station.
IP 083 A Commentary on Policy Issues Arising from On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula (ASOC)
States that ‘tourism landings do not entail permanent infrastructure or transfers of supplies, fuel or waste, but the number of people is vastly greater than for research stations, and the associated logistic activity of landing craft and ships is usually greater than for other Antarctic activities. Consequently tourism activities may have their own characteristic footprint. Whether this footprint is comparable to, or significantly greater than, that of other activities, it is created by tourism.’
IP 084 Strengthening the CEE Process (ASOC)
States that the consequences of the proposal for human footprint over a wider area than just the focal site are generally notable by their absence in reviews of comprehensive environmental evaluations.
IP 086 rev.1 The Human Footprint of the IPY 2007-2008 in Antarctica (ASOC)
Attached paper states that ‘Symptomatic of the current trend of the expansion of the human footprint in Antarctica, the IPY demonstrates the clear need for long-term, large-scale, strategic-level planning of Antarctic activities’ and that ‘[a] number of large-scale research activities have also been planned in areas which have been hitherto difficult to access, thereby, expanding the human footprint in Antarctica.’
IP 111 A Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1) (Brazil)
Footprint is identified as an operational indicator for assessing impact on aesthetic values – described as ‘spatial coverage of buildings and associated impact including roads, pipes etc.: number and location of field expeditions’
IP 121 IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism 2006-2007 Antarctic Season (IAATO)
Notes that National Programs ‘are encouraged to report their passenger numbers and activities if they are landing at typical tourist sites so IAATO can attempt to account for the “footprint” and address cumulative impact issues.’
IP 125 SCAR Lecture – Climate Change and the Antarctic: What Next? (SCAR)
Cites a World Wildlife Fund (WWF) ‘Living Planet’ report, which describes Human Ecological Footprint as ‘the area of biologically productive land and water needed to provide the ecological resources and services used by humanity’.
Also discusses approaches to reducing CO2 emissions, and indicates that a benefit of addressing population is that an absent human has no footprint.
IP 126 Prevention and Management of Harmful Non-Native Species in the Antarctic and the Sub Antarctic (IUCN)
Notes that the Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of IUCN (the World Conservation Union) is developing a ‘footprint’ analysis of invasive species impacts on Red listed species.
IP 128 Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
Expresses ASOC’s view that ‘the seemingly ever-increasing human footprint from the unplanned and uncoordinated growth of human activities in the Antarctic needs strategic analysis and action at regional and local levels.’
IP 134 Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 2006-2007 (IAATO)
Reporting on donations received for conservation research, notes that passengers involved in one operation participated in a scheme to offset their full carbon footprint.
CEP XI (2008)

WP 29 rev.1 A Five-Year Work plan for the CEP: Report on Intersessional Review (New Zealand)
The attached draft work plan includes as a suggested action ‘Develop an agreed understanding of the terms “footprint” and “wilderness”’.
WP 39 Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X: Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin (United States)
The draft management plan includes several references to footprint, as per ATCM XXX/WP05 above.

IP 004 The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica (China)
The draft CEE indicated that the proposed station, by adopting the principles of environmental protection and energy saving in its design and with the development of Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the Waste management Plan (WMP), will guarantee lower ecological footprints, lower energy consumption and lower waste production and thus will not cause distinct indirect impacts on the environments.’
IP 006 rev.1 Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2008 (United States) 
States that the advantages of the approach taken by the Antarctic Site Inventory ‘include wide spatial coverage of the western Antarctic Peninsula, and a negligible “footprint” on the landscape.’
IP 019 Chairman’s Report from the Miami Meeting (March 17-19, 2008) on Antarctic Tourism (IAATO) 
Notes that a presentation to the workshop discussed ‘the escalating carbon footprint of tourism travel’.
IP 041 A decade of Antarctic tourism: Status, change, and actions needed (ASOC)
States that spreading footprint is one of the key components of tourism development and its change over the past decade, and that increased pressure on the Antarctic environment through expanded activity ‘footprint’ is a problem associated with land-based tourism include. Also specifically discusses the activity footprint of a particular vessel, described in terms of human residence time. 
IP 059 International Polar Year 2007-2008 Planning Document: 2008 and Beyond (SCAR)
States that ‘A rigorous and encompassing environmental impact assessment of the ensemble of IPY research would document the activities of all funded IPY projects ‘as delivered’, the equipment used, the duration and location of all deployments and operations, the transport (in and out) of people, equipment and supplies, and so on, to quantify the physical infrastructure (buildings, runways), emissions and disposals into air and water, and the energy expenditures that contribute to the cumulative environmental footprint of polar research. Although an assessment at this point would not change IPY’s environmental footprint, a thorough and honest assessment of the environmental impacts of polar research during IPY could establish an important baseline for long-term observations in polar regions and offer positive examples for other large-scale international research efforts.’
IP 086 Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 2007-2008 Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty (IAATO)
Reports that ‘IAATO encourages its Members to start to consider their carbon footprint with a view to measuring carbon footprint and to look for ways to reduce our emissions.’
IP 089 Report Submitted to the XXXI ATCM by IUCN. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
Includes a proposal that ‘Parties act now to adopt an extremely precautionary approach to the management of human activities, to reduce their own carbon footprints with respect of their Antarctic activities.’
IP 118 Brazilian contribution to the Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1) (Brazil)
Identifies footprint as an operational indicator, as per ATCM XXX/IP111 above.

IP 120 Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
States that ‘the steadily increasing human footprint from the uncoordinated growth of human activities needs strategic analysis and action at regional and local levels.’
IP 122 Monitoring of Human Impacts at McMurdo Station, Antarctica (United States)
States that the management objectives for the United States Antarctic Program include to ‘[e]stablish the aerial extent of disturbance zones associated with McMurdo Station (i.e. a station “footprint”) and determine whether the aerial extent and intensity of the impacted area is increasing, decreasing, or remaining the same with time.’ Notes the preliminary monitoring indicates that ‘the footprint of physical disturbance has been stable for several decades’ and that a preliminary recommendation that ‘[t]he stability of the physical disturbance footprint should be reassessed on a 5-year cycle or when explicit management questions need to be addressed.’
CEP XII (2009)

WP 12 Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Draft Project Scope (Australia, France, New Zealand)
The attached draft project scope proposes that the project report ‘will be supported by a series of maps, charts and figures in order to provide a clear visual representation of changes in the footprint of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.’


