





Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights in 2009-2010






Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights in 2009-2010
1.	Introduction
The Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) has been organized by headquarters established in 1955 in the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture (now reorganized to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, or MEXT). The headquarters is composed of many governmental departments and agencies of various ministries, such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defence; the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism; the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries; etc. Scientific research and observation programs for JARE are considered and decided at the general meeting of the headquarters as a midterm research plan. 
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from scientific programs carried out by overwintering and summer members of the 50th and 51st JAREs near Syowa Station (69°00' S, 39°35' E) and other research fields during the 2009–2010 season.
2.	Selected highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering members of JARE at and around Syowa Station. Neither a special research project nor the campaign observation were planned during the overwintering period because of the absence of the Japanese icebreaker in the previous season, which constrained the amount of cargo transported to Syowa Station. Seasonal observations are also carried out by summer teams aboard the Shirase for oceanographic observations and in various field areas, including the inland Dome Fuji Station (77°19' S, 39°42' E) area mainly for glaciological research and the Sør Rondane Mountains for geological research. 
JARE provided opportunities for international scientists to participate in various research activities as well. An inland traverse team accommodated a Korean glaciologist to work together in the Dome Fuji Station area. A Thai marine biologist joined field observations on coastal and terrestrial ecosystems. Geologists from Belgium and South Africa joined geological survey in the Sør Rondane Mountains, as will be described later.
2.1	Long-term monitoring at Syowa Station
Meteorological observations (surface and upper atmosphere) have been carried out by the Japan Meteorological Agency at Syowa Station, and some other monitoring observations, including upper atmospheric physics, atmospheric sciences, geophysics, and biology have also been carried out by governmental agencies and the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tokyo, by overwintering personnel. 
2.1.1	2009’s lowest level of aurora activity since 1966
The disturbances in geomagnetism recorded at Syowa Station were at their lowest level, with many days of no sunspots on the surface of the sun, reflecting a low level of solar activity in 2009. This resulted in 2009 showing the lowest level of aurora breakups observed at Syowa Station since 1966.

Figure 1. Disturbances in geomagnetism recorded at Syowa Station (K index; left axis) and the number of sunspots on the surface of the sun (right axis) from 1966 to 2010.
2.1.2	Increasing GHG concentrations and similar levels of total O3 as in the previous year at Syowa Station
Long-term monitoring of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) has been done at Syowa Station as shown in Figure 2. Measurement of the concentration of the gases at Syowa Station in 2009 revealed a continuous yearly increase of the two greenhouse gases (GHG) in atmosphere. Total ozone has also been monitored from the 1960s at Syowa Station. The minimum amount recorded in 2009 was at about the same level as in the previous year at Syowa Station. These long-term monitoring programs offer evidence of climate change in Antarctica, where observation sites are scarce.

Figure 2. Concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) measured at Syowa Station.
2.2	New icebreaker Shirase
The new Japanese icebreaker Shirase, launched in May 2009, made its maiden voyage to Antarctic waters in the last austral summer season of 2009–2010. She is capable of continuously breaking sea ice 1.5 meters thick and has seawater nozzles on the bows to melt snow over the ice. She has 80 beds (20 beds more than the previous vessel) for expedition personnel and carried 56 twelve-foot containers to Syowa Station. Treatment systems for waste and wastewater are installed aboard the Shirase, and the double-hull structure was introduced to avoid oil spillage from the fuel tanks.
Two large CH-101 helicopters and a chartered smaller AS-350 helicopter were employed to transport cargos and to support field research activities. A newly installed multi-narrow-beam sounder on the Shirase was used for seafloor mapping in pack ice waters where ordinary research vessels cannot penetrate.

Figure 3. The new Shirase’s icebreaking with a seawater spray system activated.
2.3	Geoscience programs in the Sør Rondane Mountains – an international collaboration among Japanese, Belgian and South African scientists
A geoscientific field survey was conducted in the Sør Rondane Mountains from late November 2009 to early February 2010, which is the final season of a three-year project with an emphasis on meteorite search. This project included geology, geomorphology, and a meteorite search in this area, and the total number of personnel who joined in this project was 17, including Belgian and South African scientists. The geology and geomorphology teams flew into the Belgian Princess Elisabeth Station in the Sør Rondane Mountains using DROMLAN (the Dronning Maud Land Air Network) from Cape Town via Novolazarevskaya Station in late November 2009. The field teams established a main base camp at Brattnipane as well as additional advance camps in the mountain area.

Figure 4. Japanese field party arrives at Princess Elisabeth Station on a DROMLAN aircraft.
The geology and geomorphology teams conducted their field survey and they collected rock specimens for petrological and geochronological studies. 
The meteorite search team joined the geology and geomorphology teams at Crown Bay on board the icebreaker Shirase in late December 2009. After their rendezvous, the geomorphology team continued field survey mainly in the central Sør Rondane Mountains, whereas the geology and meteorite teams moved to the Balchen area, the eastern end of the mountains, for their activities. One Belgian scientist joined firstly as an exchange scientist on the meteorite team. The meteorite team successfully collected 635 pieces of meteorites, which include very unique types such as iron meteorites and ureilites. The meteorites collected will be shared among Japanese and Belgian scientists for further studies after initial processing at NIPR, Tokyo.

Figure 5. Finding a meteorite in the Sør Rondane Mountains.
2.4	Biological programs near Syowa Station
A JARE-51 biology team conducted field observations in the Lützow-Holm Bay region. One worthy of noting is a research program on a moss-pillar colony on the lake bottom, which employed SCUBA diving in Skarvsnes, some 50 km south of Syowa Station. Collection of lake sediment, measuring in situ photosynthetic activity of the colony, and installation of an U/W video camera to record the growth of the colony for a long period were carried out by SCUBA divers in late January 2010. 

Figure 6. SCUBA diving in Naga-ike Lake in Skarvsnes to observe moss pillars on the lake bottom.
2.5	“Antarctic Classes” performed by two school teachers from Syowa Station
Two schoolteachers were involved in JARE-51 to offer classes, called “Antarctic Classes,” from Syowa Station to Japanese schools through an INTELSAT satellite link between Antarctica and Japan. The engagement of school teachers was the first such attempt during the past 50 years of Japanese Antarctic history, and it resulted in successful achievement as a JARE outreach activity.

Figure 7. A live scene of the “Antarctic Classes” from Syowa Station.
3.	Conclusions
    • Long-term monitoring programs, including upper-atmospheric physics, atmospheric sciences, geophysics, and biology, were carried out by JARE at Syowa Station by an overwintering expedition team in 2009–2010. These data sets will give bases for better understanding of climate change in Antarctica.
    • A new Japanese icebreaker, the Shirase, made a successful maiden voyage to the Antarctic in the last austral summer season. The ship was rigged with environmentally friendly features, carried more expedition personnel than before, and carried 56 twelve-foot containers to Syowa Station.
    • Summer expedition teams carried out a wide range of scientific research in the Southern Ocean, Syowa Station, and Dome Fuji Station areas as well as the Sør Rondane Mountains. JARE employed the Shirase with helicopters and DROMLAN aircraft for transportation and offered an opportunity for international scientists to work with Japanese scientists in Antarctica. They are from Belgium, South Korea, South Africa, and Thailand.
    • Outreach activities in the form of “Antarctic Classes” for Japanese schools were carried out at Syowa Station, with the engagement of two schoolteachers for the first time in JARE history who joined JARE-51. 


