





Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) 
of New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica




Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Introduction
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) circulated draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) approved and endorsed by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, on 29 December 2006 to all concerned parties and the chair of CEP-X. Written comments on the draft CEE, were received from, Australia, Germany, United Kingdom and New Zealand. Full text of draft CEE was submitted to XXX-ATCM as an attachment to IP-007. Non technical summary was submitted as WP-004. During summer 2006-07, additional baseline data were collected and submitted as IP-139 to XXX-ATCM. During the presentation of draft CEE, suggestions were also received from various parties for incorporation in the final CEE. The CEP concluded that the draft CEE met the requirement of Article 3 Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty. It was recommended by CEP to ATCM for endorsement. 
Progress after XXX-ATCM
During 2007-08, correspondence/meetings were held between NCAOR and Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) and the IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany (winner of global competition) and their associates to improve the conceptual design of new research station. In continuation to deliberations, an agreement was reached and other supporting documents were also generated, which went through vetting process by experts for finalization of in agreement between Architects of the station (IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH) and NCAOR. The agreement was signed by both the parties on 14 December 2008.  An information paper (IP-16) on the update on the CEE was submitted to XXXI-ATCM, stating the progress made with regard to the new Indian research base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Progress after XXXI ATCM
Subsequent to signing the agreement, a series of meetings were held to improve the final design taking into consideration scientific and logistics arrangements and environmental protocol.  An architect of the IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany, visited the proposed site for new base at Larsemann Hills in the first week of February 2009 to study the site condition, station layout and construction of small proposed jetty to off-load the material.
During this period of (Austral summer of 2008-09) scientific studies were continued at Larsemann Hills for collection of baseline data on air, water, and biology and land environment. To support some instruments, for year-round collection of data, Wind Energy Generator (WEG) of 6 KW was also installed at the station site. An IEE in this regard was also prepared and submitted as IP-021at XXXII ATCM at Baltimore.
Progress after XXXII ATCM
In the month of July 2009 and February 2010 meetings were held between architect of the IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany and the Expert-Technical-Group, to further finalise the design, provided by the architects and to discuss and define strategy for transportation of various basic construction machines for development of approach path from the landing site to the construction site at Larsemann Hills. At the end of December 2009, basic construction equipments were transported to the site over fast ice and emergency shelter huts placed at site using helicopter. Pertaining to the activity an IEE has been prepared and submitted to the present ATCM (XXXIII). During the stay at Larsemann Hills water and biological samples were collected from the site in continuation to monitor environmental data. In view of the findings, and to further reduce the footprints, modifications in the station site plan for fuel platform, wastewater discharge pipeline and water intake pipeline were incorporated.
To finalize the working drawing and to discuss the tendering process, another meeting was held between the Architects and the members of Expert-Technical-Group in February 2010. It is expected that tender process will be completed by August 2010 for Phase one of the construction of the station. Construction of the new station shall commence in summer 2010-11.
Final CEE
The final CEE will include comprehensive study, detailed description technical specification and final design of station, all the valuable suggestions received from the parties, cumulative impacts and its mitigation measures. India will circulate the final CEE to all parties as per the provisions of the CEP. The final CEE will also be available on www.ncaor.gov.in

