





Additional information for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monuments 




Additional information for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monuments
Summary 
This paper is intended as a complement to WP 47, submitted by Argentina to the XIII meeting of the CEP. It includes a summary of the HSM management tools currently provided for under the Antarctic Treaty System, as well as a brief analysis of the current List of HSMs covered by the Antarctic Treaty. 
This additional information is meant to contribute to a clearer understanding of the various elements provided for under the Antarctic Treaty System, thus enabling a more accurate assessment of the scope and effectiveness of the management tools currently applicable to Historic Sites and Monuments.  
History of HSM regulation 
A historical analysis of the measures adopted by the ATCM in the course of its deliberations to protect Historic Sites and Monuments1 shows that a total of 38 such measures have been passed (14 Recommendations, 10 Resolutions and 14 Measures – summary provided in Table 1).
Of these measures, one can conclude that: 
    • 6 correspond to declarations, 
    • 5 relate to the creation of tools for the protection of HSMs,  
    • 5 relate to updates of existing tools, and 
    • 22 are designations of new HSMs2. 
From this brief summary, one can see that only five of these measures relate to the creation of new mechanisms for effective HSM protection and management (Recommendation V-4, Paris 1968; Resolution 8 (1995); Resolution 5 (2001); Resolution 2 (2006); Resolution 1 (2008) – see Table 1).
At the same time, in order to assess the appropriateness of these tools, one must examine the nature of the HSMs they are meant to protect. For this reason, what follows is a brief analysis of the current HSM List.  
Analysis of current HSM List 
Table 2 provides an overview of the current HSM List3, with two columns added on the right-hand side. The first of these columns proposes a further division of the HSMs into subcategories, using as the main criterion the possible application of different tools for their effective protection and enhancement. The second column includes comments referring to the category proposed for each site on the List.  
As you can see, the current HSM List could be divided into two subcategories, according to management type:  
    a. Commemorative Site
This category would include all cultural goods or property, both movable (i.e. that which can be transported) and immovable (i.e. that which cannot be transported) placed to commemorate individuals, events or processes linked to the history of man in Antarctica (such as plaques, busts, landmarks, etc.) subsequent to the event being commemorated.  
    b. Historic Site
This category would include all cultural goods or property, both movable and immovable, the value of which resides primarily in their existence as a testimonial to the history of man in Antarctica. In other words, this type of cultural property forms part of the history to which it bears witness, having been built/installed at the relevant moment in history. 
Within this category, it would be possible to establish a further subcategory of “archaeological sites”, i.e. those sites which could be subject to study using archaeological methods (such as excavation, surface collection, geophysical surveys, etc.), whether or not they have been subject to extraction, and whether they are on the surface, underground, underwater or beneath the ice. These “archaeological sites” might take the form of:
    • isolated finds: a single artefact with no other artefacts nearby;
    • moderate concentrations: a group of artefacts or immovable cultural property in the same area; or
    • archaeological zones: groupings of “archaeological sites”. 
It should be pointed out that, as in any classification exercise, the nature of a given HSM could be such that it would fall under more than one subcategory.  
The classification proposed here would allow for each HSM to be examined in terms of its management and enhancement needs, which would in turn trigger the design and application of new management strategies and tools, such as management plans, codes of conduct, conservation and/or restoration strategies as well as dissemination strategies, to name just a few of the many tools currently available for the enhancement of historical heritage. 
To achieve this, a complete and accurate description of all HSMs is required, as this will lead to better knowledge of the nature of each HSM, information which in turn can be used in the design, planning and application of the correct enhancement tools and strategies for each case. 
Conclusions
Considering the information provided in Tables 1 and 2, one can conclude that the degree of application of the HSM management tools provided for under the Antarctic Treaty System will vary according to the subcategories proposed. Specifically, Commemorative Sites would be adequately covered by by the general provisions on HSMs found in Annex V, i.e. the ban on damaging, moving or destroying any HSM (art. 8), and additional measures would presumably not have to be taken to ensure their protection. 
As for Historic Sites, depending on the site in question, one might envisage applying additional tools, above and beyond what is already provided for in existing regulations, to ensure more effective conservation.  
For example, less complex Historic Sites (such as those comprising simple, isolated artefacts or structures such as landmarks, cairns, crosses, signposts, flagpoles, etc.) would probably not require additional measures, with the focus here being simply on ensuring their conservation and drafting an appropriate dissemination strategy.  
In the case of more complex Historic Sites, however, some might require more than mere conservation measures and an appropriate dissemination strategy. In these cases, one might envisage applying additional measures (e.g. management plans that would include the drafting of codes of conduct for certain activities). Finally, in the case of Historic Sites defined also as Archaeological Sites in this document, in addition to the comments applying to the other types of sites, one would also have to implement additional tools for their protection. These might include, for example, the drafting of codes of conduct restricting visitor and vehicle movements on the site, so as to conserve the archaeological values for future study.  
Finally, as previously indicated, it should be pointed out that the application of the subcategories as proposed in this document, or of any other classification that might be proposed, would require more detailed descriptions of each HSM to be made. In the case of the classification we are proposing here, these more detailed descriptions would allow for an accurate distinction to be made between “Commemorative Sites” and “Historic Sites” and allow us to determine which “Historic Sites” should be included in the subcategory of “Archaeological Sites”. 



