





Making Tangible Progress on a Strategic Vision for Antarctic Tourism




Making Tangible Progress on a Strategic Vision                         for Antarctic Tourism1 
Summary
This paper examines regulation that is specifically applicable to Antarctic tourism, with an emphasis on ship-borne tourism and the protection of the Antarctic environment. A "whole systems” approach is used here to describe Antarctic ship-borne tourism, which involves five elements: tourists, tourist industries, generating regions, transit routes, and destination regions.  These five elements combine to enable commercial tourism to occur in practice. Regulation may apply to each of these elements.  The paper recommends that key legally binding instruments that are still not still fully in force become effective as soon as possible; advance from non-binding to binding regulation in implementing the general principles of Resolution 7, 2009 by means of Measures; identify and address gaps in existing tourism regulation; review and improve how EIA is applied to tourism; and use ASPAs and ASMAs proactively as a tourism strategic management tool.  
    1. Introduction
At ATCM XXXII ASOC introduced IP053 - “Key elements of a strategic vision for Antarctic tourism” - arguing that there is an urgent need for Antarctic Treaty Parties to develop a clear vision of tourism in the Antarctic, and to agree on a tourism strategy that delivers step by step on that vision through time. Building on IP053, this paper identifies how different facets of the tourism system are currently regulated, and which aspects of Antarctic tourism are under-regulated. The paper identifies some gaps in the regulation of tourism, but it does not intend to be a comprehensive gap analysis – rather it is only a first step in that direction.
This paper focuses on regulation that is specifically applicable to tourism, with an emphasis on ship-borne tourism and the protection of the Antarctic environment (one of the terms of reference for the ATME).  Shipping regulation, which may be applicable to tourism and also to other types of activities, is mentioned here only summarily as it is the subject of a separate ASOC paper submitted to the ATME.2  
    2. A "whole systems" approach to understanding tourism
There is no clear definition of what tourism means in the Antarctic context.  Discussing the reasons as to why this is the case are beyond the scope of the paper, but the lack of definition has resulted in a certain lack of clarity as to what is to be regulated and why.  In the Antarctic context tourism is generally associated with activities by visitors who are not affiliated in an official capacity with an established National Antarctic Program.  However, this broad focus detracts from understanding the scope and extent of tourism as an industrial activity.  Consequently, this paper focuses on commercial ship-borne tourism as conducted by private entities.
A "whole systems” approach is used here to describe Antarctic ship-borne tourism.  In this framework, tourism involves five elements: tourists, tourist industries, generating regions, transit routes, and destination regions.3 These five elements combine to enable commercial tourism to occur in practice.  This is applied to Antarctic ship-borne tourism as follows:4
    1. Tourists are the paying customers of commercial tour operators.  In ship-borne tourism their activities consist, inter alia, of travelling to the Antarctic by ship; enjoying a range of activities and entertainment on board; cruising around scenic areas; and landing at a range of sites to visit local attractions such as penguin rookeries, research stations, and historic sites. However, there is a broader spectrum of more adventurous tourism activities that are based on or supported from ships.
    2. Individuals and companies involved professionally as organisers and operators of travel programs to the Antarctic constitute the commercial tourism industry.  The tourism industry includes ship operators, land-based operators, ship agents, travel agents, and travel companies.  Tour operators are the providers of a broad range of services and “products”, from the mainstream to the adventurous.  Some services and “products” focus on Antarctic values and experiences, while others focus on activities such as kayaking or marathons that are not specifically Antarctic.  
    3. The generating regions can be anywhere in the world where Antarctic tourists originate, where tour operators are based, or where vessels engaged in Antarctic tourism are flagged.  These various actors congregate at Antarctic “gateway” locations from where most Antarctic cruises depart to the Antarctic.
    4. The transport regions are located in between generating regions and Antarctic destinations. They encompass parts of the Southern Ocean south of 60o S as well as along well-travelled shipping coastal corridors such as the NW Antarctic Peninsula.  Transport is in some instance synonymous with the tourism activity as, for instance, in “scenic cruises”. 
    5. The destination regions can be anywhere in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  At present tourism activities tend to concentrate along the Antarctic Peninsula and in the Ross Sea, with cruising and sporadic landings elsewhere on the continent and surrounding islands.  There are spatial hierarchies in the destination regions: for instance, the Antarctica Peninsula can be regarded as a destination region, but within this region there are several specific areas where dozens of tourism destinations are clustered.5  The use, frequency, and development of landing sites vary both temporally and spatially at a regional level and within regions.6  
    3. Antarctic Treaty System regulation relevant to commercial ship-borne tourism
A search through the Antarctic Treaty Database of the relevant keywords provided the following results (excluding Decisions, instruments that refer to past events, and those that are no longer current):7
    • 24 instruments under the category “tourism”; 
    • 12 instruments under the category “environmental protection” directly relevant to tourism, excluding some of the older environmental regulation and instruments not relevant to tourism;
    • 6 instruments under the category “marine pollution” relevant to tourism; and
    • 4 instruments under the topic (subcategory) “shipping” directly relevant to tourism. 
Some of the same instruments appear under several search terms.  Overall, according to the terms used here to search in the Antarctic Treaty database there are more than 40 Antarctic Treaty instruments directly or indirectly applicable to ship-borne tourism, of which 29 were adopted in 1991 or later, that is, after the adoption of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
Many of these instruments request action by Parties rather than by the tourism industry.  Only four of instruments adopted in 1991 or later are legally binding (including the Protocol and Annexes I-V).  Thus, there are few legally binding instruments applicable to tourism besides the Protocol and its Annexes, which are substantial regulatory instruments.  Three of the remaining four legally binding instruments are not yet effective: Measure 4 (2004),8 Measure 15 (2009),9 and Annex VI to the Protocol.10  To the extent that these instruments have a key role in tourism regulation they are still not still fully in force.  Even one of the earliest tourism instruments, Recommendation XVIII-1 (Kyoto, 1994), has not yet become effective.11  
Resolution 7 (2009) promises that tourism regulation will be developed so that a consistent tourism management framework is achieved. ASOC contends that this should be done within a reasonable time frame, and that tangible progress should be made at each of the ATCMs following the adoption of this Resolution.  In addition, the Resolution suggests that a pragmatic precautionary approach that incorporates an evaluation of risks should be used to make decisions on tourism in the absence of adequate information about potential impacts.  In ASOC’s view this approach should guide the development of a consistent tourism regulatory framework.
These instruments affect the five elements of the tourism whole system as follows:
    • Regulations affecting the tourism industry may demand actions that the industry has to do before, during, and/or after an expedition.  Some instruments are generic; others may affect where the industry conducts its activities and how activities should be conducted, but this type of regulation is generally restricted to specific sites or specific activities (e.g. ASMA management plans, site specific guidelines; tourism landings).  
    • Regulations affecting tourists include guidelines on specific behaviours, particularly how activities should be conducted generically (Recommendation XVIII-10) and at some specific sites (site specific guidelines). 
    • Regulations affecting the destination region indicate how tourism activities may or may not take place (through e.g. site specific guidelines), and to a lesser extent where they may or may not take place (through the establishment of ASPAs and through some ASMAs management plans).
    • Regulations affecting the transport region concern mostly environmental protection and shipping requirements concerning, for instance, waste and sewage disposal; 
    • Regulations affecting the departure region concern some pre- and post-expedition requirements such as exchange of information, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), and insurance and contingency planning.  Plainly rather than affecting the region itself this is where some requirements are met before or after an expedition. 
Appendix 1 details how several key regulatory instruments affect the various components of the tourism system.  For details on required improvements of standards of Antarctic shipping, which affect the transport and destination region (and in some instances the departure region) refer to ASOC’s companion ATME paper.12
    4. Closing remarks: A way forward
As noted previously,13 ASOC recognises the positive discussions and developments that have taken place in the context of the ATCM and of the industry itself, which have resulted in certain hortatory standards being adopted, and two mandatory obligations not yet in force, aside the liability annex which is relevant to tourism and also not yet in force.  However, these do not amount to a comprehensive tourism management regime, do not yet impose any legal obligations, and have not curbed the growth trajectory of the industry in any respect.  
As we have noted elsewhere,14 given the growing complexity of tourism there is not a single specific action that Antarctic Treaty Parties should take to address the problems raised by commercial tourism. Rather, a series of legal and practical steps are required.  These include: 
    1. Ensure that Recommendation XVIII-1, Measure 4 (2004), Measure 15 (2009), and Annex VI to the Protocol become effective as soon as possible; 
    2. Advance from non-binding to binding regulation in implementing the general principles of Resolution 7, 2009 by means of Measures addressing specific aspects of tourism.  In particular, Parties should adopt Measures preventing the longer-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and other values as a result of tourism, and Measures about shipping issues related to tourism;15
    3. Identify and address gaps in existing tourism regulation in order to develop a consistent framework for the management of tourism.  In particular, regulations should be developed to address industry trends that have an effect on Antarctic tourism operations (such as changes in the characteristics of the tourism fleet); the growing range of tourism activities; and destination development (such as the establishment of new tourism landing sites).  A tourism regulation framework should be cast more broadly than ship-borne tourism alone.  Ship-borne tourism – the subject of this ATME – is one form of a broader set of interconnected activities.  Fly-sail tourism and land-based tourism, which should also be the subject of regulation, are partly or fully reliant on ship-based support.  
    4. Review and improve how EIA is applied to tourism; improve cumulative impacts assessment and strategic uses of EIA; and
    5. Use ASPAs proactively as a tourism strategic management tool, and use ASMAs as a tool to manage tourism within discrete regions.  This may include setting aside ASPA “reserves” where no tourism is allowed to protect scientific and wilderness values.  ASMAs may be used to direct the flow of tourism towards (or away from) certain sides, as well as to identify sites where tourism is accepted and other sites where tourism is discouraged (e.g. as in ASMA No. 4 Deception Island) or where tourism should focus to the exclusion of all other sites (e.g. as in ASMA No .2 McMurdo Dry Valleys).  The criteria to make these choices should be based on protecting the intrinsic values of Antarctica as outlined in Art. 3 of the Protocol.
Appendix 1 – Effect of key tourism regulation instruments on the elements of the tourism system (excluding the “departure region”)
Components
WST 
Legal
instruments
Effect on tourism industry
Effect on tourists
Effect on transport region (within ATA)
Effect on destination region
Reporting prior/after expedition (several instruments)
Must provide pre-/post-expedition information such as expedition plans, insurance arrangements, locations visited, activities conducted, etc.


Record of what activities have been conducted where; helps monitoring activities (rather than impacts)
The Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Must comply with Protocol regulations including in the planning and conduct of activities.
Must comply with Protocol regulations, although many are not directly relevant to individual tourists. 
Affords broad environmental protection 

Annex I 
Must fill an EIA prior to the activity. May need to implement conditions or mitigation actions.
May need to implement conditions or mitigation actions.

EIA indicates where and how activity will be conducted.  It is currently the only “gatekeeper” mechanism for overseeing access to Antarctica.16 
Annex II
Must comply with regulations protecting Antarctic flora and fauna including the prevention of harmful interference.
Must comply with regulations protecting Antarctic flora and fauna including the prevention of harmful interference.

Prohibits harmful interference; it does not prevent cumulative impacts.
Annex III
Must comply with waste management regulations

Prevents environmental impacts from inadequate waste disposal
Annex IV
Must comply with waste management regulations

Broadly protects the marine environment.  
Annex V - ASPAs
Prevents the conduct of tourism except at certain sites (HSMs)
May generally not enter  ASPAs; must follow permit conditions in what concerns visitation

Prevents tourism access except at certain Historic Sites and Monuments that have ASPA designation.
Annex V - ASMAs
Must follow management plans including limiting visitation to certain sites within the ASMA
Must follow management plans in what concerns visitation

Addresses all activities in an area; management plan may prohibit or discourage tourism access at parts of the ASMA; prevents conflicts among users; provides guidelines for tourism 
Annex VI
Required, inter alia, to undertake reasonable preventative measures; establish contingency plans; take prompt and effective response action.

May prevent or mitigate environmental damage
Measure 4 (2004) – Tourism and non-governmental activities
Required to comply with certain obligations and meet certain operational standards

It does not necessarily prevent environmental damage but minimises the risk of accidents and ensuing environmental impacts
Measure 15 (2009) –  Landing of persons from passenger vessels
Must comply with limits on passenger landings and ratio guides-passengers


Prevents the simultaneous and consecutive landing of a very large numbers of passengers land. May curb the number of visitors but it does not necessarily prevent cumulative impacts.
Site specific guidelines (several Resolutions)
Need to implement use of guidelines
Encourages tourists to behave in certain ways

Provide guidance on generic forms of behaviour at certain sites.  Do not address cumulative impacts.
Monitoring (Protocol, Annex I, several Resolutions)



May detect environmental impacts from Antarctic tourism.  Application is limited to certain sites and largely dependent on individual Parties’ willingness and ability.  There are no methodology and monitoring protocols to investigate the impacts of tourism.    
Recommendation XVIII-10 – Guidelines for tourism
Required to implement use of guidelines
Provides guidance on generic forms of behaviour.  

Provides guidance on forms of behaviour adequate for all sites.  Does not address cumulative impacts.
Resolution 7 (2009) – General principles of Antarctic tourism
Cooperation with Parties and among tour operators and to share best practise on environmental and safety management issues


Establishes that tourism should not be allowed to contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment.




