





Training and education center at Bellingshausen station





Training and education center at Bellingshausen station

One of the most important directions in the development of polar science is training of young specialists. This can be done at a multistage level:
    • Educational courses for high school graduates;
    • Special courses of lectures and practical training for university students and post-graduates studying in the field of Earth’s science and life;
    • Seminar and practical lessons for young specialists – graduates of the universities in the specific areas of polar science;
    • Special courses for teachers of general high schools.
Such courses can be held both at the stationary education centers and at polar stations and the expedition bases that have necessary infrastructures.
Significant intensification of such polar education programs was noted during the period of the International Polar Year 2007-2008. So in 2008 by the initiative of the Schiller University (Jena, Germany), a summer school in Antarctic biology was held at the Russian Antarctic Bellingshausen station, in which students of biological faculties of the universities of Germany, Russia and some other European countries participated.
Choice of Bellingshausen station was connected with a comparatively simple scheme of delivery to this region of students and teachers and quite low transport costs and a rich biodiversity of Antarctic fauna on King George Island. Besides, the infrastructure of the Russian Bellingshausen station allows accommodation 15-20 school participants for a fortnight.
In the season 2009-2010, such initiative was continued. At Bellingshausen station on 16-24 January 2010, the International summer school-conference for young scientists “On manifestations of global warming in the Polar Regions” was held. The school was organized by the Obukhov Institute of the Physics of the Atmosphere of RAS and the Russian Antarctic Expedition jointly with the International Arctic Research Centre of the University of Alaska, Fairbanks with support of the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) (the USA, Norway) and at the financial support of the Russian Foundation of Fundamental Studies and RAS Presidium. The World Wildlife Fund (New York) and the Museum of Science and Technology, Chicago also participated in providing funds for the school. At first the school program was intended for 14 days, but in connection with the changed flight schedule along the route Punta-Arenas – King George Island and bad weather conditions, it was made shorter. Some school events were carried out in Punta-Arenas (Chile). 
Twenty one people participated in the work of the school from Russia, the USA and Germany. Personnel of the Russian Bellingshausen station and the Chilean Escudero station also took part. 
Lectures on the different aspects of global climate change of the Antarctic, dynamics of glaciers and permafrost, biology and geology of the region were given. As speakers, both the lead scientists – specialists in climate of polar regions and young scientists who only begin their scientific career, participated. The school-conference has become an important stage in the Antarctic climate studies. In the school framework, field studies were carried out and round-tables were held.
Main topics of round-table discussions: the role of school as an educational event; the role of school as a scientific event; what was done and what was not done; comparison of field work in the Arctic and the Antarctic in terms of scientific interests and logistical support; volume of proceedings of the school-conference. All school participants have confirmed the high scientific level and significance of the event. A decision was made to publish the volume of proceedings of the school-conference and organize publications about the school activity in the Russian and foreign scientific and popular-science journals.
The practice of organizing international summer schools at Bellingshausen station will be continued. During the next few years the authorities of the St. Petersburg enterprise “Aerogeodesiya” and the Institute of Planetary Geodesy of the Dresden Technical University plan to organize a summer school for students-geodesists in modern methodology of satellite geodesy in the Antarctic. Other topical proposals are also being considered. In perspective, such courses can be organized jointly with the Administration of the University of Punta-Arenas and the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH).

