





Russian research in the Antarctic in 2009




Russian research in the Antarctic in 2009
In the studies of current climate, estimates of parameters of spatial-temporal variability of the thermal regime of Antarctic atmosphere in the surface layer, in the troposphere strata and in the lower stratosphere for the period of instrumental observations 1957-2009 were obtained. For most stations, surface temperature trends are small being within natural variability. Significant warming is noted everywhere in the troposphere, while cooling is observed in the lower stratosphere.  A stable tendency for surface air temperature elevation in the Antarctic Peninsula area is shown to intensify. Climate of the Antarctic Peninsula forms as a result of complex interaction between the atmosphere, oceans and sea ice. The relationship between the regional climatic conditions and changes occurring in the tropical part of the Pacific Ocean, for example, connected to the El Ninjo – South Oscillation phenomenon, was determined. The aforementioned "teleconnections" are responsible for formation of significant short-period climate variability. The data analysis allowed us to quantitatively show the dominating role of large-scale atmospheric processes (Antarctic mode) in maintaining the pronounced warming source both in the surface layer and in the free atmosphere.
The energy exchange parameters between the atmosphere and the underlying surface were obtained from data of energy balance observations at Bellingshausen station. By analyzing the observation data, it is shown that measurements of heat fluxes have revealed clear daily variations of the heat exchange intensity. In all cases of diurnal measurements, the heat flux is positive, i.е., directed from the surface, changing from tens to hundreds W/m2, depending on the meteorological conditions. At night, the fluxes are small and negative. At unstable stratification, a dependence of these coefficients on the atmosphere stability parameter was determined. Parameterizations, obtained on the basis of experimental data, which are very important for climatic models, were proposed.
Data of oceanographic observations made from board the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” in the Amundsen Sea were analyzed. It was revealed that offshore and at the continental slope of the sea, the entire water column from the lower boundary of the surface water layer to the bottom is occupied by warm and saline circumpolar deep water supplying heat and salt from the north to the coastal areas. This water contributes to melting of ice shelves in the area. The surface water layer here is strongly freshened, which is connected with melt water spreading from the nearby Thwaites glacier and the Abbot Ice Shelf. Parameters of variability of landfast ice thickness and duration of the landfast ice growth-melting for a multiyear period in the area of Russkaya, Leningradskaya and Progress stations were obtained. Near Progress station, the period of landfast ice existence and its thickness are observed to increase in recent years. 
In the study of heliogeophysical effects, a comparative assessment of the influence of space rays (of solar and galactic origin) and solar wind parameters on the temperature regime and atmospheric pressure in the South near-pole area is given. Estimates of the contribution of solar and galactic space rays and solar activity to the polar ozone variability were obtained. It is shown that the galactic rays directed by solar wind influence the temperature and wind regime in the stratosphere and the ozone layer. An empirical model of the interplanetary electric field influencing the atmosphere parameters in Central Antarctica was developed.
In the studies on the subglacial Lake Vostok and glaciology, the laboratory studies of the ice core samples from the borehole with a depth of 3667 m, reached in 2009, were carried out. Structure and texture of lake ice was investigated over the entire core length at the depth range of 3536-3667 m. The data obtained indicate that lake ice stops growing at the lower surface of the glacier when it passes over the “island” located in 50 km upward along the ice flow line from Vostok station. An analysis of the tendencies of development of the natural structure of ice strata within the lake ice layers points to a possibility of super-cooled water flow from the northern areas of Lake Vostok not only to a deep-water part of the lake between the island and Vostok station, but also to the (shallow) strait between the island and the west shore of the lake. Data on the size and orientation of lake ice crystals were obtained. The databank on gas content, isotopic, chemical and biological composition of lake ice was updated, including new data on the mineralogical composition and the age of sedimentary mantle rocks of the lake. 
The latter new data were obtained from the study of a large mineralogical inclusion in the ice core from a depth of 3608 m. Possible adaptation of microorganisms isolated from lake ice, to the conditions in the subglacial water body was assessed. Optimal conditions for reactivating and maintaining survival of the cells of microorganisms were developed. Complex experiments on assessing the integrity and physiological state of the cells of microorganisms preserved in the ice were conducted. Based on the radio-echo profiling data in the Lake Vostok area, charts of internal reflection surfaces in the glacial body were constructed. Charts of isochrone surfaces of the glacial cover in the area of Lake Vostok were constructed. Data on the thickness of loose bottom sediments in the southern valley of Lake Vostok were obtained. 
A method of absolute ice core dating was developed and tested. It is based on correlation of the experimental series of ice gas content with the calculated curve of local insolation. It is shown that using a new method of ice dating allows us with a high degree of accuracy to synchronize the ice cores recovered in different regions of Antarctica. Methods and an experimental facility for laboratory studies of post-deposition changes in the isotopic composition of the snow strata were developed. The experiments showed the post-deposition changes to be quite significant even under the conditions of super-low temperatures typical of Central Antarctica. The expected total isotopic snow enrichment after its deposition in the vicinity of Vostok station is about 5‰. The results of the experiment testify to the need of introducing a corresponding correction for evolution of the isotopic composition of deposited snow to the measured isotopic composition profiles of deep ice cores aiming at more correct paleoclimatic interpretation of the data obtained.
Taking into account the results of isotopic core studies, the role of two main water sources determining the hydrological regime of Lake Vostok was assessed. It was determined that due to bottom glacier melting in the northern part of the lake, 20-40 million tons of water comes annually to the subglacial water body, and the discharge of hydrothermal sources at the lake bottom is estimated as 2.8-5.5 million tons of water a year. The latter estimates recalculated to the lake unit area correspond to the water inflow intensity of about 100 ml/m2 a year, which differs little from the area averaged data on the total water discharge from the hydrothermal sources of Japan. Based on the data of a complex of studies of lake ice, a preliminary assessment of the biogeochemical potential of Lake Vostok in terms of possible maintenance of microbial life in it was performed. It is shown that microorganisms if they inhabit subglacial water should be chemo-autotrophs by the way of receiving energy and substance and psychrophilic, oxigenophilic and piezophilic by physiology.
New data were obtained on the peculiarities of glaciation of the Last Glacial Maximum and deglaciation of King-George Island (West Antarctica) and the Schirmacher Oasis (East Antarctica). The databank was generated characterizing changes of the main mass balance constituents of the Antarctic ice sheet and their contribution to the global ocean level oscillations for the last 10 years. 
As a result of geological-geophysical studies, a model of the structure and evolution of the Earth’s crust of the Southern Ocean in the area of the Commonwealth Sea – Kerguelen Plateau was developed and a set of structural and geophysical charts at the scale of 1:2 500 000 (charts of potential fields, chart of acoustic foundation regioning and a tectonic chart) of this region was prepared. It was determined that splitting of the lithosphere in the Commonwealth and Davis Seas occurred about 134 million years ago. It is assumed that the southern part of the Kerguelen Plateau is underlain by the extended and thinned blocks of the continental crust, which belonged to the Indian margin and in some time after the lithosphere splitting  they were torn away due to the change of the seabed spreading axis about 129 million years ago.
Generalization of geological and geochemical data (isotopic dating and chemical composition of mountain rocks, structural characteristics, metamorphism conditions and tectonic settings) on bare regions of East Antarctica was performed and a correlation scheme of main tectonomagmatic processes was developed. It was determined that the tectonomagmatic processes in different regions of East Antarctica predominantly occurred at the time ranges of 3500–3400, 3200–2800, 2650–2450, 2200–2000, 1500–920 and 600–500 million years ago. In some regions, some local phases of tectonomagmatic activity are identified. 
The Earth’s crust models and paleotectonic reconstructions reflecting structure, geodynamics and history of development of the Antarctic lithosphere were developed. It is assumed that during the period of establishment of the Antarctic Earth’s crust, its stage-by-stage stretching took place with a simultaneous manifestation of thrust tectonics. 
An analysis of seismic data collected in the expeditions from the early 1980s (around 130 000 km) was performed, and a seismostratigraphic model of the sedimentary mantle of the continental margin of East Antarctica was constructed. Five regional seismic horizons with an age of ~ 160, ~120, ~42, 34 and 24 million years, respectively, were delineated in the sedimentary mantle. 
Models of succession and cyclicity of environmental changes (sedimentation conditions) in the Antarctic and development of Antarctic glaciation for the last 40–50 million years were developed. Based on the seismostratographic analysis it is assumed that about 42 million years ago the Antarctic ice sheet has reached for the first time the shelf edge in the western part of the Wilkes Land. Full glaciation of Antarctica took place 34.5 million years ago. During the period between 34 and 14 million years, the Antarctic ice sheet remained unstable, changing in cycles by the area of its development (polythermal conditions), attaining a stable state after 14 million years (polar conditions). 
In the biological studies, taxonomy of some groups of Antarctic flora and fauna, regional peculiarities of flora and fauna, ecosystems of biota and autochthonous microbiota were investigated. Main tendencies in the change of vegetation of the Fildes Peninsula were analyzed. Due to a very strong anthropogenic impact – a large number of tourists, construction and road activities – destruction of the vegetation cover at the most frequently visited places occurs. The lichen communities are extremely sensitive and require a long time for reconstruction. At the same time, significant climate warming leads to the increased biomass of lichens. Wide spreading of the vascular plant Deschampsia antarctica on the Fildes Peninsula also testifies to warming 
The species composition of bottom, ice and cryopelagic biocenosis of the coastal ecosystems of Nella Fjord of Prydz Bay was determined. The numbers and species composition of single-celled algae were assessed. The total number of species was 36, of which more than 90 % is comprised by the diatoms algae. The diatoms prevailed in water, and dinoflagellates dominated in ice. Ice in the bay is very fresh (with salinity not more than 1‰), which prevents active development of the diatom algae. On the contrary, dinoflagellates are capable to withstand strong freshening, that is why their numbers in ice are much greater compared to the numbers of diatom algae. 
Protoplankton and the taxonomic structure of zooplankton of Ardley Bay near Bellingshausen station, where the year-round hydrobiological studies are undertaken, were investigated. Samples of phyto- and zooplankton are collected at two permanent stations: at the coast and at the bay center at a depth of 50 m. It was determined that a small depth and the specific hydrological regime of the bay lead to a significant modification of mesoplankton community compared to deep water areas. In plankton, small species breeding throughout the year - Cyclopoida (Copepoda class) Oithona similis begin to ply the dominating role.  
Studies of seasonal dynamics, spectrum and intensity of nutrition, calorie content and individual oxygen consumption, conditions of cultivation and the life cycle of dominant species of Lake Kitezh (Fildes Peninsula) – Pseudoboeckella poppei were carried out. Calculation of production of this species and study of the oxygen regime and content of organic suspended matter of Lake Kitezh were carried out. It is shown that a peculiar feature of existence of the population Pseudoboeckella poppei in Lake Kitezh is full absence of predators, eating bocelli. This leads to an interesting modification of the characteristics of growth of small crustaceans. After they become sexually-mature (at a length of 1.95 – 2 mm) no inhibition of somatic growth occurs, resulting in appearance of large individuals with a size of 2.5 – 3 mm in the population. The specific calorie content of the body of these individuals is significantly decreased compared to smaller specimens. This peculiarity of the growth of bocelli can be considered as adaptation of the population to using a wider range of food objects (probably, of the own young), and transferring the unfavorable conditions to the period of sexually mature large stage.
An analysis of data on bio-productivity of Antarctic waters in the main commercial fishery regions of the Atlantic part of the Antarctic (South Georgia Island, the South Orkneys and the South Shetland Islands) for the last 30 years was performed. The peculiarities of the distribution of concentrations of krill and fish and their total permissible catch were determined. 
A detailed ornitho-faunistic analysis of the species composition of bird population in the vicinity of Bellingshausen station and in the area of Leningradskaya and Russkaya stations was performed and a biological-ecological characteristic of each species was given. Characteristics of the large-scale distribution of sea birds and mammals in the Southern Ocean were obtained. Parameters of the state of microbiota in the areas of Mirny and Progress stations were estimated. Data on soil contamination and peculiarities of microflora in the areas of these stations were obtained and analyzed. 

