Activities carried out in Chile to commemorate the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty
Activities carried out in Chile to commemorate the
Fiftieth Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty
Summary
This document aims to present the activities carried out in Chile
during 2009 on the occasion of celebrating the Fiftieth Anniversary
of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.
Special issue of Diplomacy journal
The Diplomacy journal, published by the Andrés Bello Diplomatic
Academy, released a special edition of two parts on the Antarctic
topic in conjunction with the Antarctic Division of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Chile. Among the contributors are prominent
national and foreign specialists that addressed this subject from
legal, political, scientific and institutional perspectives.
The first part was published in the Issue Nº 120 July – September
2009 and includes the following articles: The full text of the articles
published on Diplomacy Journal Nº 120 and 121 are available
digitally in the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile
through the following links:http://www.minrel.gov.cl/
prontus_minrel/site/artic/20081106/asocfile/20081106200449/
dip_120_2_1.pdfhttp://www.minrel.gov.cl/prontus_minrel/site/
artic/20081106/asocfile/20081106200449/diplo_121.pdf
“The Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Protection of Antarctica”
by Oscar Pinochet de la Barra.
“The Antarctic Treaty as International Regime” by Jorge Berguño.
“Notes on the past, present and future of the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat” by Johannes Huber.
“The Consultative Meetings: The sui generis legislature of
Antarctica” by María Luisa Carvallo.
“The Law of the Seas and Antarctica. The impact of the Continental
Shelf” by María Teresa Infante Caffi.
Also, in the Issue Nº 121 October – December 2009 were published
the corresponding articles to the second part:
“The Antarctic National Policy. Implementation mechanisms” by
José Retamales Espinoza.
“The Antarctic Chilean institutionality as an Antarctic National
System” by Javier Urbina Paredes.
“Chilean scientific research in Antarctica in the framework of the 50
years of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty” by León Bravo.
It is expected that the Issue Nº 123 March – June 2010 includes the
article “The Antarctic Treaty after fifty years” written by Tucker
Scully. Also, this edition should contain the lecture delivered by the
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs in the ceremony to commemorate
in Chile the fifty years of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.
Commemorative Ceremony for the 50th anniversary of the signing
of the Antarctic Treaty
On 1st of December of 2009, Andrés Bello University jointly with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs organized a commemorative
ceremony of this anniversary. This was chaired by the Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Angel Flisfisch, who
delivered a lecture entitled "The importance of the Antarctic Treaty
to the Chilean Foreign Policy".
In the event also was given tribute to Ambassador Oscar Pinochet
de la Barra for his countless contributions to the promotion of the
Antarctic knowledge and its values. It should be noted that he
participated in the diplomatic conference in 1959 that led to the
Treaty. The ceremony was covered by national news media and also
was informed trough the web site of the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat.
This was the last event of the series of commemorative activities
organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They begun on March
of that year with the launching ceremony and postmarked of the
postal issue “ExpoAntártica Chile 2009” and the opening of the
philatelic exhibition of the same name. This activity was informed
trough the ATCM XXXII IP 108  Exposición Filatélica ExpoAntártica
Chile 2009 Lanzamiento y Matasellado alusivo al sello postal de la
exhibición.
