





Southern Ocean Sentinel: an international program to assess climate change impacts on marine ecosystems





Southern Ocean Sentinel: an international program to assess climate change impacts on marine ecosystems
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
Assessment and predictive models need to be developed to provide assessments of current and predicted future climate change impacts on Southern Ocean ecosystems for use by governments, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and other international forums, including the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  This paper reports on an International Workshop on ‘Monitoring climate change impacts: Establishing a Southern Ocean Sentinel program’, held in Hobart, Australia, on 20-24 April 2009, to discuss the manner in which such assessments could be developed, based on field monitoring programs and the development of ecosystem models.  
Introduction
The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) have agreed that climate change could impact on their activities and ability to meet their objectivesi,ii.  In 2009, a joint meeting of the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) recommended that the establishment or further development of complementary baselines, reference areas, and appropriate indicators was needed for this taskiii.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in its fourth review, highlighted a number of uncertainties to be resolved in relation to climate change impacts on polar environments in order to better assess future impacts in the Southern Ocean and elsewhereiv.  While the ability to make future predictions of ecosystem changes are hampered by uncertainties, sufficient information is now available to identify many aspects of Southern Ocean ecosystems that could be impacted by changes in the physical systems. Tools are also now available to integrate disparate data sources to help give coherent assessments of imminent and future change in Southern Ocean ecosystems.
These existing tools, combined with long-term measurements of key indicators, should be used to develop assessment and predictive models in order to provide two assessments for use by governments, IPCC and international forums, such as CCAMLR and ATCM:
    • what are the current climate change impacts on Southern Ocean ecosystems to inform governments of the consequences of climate change on populations, species and ecosystems? and 
    • what are the predicted future impacts on marine ecosystems, using select indicators of Southern Ocean ecosystems as early warning signals, to inform managers of human activities and ecosystem services that could be impacted by climate change?
Monitoring climate change impacts: Establishing a Southern Ocean Sentinel
The manner in which these assessments could be developed, based on field monitoring programs and the development of ecosystem models, was the focus of discussion at an International Workshop on ‘Monitoring climate change impacts: Establishing a Southern Ocean Sentinel program’, which was held at CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, on 20-24 April 2009.  It was hosted by the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, Australian Antarctic Division, and WWF-Australia.
An important outcome was the need to develop this capability as an international collaboration to deliver systematic and integrated measurements of ecosystem change in different regions of the Southern Ocean in order to take account of regional differences in the manifestations of climate change impacts.  In this respect, the Southern Ocean Sentinel is now a part of the international ICED (Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics) program with linkages to be developed with the Southern Ocean Observing System.  The workshop noted that, at present, the field program is best developed for monitoring physical parameters.  There was a recognition that urgent attention needs to be given to improving the design of measurement programs of biological indicators and that spatial coverage of biological monitoring programs needs to be greatly increased.  
The Executive Summary of the workshop report is reproduced at Appendix A. The full workshop report is available at http://www.aad.gov.au/default.asp?casid=35088. The report is a product of the discussions at the workshop including work by keynote speakers, working group facilitators and all of the participants. For further information, please contact Dr Andrew Constable, Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre and the Australian Antarctic Division, andrew.constable@aad.gov.au.
Appendix A. Workshop Report Executive Summary
Global greenhouse gas emissions are affecting the Earth’s atmosphere, cryosphere, oceans, and terrestrial systems.  Future climate change impacts on marine ecosystems are poorly known compared to their terrestrial counterparts.  Many climate change impacts on marine ecosystems will be measurable in the Southern Ocean early and least confounded by other future human impacts such as fisheries, pollution and land management.  A coordinated international Southern Ocean Sentinel to monitor, assess and signal future climate change impacts on marine ecosystems was considered at an international Workshop on 'Monitoring climate change impacts: establishing a Southern Ocean Sentinel'  (hereafter referred to as Workshop) held in Hobart Australia in 2009. This report summarises those discussions and the outcomes.
The Southern Ocean comprises more than 10% of the world’s oceans and plays a substantial role in the Earth System. Aside from the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, the defining feature of the region is polar seasonality, which limits most productivity to the spring and summer months. The Southern Ocean represents a complex suite of habitats for its unique biota, defined by light, temperature, water chemistry, depth, and geomorphology, as well as winds, currents, and sea ice. Section 2 outlines how these factors combine to influence biota in ocean, sea ice, coastal and sea floor habitats.
Potential impacts of climate change on the structure and function of Southern Ocean food webs and ecosystems will be dictated, in the first instance, by the sensitivity of organisms to change in the physical environment.  The overall dynamics of the system will then be determined by the influence of affected species on other species in the food web, whether that influence is as predators, prey, competitors or in some other role.  Organisms benefit from adequate resources to meet their needs, mates for reproduction, and protection from predators. An organism’s morphology, physiology, life history and behaviour will determine the types of habitats in which it can live, as well as how it relates to other organisms.  Section 3 introduces the different biota found in the Southern Ocean.  It also outlines some of the functional attributes of organisms that will influence where species might be found now and in the future and how successful they will be in those areas.  It concludes by considering the general nature of Southern Ocean food webs and the regional differences in the ecosystems. 
The Southern Ocean has a heterogeneous suite of ecosystems that are changing. Not all changes will be due to climate change.  These ecosystems have been affected over the last two hundred years by over-exploitation of marine mammals and some fish stocks.  This has likely resulted in substantial change in the structure and function of the food web, most of which remains undescribed due to the lack of historical data.  Changes in the physical environment have been documented, particularly during the era of satellite remote sensing since the late 1970s.  Evidence of change from historical data has been increasing over the past decade and also because trends are now becoming more clearly distinguished from natural variability.  Section 4 summarises the physical and biological changes observed to date and considers the prognoses for future climate impacts on the physical system.
An assessment of climate change impacts on Southern Ocean ecosystems and biodiversity requires measurements of change in an ecosystem and then attribution of that change to climate change.  Field programs need to be designed in such a way that they can discriminate climate change impacts from natural spatial and temporal variation or other causes of change, such as fisheries. The method of attribution will need to be capable of rejecting alternative hypotheses that might explain the observed change.  Other ecosystem data may be required for this purpose.  Section 5 considers approaches for identifying plausible scenarios of climate change impacts, choosing a set of indicators of those impacts, designing programs to monitor the indicators, and attributing observed changes to climate change.
Antarctic nations have undertaken and sustained large scale scientific endeavours for over 100 years.  The International Geophysical Year in 1957-58 bound them into a collaborative and coordinated effort that remains to this day in the Antarctic Treaty System, an effort exemplified once more in the recent International Polar Year (IPY).  Science in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean has played a significant role in resolving difficult and uncertain global issues.  Many scientists involved in Southern Ocean research have turned their attention to how much the climate will change, how much Earth’s systems will be impacted and how those impacts will affect ecosystems and people.  There is an increasing urgency to establish baseline measurements of ecosystem structure and function against which change can be measured.  Scientists involved in environmental impact assessments and natural resource management have experience and expertise that could help design programs to support assessments of change and for developing prognoses for ecosystems in the future. Section 6 summarises the strategies that are currently available to monitor change and approaches that could be used in developing a long-term assessment strategy which could optimally facilitate early warning assessments of future climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.  
Regional and global policy imperatives need assessments of current and future climate change impacts on Southern Ocean marine ecosystems.  A Southern Ocean Sentinel can fill this role.  Two important research programs, the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) of IMBER and the SCAR/SCOR / CLIVAR / CliC’s Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) are developing, respectively, understanding of climate change impacts on Southern Ocean ecosystems, which will include the development of ‘end-to-end’ models, and a framework for obtaining the measurements needed to improve our understanding of change in the Southern Ocean.  A Southern Ocean Sentinel addresses key objectives of the ICED programme and could, therefore, be most appropriately developed as part of ICED, becoming one of its legacy outcomes.  It will also provide the basis for developing key links between ICED and the SOOS program, along with linking other programs and organisations to information on how climate change impacts their activities, such as the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).  Section 7 summarises the conclusions of the Workshop, including the important international climate change questions to which a Southern Ocean Sentinel will contribute and an initial work plan from the Workshop for contributing early warning assessments of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.
The Workshop agreed that ICED be approached to include the Southern Ocean Sentinel as part of its scientific program.  Southern Ocean Sentinel could then be developed as part of the wider community effort to understand the impacts of climate change in Southern Ocean ecosystems.  It also suggested that the Southern Ocean Sentinel could be a mechanism for further developing the biological component of monitoring in SOOS and that this should be developed through ICED.
The Workshop agreed that a necessary first step would be delivery of qualitative and preliminary quantitative assessments of climate change impacts on the Southern Ocean to be ready in time for use by the IPCC in its fifth review of climate change.  It was suggested that such assessments be undertaken at least for different regions of the Southern Ocean to take account of the regional differences in ecosystem characteristics and climate change impacts.  
In conclusion, the wide-ranging and detailed discussions of the Workshop highlighted the existing capacity to undertake assessments of climate change impacts on Southern Ocean marine ecosystems.  The Workshop agreed there is an urgent need for developing a long-term monitoring and assessment capability for Southern Ocean ecosystems as a whole.  A Southern Ocean Sentinel could be developed as an integrative concept aimed at detecting and assessing early warning signals of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.   The Workshop agreed that this needs to be closely coordinated as part of current and planned Southern Ocean initiatives and that this would most appropriately be achieved by Southern Ocean Sentinel being developed as part of ICED.

