





IAATO Guidelines to Minimize Seabirds Landing on Ships





IAATO Guidelines to Minimize Seabirds Landing on Ships
Information Paper submitted by IAATO

Summary
Through an initiative by IAATO field staff, IAATO has brought into practice simple practical guidelines to minimize the likelihood of seabirds landing on vessels.
In anticipation of a discussion on light pollution mitigation measures by the CEP, IAATO is pleased to submit these guidelines and report form (Appendices A & B) as a contribution to the discussion. 
Introduction
A ship’s crew need to use light during hours of darkness for safe navigation and operation of vessels. Passenger ships can have potentially a greater amount of lighting due to the additional portholes and windows. During the breeding season in the Southern Ocean, burrowing petrels make their way to and from their nests under the cover of darkness. Attracted – or disorientated – by a vessel’s lights, they may land on deck and find they are then unable to take off.
Development of the guidelines
Seabirds land on vessels in the Southern Ocean every year. The legs of petrels are not designed for walking so these seabirds often struggle to take off. Instead they hide behind the ship’s equipment and in corners. Although the seabirds usually survive the initial impact, they can become hypothermic if they become waterlogged. 

These incidents occur most frequently in the sub-Antarctic area during hours of darkness and usually during nights of poor visibility (snow, fog, or rain).  On most occasions, this involves one or two birds landing on deck and only rarely is there mortality. Serious bird strikes (where large numbers of birds land on deck and mortality occurs) are considerably rarer. In IAATO records, there are two reported incidents of serious bird strikes: one in the 1990s and another during the 2008/09 season1. The former took place in open ocean off the southern coast of a sub-Antarctic island during a night of poor visibility and snow storms; the latter was also on a night of poor visibility but in shallow coastal waters of a sub-Antarctic island and likely could have been avoided if the mitigation measures had been adopted earlier. 

IAATO field staff working with a Birdlife International representative developed a set of guidelines to minimize the likelihood of birds landing on vessels and to provide guidance on handling stranded birds. The intention of this initiative was to promote the very simple mitigation measures which can be taken to minimize the chance of even rare occurrences happening. IAATO adopted these measures during the last IAATO annual meeting and for the 2009/10 season have dispersed the guidelines through both a poster to be put up in passenger and crew areas (Appendix A) and as a PowerPoint presentation. In addition, report forms to log any incidents were circulated to IAATO field and ship staffs (Appendix B). Anecdotal reports from field staff indicate that since adoption of the guidelines the occurrence of birds being found on deck is now rare. To date, no seabird strike forms have been received for the 2009/10 season. 

IAATO would welcome any comment on these guidelines and is pleased to submit them to the CEP to assist with discussions.  
Appendix A – Information Poster 

Appendix B: Report Form





