





Terra Nova Bay – Wood Bay Marine Protected Area inside a wider proposal for a Ross Sea MPA





Terra Nova Bay – Wood Bay Marine Protected Area inside a wider proposal for a Ross Sea MPA
Information Paper submitted by Italy


Summary
Recently the establishment of spatial protection for marine biodiversity has been identified as a priority issue by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR.
Ross Sea Region to considering as future MPA was just identified in the 2007 CCAMLR Bioregionalization Workshop and Terra Nova Bay area proposed as SSRU (small scale research unit). The SSRU proposal for Terra Nova Bay is consequent to a wider proposal for Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA) that should include entirely the CCAMLR Area 88. Inside this area small  MPAs or areas with marine component were just allocated and areas where taking of seals were prohibited and areas currently of no fishing.
The main objectives of this MPA proposal should be to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the Terra Nova Bay region , perhaps the last near-pristine marine ecosystem on Earth by managing the variety of activities and interests in the area with the scope to ensure that its important values are protected and sustained in the long term.
Introduction	
The establishment of spatial protection for marine biodiversity has been identified as a priority issue by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR. International commitments have called for the development of representative networks of marine protected areas globally by 2012, and cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR provides a unique opportunity for developing coordinated systems to attain this goal. 
There is an array of existing tools available to the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members for implementing marine spatial protection, including for example: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Protected Areas, CCAMLR Closed Areas and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystem (VME) Risk Areas. Some of these areas may allow for multiple uses, or may restrict only a single type of activity. However, it is also important to establish a network of protected areas that provide comprehensive protection for representative examples of major marine ecosystems. Spatial protection and management will be most effective when it can be implemented in the context of broader marine conservation measures. It is therefore critical for marine spatial protection to be considered as part of a harmonized regime for marine conservation across the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Marine protected areas (MPAs)  have an important role on the understanding of the effects of climate change on the marine ecosystem, particularly on adaptation capability and building resilience in order that it can better withstand stresses that will be imposed from ongoing climate change. Marine protected areas can also have other benefits such as for conservation of biodiversity. 
Ecological characteristics
Ross Sea Region to considering as future MPA was just identified in the 2007 CCAMLR Bioregionalization Workshop is reported in the fig. 1. Inside this area a small  MPAs or areas with marine component were just allocated and areas where taking of seals were prohibited and areas currently of no fishing. This area include the Ross Sea Shelf between 70° S, 165° E and 80° S, 150° O. 
Terra Nova Bay (TNB) extends for about 64 Km along the cost between Cape Washington to Drigalski ice tongue. TNB Marine Protected Area joins inside of the Victoria Land Coast Ross Sea, this last includes the Ice Shelf section south of McMurdo Sound, extends from Cape Adare at 68° S to the La Gorce Mountains at 86° S. The entire area is very important from environmental and ecological point of view due to the highly variable sea ice dynamics including a wide polynya, and it can be studied within the existing logistics of National Programs. 
The here proposed MPA area extend from Kay Island at 74° 05’ S at north of Terra Nova Bay until at Inexpressible Island at 75° 00’’ S and run along the coast inside the sea until to the longitude 166°30’ E. The whole area would have a size of about 6000 Km 2 (Fig 2). 
The land and coast and the open sea within the proposed MPA includes a variety of marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats. Some of these systems are unique to the Antarctic. 
Moving for one degree of latitude along the coast, changes of environmental parameters affect all the inland and marine environments, starting from nutrient cycles and primary production to top predators, leading  changing in community structure and function at any trophic level. Considering the gradually changing variables, local transitions and peculiarities may occur, because of strong wind action, peculiar edaphic features, melt-water input, grain size and sea bottom morphology. 
Consequently significant differences in the marine e non-marine physical environment are found in temperature, wind stress, solar radiation, UV-B umidity, melting and pack-ice coverage. (Cattaneo-Vietti R. 2000). 
They affect living organisms both in terms of their minimum and maximum values but also in their seasonal variability.
Aims and objectjves of the MPA
The aim of this MPA  and its management plan should be to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the Terra Nova Bay region , perhaps the last near-pristine marine ecosystem on Earth by managing the variety of activities and interests in the area. The area requires special management to ensure that its important values are protected and sustained in the long term, specially the extensive data set collected over the last 25 years. 
In particular the general objectives can be resumed as follow:
    •  avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the area.
    •  protct exemplary benthic and pelagic biodiversity of word class evoluzionary significance
    •  presenve significant habitat of Adelie and Emperor Penguins, Antarctic Petrels and Skuas  at the same that  with  weddel seal population and, different specimen of whales.
    •  allow scientific research on the ecosystem, in particular on the marine species assemblages, while ensuring it is protected from oversampling or other possible scientific impacts.
    •  maintain long-term monitoring sites to evaluate natural changes in marine and terrestrial  communities
    •  monitor the effects of the research station and its associated activities on the marine ecosystem.
    •  preserve a part of the natural ecosystem as a potential reference area for the purpose of future comparative studies.
    •  Ensure that any marine harvesting activities are avoided or at least ensure that  the development of a research plan within the area in advance of any such activities will take place.
    •  Ensure the long term protection of scientific, ecological, and other values of the Area through the minimization of disturbance. 
    • On regard of marine species particular importance is referring on adaptation and ecological role of nototheniid fish and other top predator and the scientifically and economically important tootfish population.
    •   the presence of polynya at Terra Nova Bay facilitates biogeochemical processes leading at high primary production
    • The natural laboratory that Ross Sea and particularly Terra Nova Bay represent allows to investigate climate change and its ecological effect without interference of other anthropogenic impacts.
Characterization of the area
The geographic coverage of the protected areas around TNB region is at moment poor. The MPA includes Terra Nova Bay Protected Area (marine ASPA 161, that extends less than 7 Km offshore), and along the boundaries of the proposed MPA, will be taken into account the area of Edmonson Point (ASPA with marine component N° 165). In the area of Terra Nova Bay, 20 Km from the coast is located also the Mt Melbourne protected Area (ASPA 118), that in any case should be out from the area pertains of the MPA.  Inexpressible Island on South of Terra Nova, Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay (SCAR Gazetteer Ref. No 18082) near the Mario Zucchelli Station and Kay Island at North of Edmonson Point, inside of Wood Bay are located along the terrestrial boundaries of the proposed MPA and could be proposed as new Protected Areas with the scope to consider all the areas important from ecological and biological point of view. 
However all these areas represent example of costal and nearshore ecosystems and there are no marine spatial protection or management measures in offshore pelagic areas.
The area taken into consideration, in particular, includes a wide marine area that from the coast goes forward the Ross open Sea. This area has high naturalistic importance and scientific and educational values. In the whole area is increasing scientific, touristic and logistic activities. Therefore should be important for the next future to consider the need to manage the different activities were recognised important into the area with the establishment of different Protected Areas (ASPAs) into the zone to the aim to preserve marine and terrestrial environment inside a wider regional Ross Sea MPA.
The area includes the summer Italian Station Mario Zucchelli (MZS) and the seasonal Germany Station of Gondwana just far away 20 Km from MZS (fig. 3).
The designated Area is situated in Northern Victoria Land, between the Kay Island inside of the Wood Bay and Inexpressible Island inside the Terra Nova Bay. Area comprises a strip of the coastline approximately 100 km in length, extending to a maximum of 60 km offshore. 
The Area lies between points on the coast at 74°03' S to the north (adjacent to Kay Island), and 74° 57' S to the south (just southern of Inexpressible Island), extending outward until to the 165°40’ E longitude line. (fig.2). No marine resource harvesting has been, is currently, or is planned to be, conducted within the specific Area, 
The western boundaries of the Area are reported from Kay Island  along the coasteline extending between 74°03’31”S in the north and 74°57’15”S in the south. The northern boundary of the Area is defined as the 74°57’15”S line of latitude, extending from the coast eastward to the 165°40’E line of longitude. The southern boundary is defined as the 74°57’15”S line of latitude, extending from the coast   163° 38’ E eastward to the 165°40’E line of longitude. 
Geology and Glaciology, water circulation, distrubution of sea ice, in particular along the Victoria Land and in the Ross Ice Shelf have been studied by different authors ( from Ainley D.G. , The Ross Sea : High Seas Gem 2009).
Ross sea as descripted by Ainley (2009) is defined as the region landward of the 800-m isobath on the upper continental slope, where the warmer, abyssal deep waters are separated from the colder shelf waters.
The coastline of Terra Nova Bay marine area is a large inlet, approximately 180 x40 Km wide, delimited by the Avietor Glacier (73°55’ S, 165°20’ E and the  Drygalski Ice Tongue (75°20’ S,  162°50’ E). It is characterised predominantly by rocky cliffs, with large boulders forming occasional ‘beaches’ (Simeoni et al., 1989). Geology and glaciology of Terra Nova Bay area is rather complex particularly because Northern Victoria Land sits at the Pacific termination of the transantarctic mountains (Lombardo B. & others) 
More than a hundred small lakes and ponds were identified in the ice-free areas, not to count the meltwater and periglacial lakes. Most of these water bodies are located along the coast, These lakes receive their sediment and water supply during warmer periods of spring and summer through melted snow and ice. The source areas of most of these glacial lakes, which act as sediment traps, are debris-mantled slopes that are eroded by periglacial mass movement processes.
In this area, like in the rest of Antarctic continent, the soils develop and vary according to the nature of the bedrock, the time, the climate and other ecological factors that control weathering, and the presence of biotic communities.. Because of the extreme aridity and the very low temperatures, the soils are usually devoid of organic matter, except in scattered small localities where a sparse lichen cover may be present. In this environment, chemical weathering processes proceed very slowly, and rock debris is mainly produced by glacial scouring, cryoclastic processes during freeze–melt cycles, and strong winds. The ground surface generally consists of unconsolidated boulders and pebbly gravels; the fine material is blown away by wind and accumulates to the leeward of larger boulders.( Malandrino M. & others)
Terra Nova Bay is part of the Ross Sea and is relatively ice–free in summer.             In the sheltered areas, the soft bottom begins at 20–30 m.,  pack ice approximately  of  2–2.5 m thick covers the sea surface for 9–10 months of the year (Stocchino &Lusetti, 1988; 1990).  Data available for the summer period suggest that ocean currents in the Area are likely to be slow and to flow generally in a north-south direction. 
The seafloor within the Area is primarily granitic rock, with softer substrates composed of coarse sands or gravels.  In the supralittoral zone, only cyanobacteria and diatoms colonise the hard substrates, while the intertidal zone (1.5–2.0 m wide) has, in the most sheltered areas, a high coverage of the green alga Urospora penicilliformis and Prasiola crispa (Cormaci et al., 1992b).  
Below the tidal zone, down to 2–3 m depth, the community is very poor, due to the persistent presence and scouring action of pack ice, and is mainly composed of epilithic diatoms and the crustacean amphipod Paramoera walkeri.  Immediately deeper, rocks can be fully colonised by the red alga Iridaea cordata  frequently found with Plocamium cartilagineum, to a depth of 12 m  At this level large sessile animals such as Alcyonium antarcticum and Urticinopsis antarctica can be occasionally observed, The upper algal belts represent shelter and a food source for diversified and abundant communities of mobile fauna. Numerous invertebrates, such as the polychaete, the mollusc, the crustacean amphipod and the isopod feed on these algal species and can be very abundant. On rocky bottoms in deeper layers, the algal colonisation is replaced by a calcareous crustose coralline alga (Clathromorphum lemoineanum) on which sea-urchins feed. (from  Management Plan , Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA 161) Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea ATCM XXVI, Madrid 2003) 
The caracterization of Terra Nova Bay area and along the coast at different deep has been well studied in the past particularly by italian scientists and utilized into the preparation of the Management Plans both of Terra Nova Bay marine ASPA n°161 and Edmonson Point ASPA with marine component  n° 165.
Scientific values
The whole Terra Nova Bay and Wood Bay area (Fig. 2) are particularly valuable for science due to the extraordinary presence of marine and terrestrial flora and fauna, with a database running more than the last 20 years. Extensive marine ecological research has been carried out at Terra Nova Bay since the half of years eighty contributing substantially to our understanding of these communities which had not previously been well-described. High diversity at both species and community levels make this Area of high ecological and scientific value.
Examples of researches performed into the proposed MPA are studies on Long Term Ecological Research that includes Terra Nova Bay since 2006 into the national Network LTER-Italy.The project is integrated in the international project Latitudinal Gradient Project (LGP) coordinated from New Zealand that includes Terra Nova Bay costal ecosystem into the historical Long Term Monitoring.
The presence of a population of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Adelie Cove (‘Penguin Bay’) allows assessment of the effects of this colony on the adjacent marine environment (Povero et al., 2001). 
The descriptive name Silverfish Bay is based on the abundance of Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum) eggs found under the fast ice. The popularity of the locality and its scientific importance to the Ross Sea ecosystem resulted in a common name being assigned. It is noteworthy to emphasize that the locality  is the only known reproductive area for this important key fish species of the Antarctic coastal ecosystem (Vacchi et al., 2004; Bottaro et al., 2009)
At Edmonson Point , the geographical position, the terrain and habitat of the site and the natural protection given by the summer fast ice extension and the distance from Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay make Edmonson Point particularly suitable for the research being undertaken on adelie penguins and skuas .
Besides the presence of one of the greatest emperor penguin colonies at Cape Washington makes the zone particularly important for studying on these birds. 
Studies have been carried out on a wide variety of topics including long term monitoring of, penguins and bird populations also in the Wood Bay and Edmonson Point area (Corsolini S. and Tremont R. 1997, Olmastroni and others 1998, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004), not only by Italian scientists but in collaboration with scientists from a wide range of Antarctic Treaty Parties.
The Victoria Land Coast (Ross Sea), as said before included the Ice Shelf section south of McMurdo Sound and represent the most extensive latitudinal Gradient along the Antarctic coastline that can be studied within the existing logistics of national programs. The Ross Sea Region contains a number of environmental (ecological) spectra relating to cold, aridity, solar radiation, UV, light/dark conditions and high variable sea ice dynamics including a major polynya. The land and coast within the Ross Dependency across this wide latitudinal range includes a variety of marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats., Some of these system are unique to the Antarctic. 
Another Project “Terra Nova Bay ASPA Marine Observatory (MOA-TNB)” joins inside of the project LTER-Italy and relate on a marine coastal observatory for the collection and successive marine environmental information processing for a corrected management of the Terra Nova Bay marine  ASPA n°161.
In particular scientific research being undertaken within the area is important for considering the long term environmental changes in the region and as these are in relation with global changes and in particular in this moment in relation to the effect of climate changes. This research is important to the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole.
There is a potentially risk for the researches when activities occur in the area not appropriately managed, The marine harvesting activities are not normally conducted within the area into consideration and the marine component of the area represent approximately only the 2% of the CCAMLR Subarea 88.1. Harvesting activities shall be forbidden in the area so that fisheries would not impact on the important scientific and other values present within the area.
Recently during the XXVII CCAMLR has been proposed to split 88.1J subarea ( that includes enterely Ross Sea Area) in Est and West and to prohibit fishing in West proposing the area of Terra Nova Bay as a SSRU (small scale research unit). The SSRU proposal for Terra Nova Bay is consequent to a wider proposal for Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA) that should include entirely the portions 88.1J and 88.1 H. This should be important with the scope to have a truly protection of the marine resources that refer to 105, 106, 121, 124, 161, and 165 MPA present in the whole area of Ross Sea.
Flora and fauna values
Wood Bay and Terra Nova Bay areas are among the most biologically and ecologically diverse in Antarctica  with many species of bryophytes, lichens, marine birds, mammals and invertebrates.
These organisms are present on both marine and terrestrial ecosystem and whole MPA system produces a clear influence on regional ecological processes.
Breading colonies of birds and seals are present on ice-free areas along the coast of Edmonson Point, Adelie Cove and Inexpressible Island, while emperor penguins are present on ice at Cape Washington.
Particularly numerous Weddell  seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are commonly found in the area.
South polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed within the Area with one of the most numerous colony of the Victoria Land. 
Flocks of snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) have been observed flying over the Area, and Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) have been sighted regularly. The second of these latter two species is known to breed within the Area. 
At least six moss species, one liverwort, and about 30 lichen species have been recorded within the single area of Edmonson Point and recent analyses have identified at least 120 alga and cyanobacteria species present in the same area.
No other area in the Ross Sea, apart from Cape Hallett, has a comparable abundance of plants as Edmonson Point (Greenfield et. al. (1985)) although in 1996 a similarly extensive area colonised almost exclusively by Bryum subrotundifolium (= B. argenteum) was discovered on Beaufort Island (ASPA No. 105), approximately 280 km to the south of Edmonson Point.
Particularly around Edmonson Point area the moss-dominated communities comprise up to seven bryophyte species, several algae and cyanobacteria and, at the drier end of the moisture gradient, several lichens encrusting moribund moss (Lewis Smith, 1999; Bargagli et al., 1999).
The lichen communities are relatively diverse, with 24 species identified and at least six crustose species so far unidentified, although few are abundant (Lewis Smith 1999, and pers. comm. 2004)
Invertrebates
Numerous invertebrates, such as the polychaete Harmothoe brevipalpa, the mollusc Laevilittorina antarctica, the crustacean amphipod Paramoera walkeri and the isopod Nototanais dimorphus can be very abundant. The soft bottoms from 20–40 m depth are coarse sands and gravels, where the community is characterised by the mollusc bivalve Laternula elliptica and the polychaete Aglaophamus ornatus (Nephtiidae). Between 30–70 m, the substrate becomes finer and is completely colonised by the bivalve Adamussium colbecki. Below 70–75 m down to 120–130 m depth the benthic communities are dominated by the sessile zoobenthos mainly characterised by sponges and anthozoans, which can reach very high biomass values.  The conspicuous sponge spicule mats found at these depths underline the important role of sponges in this area, besides the one played by diatoms, in determining the sediment texture and silica content. A peculiar community, dominated by polychaetes and by the bivalve Limatula hodgsoni, can be associated with these mats. Much deeper, at about 150-200 m depth, brachiopods and various species of bivalves characterise the environment on small gravels as well as on the soft bottom.The great heterogeneity of these substrates contributes to the creation of communities with considerable species richness, diversity and biomass.
In this region, large predators such as the gastropod Neobuccinum eatoni and the nemertean Parborlasia corrugatus are frequent.  The echinoid Sterechinus neumayeri and the starfish Odontaster validus are still very frequent at all depths on both hard and mobile substrates (Chiantore et al., 2002; Cerrano et al., 2000b).
Finally, the faunal assemblage of the Area includes four different families of notothenioid fishes, represented especially by species of the Trematomus group, including T. bernacchii, T.newnesi, T. pennelli, T. hansoni and T. loennbergii and the channichthyid Chionodraco hamatus.
 These exert an important role in benthic food webs as consumers of many invertebrate species, mainly crustaceans and polychaetes (Vacchi et al., 1991; 1992; 1994a; 1994b; 1995; 1997; 2000b; La Mesa et al., 1996; 1997; 2000; Guglielmo et al., 1998).
Benthic community and fish
Evidences from Ross Sea Biology indicate that phytoplankton production is a function of the age of the ice, and has a  relatively restricted biodiversity, particularly diatoms and haptophytes that attain alternatively large biomass in summer or in spring. Benthic communities are well studied in the Ross Sea as strongly influened by ice and from other environmental features. Zooplankton biomassas is high for the Ross Sea and dominated by smaller zooplankton (copepods and crystal krill for example are relatively abundant in Terra Nova Bay) , rather than the larger krill.  Antarctic krill are important prey for penguins, seals, whales and other predators while crystal Krill is an important prey also for silverfish Pleurogramma antarcticum.  ( from Ainley D.G. , The Ross Sea : High Seas Gem 2009). The Ross Sea fish fauna consists of 16 families and 95 species . Between the most importants and abundant there are Trematomus species, and silverfish, pleurogramma antarcticum. This last species together with Dissostichus Mawsoni (toothfish) are ecologically very important in the Ross Sea particularly  Dissostichus in the role of a top predator (Vacchi & others 1994a)  In the area of Terra Nova bay it is principally found the species of medium lenght like 80-100 cm
Protected Areas that could be included into the boundaries of the  proposed Marine Protected Area (MPA)
The following areas are to be proposed as particularly sensitive along the cost between Wood Bay and the final part of Terra Nova Bay. Living from North to South, they are Kay Island, Cape Washington, Silver Fish Bay  Inexpressible Island and the just mentioned Edmonson Point ASPA and Terra Nova Bay Marine ASPA.  
    a) ASPA No.165 (Edmonson Point) is designed to protect local fauna and vegetation. The site is a good example of an Adèlie penguin ( Pygoscelis adeliae) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki) assemblage and the site includes a Weddel seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) breeding area along the adiacent coast. Therefore the near-shore marine environment is a good and representative example of the sea-ice habitat used by breeding Weddell seals to give birth and wean pups early in the summer season. A colony of approximately 2000 pairs of Adèlie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) has been a focus of ongoing research since 1994-95 together with a colony of approximately 120 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki)
The habitat for bryophyte development is one of the most extensive of its kind in Victoria Land and vegetation is unusually well-development. Scientific values are particularly high for terrestrial and freshwater ecology and the site is considered especially good for studies on the impact of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems. The volcanic lithology and locally nutrient-enriched (by birds) substata, together with a localised abundance of water, provides a habitat for relatively extensive bryophyte development. Plant communities are highly sensitive to change in hydrological regime thus the range of vegetation is diverse and includes epilithic lichen  and moss-dominated communities.
    b) Marine ASPA No. 161 (Terra Nova Bay) is designed for research into the near-shore benthic communities in the region. Extensive marine ecological research has been carried out at Terra Nova Bay since 1986/87, contributing substantially to the understanding of these communities. High diversity at both species and communities level make this Area of high ecological and scientific value. Particularly the presence of a population of Adèlie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Adèlie Cove allows assessment of the effects of this colony on the adjacent marine environment. Besides between the objectives of marine ASPA we have to remember to maintain long-term monitoring site to evaluate natural change in marine communities, to monitor the effects of the near research station (MZS) and its associated activities on marine ecosystem and to  minimize the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the area.
    c) Kay Island (coordinates 74° 05’ S, 165°20’ E) is situated on North of Edmonson Point inside the Bay that is named Wood Bay (Fig.4). It is a particular site from geographical point of view. It  is encircled by ice that very rarely is melted. There is very hight albedo effect there and during the summer it is possible to find temperatures near 10 degree.

It not have different biodiversity than other site in the area, but there is high biomass, there is high growing of mosses and the rocks are covered by lichens, common lichens but very abundant and the growing is sometimes spectacular.

Another particularity is that Kay Island is an important skuas and snow petrel riproduction site and again more important is that the site is a perhaps the unic reproduction site for the Wilson’s Storm petrels  rare in the Terra Victoria.
    d) Cape Washington (coordinates  74° 39’ S, 165°25’ E ) is situated no longer than 30 Km to North of the Italian Base (Fig.5 and 6). It is a particular site for the presence of the second biggest emperor penguin colony of the world  and the coast immediately at north is a important breeding site for Weddell seals. Along the cost of Cape Washington there is a passage line for the Killer Whales that throught Terra Nova Bay go until Mc Murdo Sound.

An aerial survey on cetacean species, conducted in the coastal area surrounding the Italian Station Mario Zucchelli in summer  2004, showed the presence of Killer Whale (Orcinus orca (L.), types B and C and Minke Whale (Balaenoptera bonaerensis Burmeister). (Lauriano et al., 2007a; 2007b; Lauriano pers.com.) 
    e) Silverfish Bay (coordinates of triangle in fig 7. West of Shield Nunatak  74°34.1’S  164° 30’ E, Oscar Point  74° 35.4’ S  164° 55. 2’ E,  Tip of Ice Tongue 74°41.1516’S  164° 33. 012’E). It is a coastal handle of sub-triangular form of approximately 78 km2 of extension; the surface almost is totally covered by multi-annual marine ice until 3 meters of thickness; the depths of sea turn out very deep but a bathymetry of the locality does not exist.

The denomination of the area is relative to the abundant presence of eggs and larvaes of “Silverfish” (Pleuragramma antarcticum), the fish key species in the trophic webs of Antarctic costal ecosystem (La Mesa et al., 2004).

The platelet ice occurring at Terra  Nova Bay in early spring has been shown to house an important nursery for the Antarctic silverfish, Pleuragramma  antarcticum, a key organism in the ecology of Antarctic food webs (La Mesa et al., 2004; Vacchi et al., 2004). The platelet ice environment has strong prooxidant characteristics at the beginning of austral spring, and the marked responsiveness of antioxidant defences represents a fundamental strategy for  P. antarcticum. The elevated prooxidant challenge, to which these organisms are naturally adapted, also influences the susceptibility of P. antarcticum toward prooxidant chemicals of anthropogenic origin (Regoli et al., 2005b). 

The exceptional scientific importance of this area for the management of the Ecosystem of the Sea of Ross required therefore the creation of a suitable protected area.

Silverfish is a species key for the alimentary network of Antarctica. It is the food for penguins, seals, cetacea, and many other marine organisms; the protection of their  reproductive cycle is crucial for the entire antarctic marine ecosystem.
    f) Inexpressible Island (coordinates 74°54’ S, 163°39’ E) is situated about 30 Km on South from Italian scientific Base of MZS (Fig. 8 and 9).

Inexpressible island penguin colonies consists of 25000 nests and it appears directly on an area of open sea, Terra Nova Bay polynya ,maintained free from the marine ice (pack) from strong katabatic winds for all the year. 

For the high natural values of the proposed are we propose to forbid the commercial fishing by supporting the hypothesis for a SSRU, as recommended to the Scientific Commission CCMLAR  November 2008,  by the Fish Stock Assessment working group (FSA) for Western Ross Sea most internal area including Mc Murdo Sound and Terra Nova Bay. The SSRU would take into account the special vulnerability of the area particularly considering that it is a migration area of the Tootfish. This fish, in order to reach the reproduction zones situated to the north, passes through Terra Nova Bay.
Preliminary conclusion
The aim of the proposed MPA was to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of Terra Nova  region by regulating the activities within the area. The area would require special management to ensure that this important values are protected and sustained in the long-term, specially the extensive scientific data sets collected over the last 25 years. Increasing human activity and potentially conflicting interests have made it necessary to manage and coordinate activities more effectively within the area.
There are many scientific values to preserve there both along the coast and in the sea.
Fortunately the foodweb of the Terra Nova Bay area , in the last 10-15 years appears to have been largely untouched directly by human presence.
Inside of the taken into account MPA there is high presence of Adélie penguins while emperor penguins are present on ice at Cape Washington.
Particularly numerous Weddell seals are commonly found in the area South polar skuas breed within the area with one of the most numerous colony of the Victoria Land. 
Flocks of snow petrels have been observed flying over the Area, and Wilson’s storm petrels have been sighted regularly.
The area taken into account is under CCAMLR jurisdiction. At moment fishering is limited at scientific sampling and would be prohibited unless by permit under Madrid Protocol. In any case the collection of samples would be take into account, particularly the sampling modality, to evoid the affect the population size or destroy bentic communities.
Very important should be to preserve krill and tootfish biomass particularly this last species because the reduction of an so ecologically significant top predator could substantially alter the Ross Sea ecosystem.
To the aim to preserve all mentioned scientific values, the establishment of Terra Nova Bay marine protected area is proposed. The MPAs are a tested tool for the protection of marine biodiversity, and Terra Nova Bay MPA could represent an example and an incentive in order to improve conservation of the Ross Sea’s ecosytem.
Further work is required to confirm if the additional ASPA and marime ASPA here taken into account would be appropriate to meet the full range of conservation objectives for Terra Nova Bay region. 
The input of experts in reviewing this proposal is essential also in the optical to ensure that spatial protection can be developed as a part of a comprehensive and representative and sure more wide Ross Sea Marine Protected Area. 
Biblography
Ainley D.G. , The Ross Sea : High Seas Gem 2009
Bargagli, R., Smith, R.I.L., Martella, L., Monaci, F., Sanchez-Hernandez, J.C. and Ugolini, F.C. 1999. Solution geochemistry and behaviour of major and trace elements during summer in a moss community at Edmonson Point, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 11(1): 3-12.
Bottaro M., Oliveri D., Ghigliotti L., Pisano E., Ferrando S., Vacchi M., 2009. Born among the ice: first morphological observations on two developmental stages of the Antarctic silverfish Pleuragramma antarcticum, a key species of the Southern Ocean. Rev. Fish. Biol. Fisheries 19: 249–259
Cattaneo Vietti R. , Workshop LGP Report Siena, Italy, July 2000)
Cerrano C., Bavestrello G., Calcinai B., Cattaneo-Vietti R., Sarà A., 2000b. Asteroids eating sponges from Tethys Bay, East Antarctica. Antarctic Science 12(4): 431-32.
Chiantore M., R. Cattaneo-Vietti, L. Elia, M. Guidetti, M. Antonini, 2002. Reproduction and condition of the scallop Adamussium colbecki (Smith 1902), the sea-urchin Sterechinus neumayeri (Meissner, 1900) and the sea-star Odontaster validus Koehler, 1911 at Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea): different strategies related to inter-annual variations in food availability. Polar Biology 22: 251-55.
Cormaci M., Furnari G., Scammacca B., 1992b. The benthic algal flora of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antarctica). Botanica Marina 35(6): 541-52
Corsolini S. and Tremont R. 1997, Australia-Italy cooperation in Antarcitica: Adelie Penguin monitoring program, Edmonson Point, Ross sea region Newslette of the Italian Biological research in Antartctica 1 (Austral summer 1995-96). 59-64 Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Bisogno I., Focardi S, 2004. Interannual variation in the summer diet of Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae at Edmonson Point . WG-EMM04/ 38.

Greenfield, L.G., Broady, P.A., Given, D.R., Codley, E.G. and Thompson, K. 1985. Immediate science report of NZARP Expedition K053 to RDRC. Botanical and biological studies in Victoria Land and Ross Island, during 1984–85.

Guglielmo L., Granata A., Greco S., 1998. Distribution and abundance of postlarval and juvenile Pleuragramma antarticum (Pisces, Nototheniidae )of Terra Nova Bay (Ross Sea, Antartica). Polar Biology 19: 37-51.
La Mesa M., Arneri E., Giannetti G., Greco S., Vacchi M., 1996. Age and growth of the nototheniid fish Trematomus bernacchii Boulenger from Terra Nova Bay, Antartica. Polar Biology16: 139-45.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., Castelli A., Diviacco G., 1997. Feeding ecology of two nototheniid fishes Trematomus hansoni and Trematomus loennbergi from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Polar Biology 17: 62-68.
La Mesa M., Vacchi M., T. Zunini Sertorio, 2000. Feeding plasticity of Trematomus newnesi (Pisces, Nototheniidae) in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, in relation to environmental conditions. Polar Biology 23(1): 38-45.
Lewis Smith, R.I. 1999. Biological and environmental characteristics of three cosmopolitan mosses dominant in continental Antarctica. Journal of Vegetation Science 10: 231-242.
Lombardo B., Pertusati P.C. & Ricci C.A. Some Geological and Petrological Problema in the Wilson Terrane of Borchgrevink coast (Northern Victoria Land, Antarctica)  Memorie della Società geologica italiana Vol. XLVI, 135-143 1989
Malandrino M., Abollino O.,Buoso S., Casalino C.E.,  Gasparon M., Giacomino A. La Gioia C. and Mentasti E. Geochemical characterisation of Antarctic soils and lacustrine sediments from Terra Nova Bay. Microchemical Jurnal Vol. 92, issue 1, pag 21-31Polar Chemistry May 2009.
Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Franchi, E., Focardi, S., Clarke, J., Kerry, K., Lawless, R. and Tremont, R. 1998.  Adélie penguin colony at Edmonson Point (Ross Sea, Antarctica): a long term monitoring study. 31 August-September 1998;    Christchurch, New Zealand. SCAR. p 143.
Olmastroni, S., Corsolini, S., Pezzo, F., Focardi, S. and Kerry, K. 2000. The first five     years of the Italian-Australian Joint Programme on the Adélie Penguin: an overview.     Italian Journal of Zoology Supplement 1: 141-45.
Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Volpi V, Corsolini S, Focardi S, Kerry K. 2001b.  Foraging ecology of chick rearing of Adélie penguins in two colonies of the Ross Sea; 27/8-1/9 2001; Amsterdam, The Netherlands. SCAR.
Olmastroni, S. 2002. Factors affecting the foraging strategies of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Edmonson Point, Ross Sea, Antarctica. PhD Thesis, Università di Siena.
Olmastroni S, Pezzo F, Volpi V, Focardi S, 2004. Effects of weather and seaice on the reproductive performance of the Adélie penguin at Edmonson point, Ross Sea. CCAMLR Science 11: 99-109.
Povero P., Chiantore M., Misic C., Budillon G., Cattaneo-Vietti R., 2001. Pelagic-benthic coupling in Adélie Cove (Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica): a strongly land forcing controlled system? Polar Biology  24: 875-882
Simeoni U., Baroni C., Meccheri M., Taviani M., Zanon G., 1989. Coastal studies in Northern Victoria Land (Antarctica): Holocene beaches of Inexpressible Island,Tethys Bay and Edmonson Point. Boll. Ocean. Teor. Appl. 7(1-2): 5-16.
Stocchino C., Lusetti C., 1988. Le costanti armoniche di marea di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide). F.C. 1128 Istituto Idrografico della Marina, Genova. 
Stocchino C., Lusetti C., 1990. Prime osservazioni sulle caratteristiche idrologiche e dinamiche di Baia Terra Nova (Mare di Ross, Antartide). F.C. 1132 Istituto Idrografico della Marina, Genova. 
Vacchi M., Greco S., La Mesa M., 1991. Ichthyological survey by fixed gears in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica). Fish list and first results. Memorie di Biologia Marina e di Oceanografia 19: 197-202.
Vacchi M., Romanelli M., La Mesa M., 1992. Age structure of Chionodraco hamatus (Teleostei, Channichthyidae) samples caught in Terra Nova Bay, East Antarctica. Polar Biology 12: 735-38. 
Vacchi M., Greco S., 1994a. Capture of the giant Nototheniid fish Dissostichus mawsoni in Terra Nova Bay (Antarctica): Notes on the fishing equipment and the specimens caught. Cybium 18(2): 199-203.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Castelli A., 1994b. Diet of two coastal nototheniid fish from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 6(1): 61-65.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1995. The diet of Antarctic fish Trematomus newnesi Boulenger, 1902 (Notothenidae) from Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. Antarctic Science 7(1): 37-38.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., 1997. Morphometry of Cryodraco specimens of Terra Nova Bay. Cybium 21(4): 363-68.
Vacchi M., La Mesa M., Greco S., 2000b. The coastal fish fauna of Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (Antarctica). In: Ross Sea Ecology, F. Faranda, L. Guglielmo and A. Ianora Eds., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg: 457-68.
























Fig 1. The Map shows Ross Sea region that should be protected from commercial 
Resource under the Antarctic Treaty and it is the same area identified in the 2007
CCAMLR Bioregionalization Workshop.


Fig 2 Boundaries of the new proposed Terra Nova Bay Marine Protected Area. The size is about 7000 Km2. The maximum  length is 100 Km and the width is 70 Km inside of the Ross Sea.



Fig. 3 Satellite image of the Terra Nova Bay Area. Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS), Silverfish Bay and Cape Washington are marked. A few kilometers to the South of MZS (below MZS in the picture) are located TNB ASPA n° 161, and Inexpressible Island. To the North of Cape Washington, just outside the satellite image there are Edmonson Point and Kay Island.


Fig. 4 View of Kay Island in the Wood Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica


Fig.5 Cape Washington emperor penguin colony

Fig 6 A view of Cape Washington and the emperor penguin colony at beginning of summer season


Fig 7 Silverfish Bay area corresponds to the triangle delimited by Oscar Point, the tip of Campbell Ice Tongue and Shield Nunatak

Fig. 8 Inexpressible Island viewed from South


Fig.9 Inexpressible Island and Adelie Penguin colony on the beach.



