





Review of management plans under the Protocol: an example at Cape Hallett





Review of management plans under the Protocol: an example at Cape Hallet
1. Introduction
A small area at Cape Hallett was first protected as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 7 in 1966, making it one of the oldest protected areas in Antarctica. The United States proposed the area because it provided an outstanding example of biological diversity, containing “a small patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which supports a variety of terrestrial fauna”, and the rich avifauna was also noted, although only South Polar skua breeding territories were then included. 
The boundaries of the SPA were extended on two prior occasions, first in 1985 to include more of the area important for terrestrial ecology, and secondly in 2002 to incorporate the Adélie colony in view of its unique scientific value related to station decommissioning and subsequent colony recovery.
2. Management Plan review
The Madrid Protocol requires in Annex V, Article 6.3 that “…A review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least every five years [and] The plan shall be updated as necessary.”
The latest management plan for ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett was adopted in 2002, and consequently the United States initiated a review in 2007-08. Following consultations, a draft management plan was submitted for consideration at CEPXI (WP013; Kiev, 2008). The draft suggested that the boundary of the ASPA could be defined as “>5m from breeding areas” without specifically defining a fixed boundary line. A number of Treaty Parties could not support a boundary that is not clearly defined. To address these points, and to develop a revised draft management plan, the United States undertook fieldwork at Cape Hallett from 26 Nov – 03 Dec 2009 with the following objectives:
    • Define precisely the extent of Adélie colony breeding areas in 2009;
    • Assess and survey precisely potential areas where visitors could access the site without significant impacts on the values of the ASPA, and survey options for potential revision of the ASPA boundary;
    • Assess aircraft access issues in light of the sensitivities and complexities of the site;
    • Gather data to improve mapping, in particular the coastline and key features within the ASPA.
3. Summary of review process
In the course of carrying out the management plan review for ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett over several years, the United States has followed a procedure, and used a variety of tools, to help reach conclusions about approaches to management at the site. Examples of these procedures and tools are provided in the Appendicies attached, which can be summarised as follows:
Appendix A: Initial Identification of Issues
This first stage in the process made a preliminary identification of key site management issues. These issues were summarised in a Discussion Paper, which was distributed for stakeholder comment.
Appendix B: Stakeholder Consultation
Individuals, groups and Parties with known direct experience and interest in the site were circulated with the Discussion Paper and comments invited. An excellent response was received, which was very helpful to guide management responses. In practice, consultations with stakeholders took place over the entire process of the management plan review, and the summary in Appendix B aims only to highlight key points raised by respondents rather than present full correspondence. Subsequent to the field visit, additional consultation was undertaken on a range of management issues, including minimizing the risks of introductions of foreign species, boundary options, tourist visits and air access.
One of the responses received in consultations drew attention to the importance of a vegetation plot that was originally surveyed by Emanuel Rudolph (Ohio State University) in 1961-62, which laid the foundation of the original protected area. Careful work by a team led by Prof T.G. Allan Green (University of Waikato) repeated the survey in January 2004, enabling a detailed assessment of vegetation change over a 40-year period. The site is therefore of unique scientific value and it is extremely important that the site is not subjected to unnecessary disturbance. Thus, the consultation process led directly to the decision to demarcate the plot as a Restricted Zone in the revised management plan.
Appendix C: Field Visit Report
The United States has developed a checklist designed to record observations made during field visits to ASPAs for the purposes of management plan review. This checklist has been developed by combining features found in the SCAR Visit Report Form referred to in the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans (Resolution 4 (1998)) with items covered under the Checklist to Assist in the Inspection of ASPAs and ASMAs (Resolution 4 (2008)). The SCAR form was not specifically designed for site inspections and hence omits some categories of information important for management plan review purposes, while at the same time the ASPA/ASMA Inspection Checklist does not cover a range of items that are usefully included in the SCAR Visit Report form.
The United States has found that to meet its needs fully for recording observations relevant to the review of management plans, it has been beneficial to combine both forms into one consolidated and customised checklist that is suitable for field use by observers. In order to keep the form to the minimum size needed, a few questions appearing in the other forms have been omitted (e.g. where the information was readily available from other sources). For example, the authority issuing the permit is already known (in our case the Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation), and other protected areas in the vicinity are easily verified by reference to the list maintained by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
A practical example of implementation of the customised Field Visit Report form is provided in Appendix C, which covers the field visit made to ASPA No. 106 in Nov–Dec 2009 during the management plan review.
Appendix D: Boundary revisions
The United States supported a change to the management plan so that visitor access to what is currently a ‘Managed Zone’ within the ASPA would be accommodated outside of the Area using Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines, which were introduced by the ATCM after the previous plan for Cape Hallett was adopted. In reaching a decision to revise the boundaries and allow continued tourist access, the United States has followed advice received from bird biologists that tourist visits to a limited coastal areas of Seabee Hook with controlled access and management would not significantly impact on the values of the site.
A concern expressed by a number of Parties about the revised draft plan submitted for consideration at CEP-XI (WP-013, Kiev 2008) was that the boundaries were not fixed and defined by coordinates. The SGMP noted comments from several Parties that this could make the boundary difficult to enforce legally, and to define in legislation. The United States accepted these concerns and has revised the plan to define a boundary that would remain fixed until any future need for a subsequent change is identified.
A range of options was considered for potential revision of the ASPA boundary, as indicated in the Discussion Paper distributed for stakeholder comment and in subsequent consultations. Following field work, it was determined that some of the coastal areas suggested in the initial Discussion Paper as potentially suitable for tourist access were less suitable than thought. A new survey of the extent of the Adélie colony showed several places where space was insufficient for visitors to maintain at least 5 m from breeding birds.
As a result, a revised proposal was developed identifying two areas at the periphery of the colony which provide sufficient space to allow for visits with minimal impact, although reducing the area available for tourist visits. The sites identified for visitor access consist of broad, flat ground unoccupied by nesting penguins and with direct seaward access. The proposed boundary maintains a minimum of 5 m from the edge of the breeding areas of the Adélie penguin colony, to ensure that potential impacts of visitors on birds are likely to be minimal. Because sea ice conditions at the site are variable and can change very rapidly, it was considered important for safety reasons to allow sufficient shoreline for small boat landings to be made with a degree of flexibility. Following further consultations, the northern beach was subsequently included in the area accessible to tour groups, providing more options for landings without compromising the values for which the site is protected. The final draft of the revised management plan allows for visitor access to the northern beach and to the two areas at the periphery of the colony on Seabee Hook.
Appendix E: Air access
Many concerns about air access issues were raised in the stakeholder consultation, with all being in favor of stricter and clearer guidance on the conditions for aircraft operations. A paper on the issue was circulated to National Programs and helicopter and fixed wing operators (Appendix E). Following feedback received, revisions were made before inclusion of the air access guidelines in the final revised management plan.
On reaching a decision on provisions for air access, the United States has taken into account a wide range of factors including past scientific studies, existing guidelines, environmental Best Management Practice, site-specific conditions, practical constraints, technical advice from pilots, and important safety considerations. The final guidance adopted was approved by helicopter and fixed wing operators with experience at the site. A new air access guidance map was prepared to assist pilots and other visitors responsible for access. 
4. Revised management plan and maps
The fieldwork carried out as part of the management plan review surveyed key features to fill gaps in existing information. This resulted in new and more accurate maps of the Area, and new fixed boundaries were defined to provide greater clarity. An orthophoto was developed using aerial photography from 14 Dec 1983, which enabled delineation of the former station extent and former Adélie penguin nesting areas. New ground survey data and rectified aerial and satellite imagery was overlaid on this base in the evaluation of management issues. In addition to substantial revisions made to the map covering Seabee Hook, new maps were added to meet site management needs and the final revised set of maps included Map 1: Regional map; Map 2: Air access guidance; Map 3: Topographic map; and Map 4: Former Hallett Station area.
The resulting draft management plan and maps have been submitted for consideration at XXXIII ATCM as WP-058. Coupled with the work to revise the management plan for ASPA No. 106, the United States developed new Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for the purpose of managing tourist visits to Seabee Hook, working closely with IAATO, which were submitted for consideration at XXXIII ATCM as WP-042.
5. Acknowledgements
The United States wishes to thank all those who have participated in the review of the management plan for ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, including approximately 20 scientists who offered detailed comments covering all of the disciplines relevant to the types of science being conducted within the Area.
The United States particularly wishes to thank the Government of New Zealand, with whom we have cooperated closely and productively throughout the review process. We wish also to thank the Government of Italy for kindly providing key logistic support to enable the Nov-Dec 2009 field visit. Italy also later provided assistance by removal of remaining station materials from the site aboard the Italica on 30-31 January 2010, thus completing the major multi-year clean-up effort undertaken by Italy, New Zealand and the United States.
The United States is also very grateful to all Parties who have contributed through the SGMP, which provided full, thoughtful and constructive comments on the draft management plan submitted in 2008. The work of the SGMP has thus made an important and substantial contribution to the revised draft plan being submitted in 2010.
Finally, the United States also wishes to thank IAATO for their work in the cooperative development of new Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for Seabee Hook.

