





Rising to the challenge: Key steps to deliver a Comprehensive and Representative Marine Protected Areas Network in the Southern Ocean by 2012





Rising to the Challenge:
Key steps to deliver a Comprehensive and Representative Marine Protected Areas Network in the Southern Ocean by 2012


I.	Introduction

This year could well be a watershed for the development and implementation of marine spatial protection and management in the Southern Ocean. There were numerous positive developments in 2009 that, if capitalized on, will make the Southern Ocean an important example for the protection of biodiversity from now in 2010, the International Year of Biodiversity, to 2012, the deadline established to implement a comprehensive and representative system of marine spatial protection and management in the Southern Ocean and beyond.1 The task ahead is to build on the progress made in 2009 and convert it from a clear plan with actionable goals into concrete measures that will ensure the protection of the full range of Southern Ocean biodiversity. This paper will elaborate on key outcomes of 2009 and those required during 2010 to ensure that we are on track to achieve a comprehensive and representative network of marine protected areas (MPAs) and marine reserves across the Southern Ocean by 2012, and the important role of the ATCM in this process.


II.	CCAMLR XXVIII

At its recent meeting the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) approved a new high seas marine protected area (HSMPA) south of the South Orkney Islands.2 Commercial fishing is banned within the MPA as is disposal of waste and discharge from fishing vessels. Of equal if not greater importance, CCAMLR also agreed to a series of key milestones in a work plan for the coming three years. These milestones are as follows:

(i) By 2010, collate relevant data for as many of the 11 priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate), and characterise each region in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities.

(ii) By early 2011, convene a workshop to review progress, share experience on different approaches to the selection of candidate sites for protection, and determine a work program for the identification of MPAs in as many of the priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate).

(iii) By 2011, identify candidate areas for protection in as many of the priority regions as possible (and other regions as appropriate), based on the collated data and regional characterisations, and using appropriate selection methods.

(iv) By 2011, submit proposals for areas for protection to the Scientific Committee.

(v) By 2012, submit proposals on a representative system of MPAs to the Commission.3

Achievement of these milestones will lead to the creation of networks of high seas MPAs across all eleven priority areas (and other potential areas) in the Southern Ocean by 2012. With the South Orkneys MPA as an important first step, the five-step work plan makes clear CCAMLR’s intention to immediately build on this achievement and establish a comprehensive and representative system of marine spatial protection and management across the breadth of the Southern Ocean by 2012.

At this Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), CCAMLR’s South Orkney MPA should be given official endorsement by both the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and the ATCM itself. Given the stated desire for CCAMLR and the ATCM to harmonise4 their approaches to implementing marine spatial protection and management, ASOC encourages Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties (ATCPs) to extend provisions related to vessel activity of the CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-03 to all vessels of Antarctic Treaty Parties and non-contracting Parties. This can be accomplished via the adoption of a measure prohibiting the discharge by all ships of all wastes including sewage, sewage sludge, grey water and food wastes within or adjacent to the South Orkneys MPA. In addition, the ATCM should inform the IMO of the measures adopted for ATP flagged ships, and seek similar measures for all international shipping.


III.	Making Progress in 2010 – The International Year of Biodiversity

The year 2010 has been designated by the United Nations as the International Year of Biodiversity. Throughout the year, important events and meetings will highlight the need to develop and apply solutions to protect biodiversity across the globe. In the interest of progressing a harmonized ATCM-CCAMLR approach to marine spatial protection and management, the milestones referred to above (towards implementing a comprehensive and representative system of MPAs) should be presented to both the CEP and ATCM. ASOC believes that it is consistent with the discussion and recommendations from last April’s Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop5 for the CEP and ATCM to adopt and then actively support achieving and surpassing these milestones. The CEP and its Members can play a major role in fulfilling these milestones including the practicalities of exchanging data, analyses and methods.6

Both Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members have the resources and capacity to collate relevant data for all 11 areas of the Southern Ocean recognised as priorities for MPA designation and other regions as appropriate. Each region should be characterized in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities, including research history.

ASOC looks forward to learning of progress that has already been made by Parties against the first milestone at this year’s CEP and ATCM. Even at this early stage of CCAMLR’s work plan, it is useful to review progress in ongoing work and upcoming projects that ATCM parties and CCAMLR members intend to undertake towards achieving the 2012 targets. Such information sharing supports collaboration and coordination between Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members across regional projects.

The SC-CAMLR recognised that participation from CEP on discussions on marine spatial protection and management would be valuable, and should include invitations for CEP experts to attend relevant working group meetings and to participate in intersessional work on the topic of MPAs.7 The second milestone refers to the holding of a workshop to review progress, share experience on different approaches to the selection of candidate sites for protection, towards the identification of MPAs across the 11 priority regions and other regions as appropriate, to take place in early 2011. ASOC supports CEP being a full partner in this workshop. To that end, it would be useful for CEP to discuss and communicate to CCAMLR CEP’s objectives and desired outcomes for such a workshop. CEP discussions on objectives and desired outcomes for such a workshop could also form the basis of a draft terms of reference for the workshop. These draft terms of reference could be submitted for consideration by the CCAMLR Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG EMM) meeting scheduled for July 2010 with the objective that they are finalised and agreed, and a date for an early 2011 joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop on Southern Ocean MPAs is set.

Another positive step would be the formation of an ad-hoc steering group of experts from both CEP and SC-CAMLR to oversee not just the proposed 2011 marine spatial protection and management workshop but the overall development of work towards implementation of a comprehensive and representative network of MPAs and marine reserves across the Southern Ocean by 2012. SC-CAMLR already has a group in the MPA Special Fund Correspondence Group that could contribute to such work.8 Members of the CEP with expertise in developing and implementing marine spatial protection could work with this group. Further, SC-CAMLR has recognised that the participation of experts from CEP on marine spatial protection in the CCAMLR WG EMM meeting would be beneficial in progressing and coordinating the Southern Ocean MPA agenda.  CCAMLR and the CEP should also engage the expertise that observers to CCAMLR and ATCM have in MPAs, including ASOC and IUCN


IV.	Reference Areas, Resilience and Adaptation

As the evidence of the impacts of increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, especially carbon dioxide, becomes more apparent,9 Antarctic Treaty parties have recognised the need to address the impacts of climate change and ocean acidification as evidenced by the recently held Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change.

A key recommendation of the April 2009 CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop was that a representative system of marine protected areas, which would serve the purpose of conserving representative components of Antarctic marine biodiversity, could also be designed in such a way to:

    • act as scientific reference areas, for example, to help understand how to manage activities in the face of climate change impacts, and

    • provide areas to increase the resilience of the Antarctic marine ecosystem to climate change or other impacts.10

The report of the Southern Ocean Sentinel workshop released at CCAMLR XXVIII reinforced the need for scientific reference areas to study and monitor the effects of climate change free from the influence of other human factors. In areas where there are a number of activities occurring, an important time series of observations could become tainted or spoiled by factors other than climate change if steps are not taken to protect the integrity of long-term monitoring. Activities including fisheries, tourism, other scientific research and Antarctic Parties support and supply operations can negatively affect the ability of a monitoring program to establish attribution of impact, and the level and influence of impact regionally and globally. Marine spatial protection and management that removes or manages the impact of these activities from the designated area can facilitate the collection of valuable data over an extended time period. The management arrangements and spatial configuration of climate change reference areas will depend on the type of data required for developing models and allow for the regular measurement of indicators.11


    V. Scale of Ambition

In order to build resilience, provide important reference areas and protect biodiversity the scale of future marine spatial protection and management designations will need to increase significantly. At approximately 94,000 km2 in size, the South Orkneys MPA is slightly bigger than Portugal. However this only represents 0.26% of the Southern Ocean (as defined by the CCAMLR boundary, or less than 0.46% of area south of 60° south). Therefore it is small then in relation to the size of marine protected areas that will need to be designated thus to achieve the level of biodiversity protection embodied by the principles of comprehensiveness, adequateness and representativeness and implied in the WSSD goals for 2012.12 In comparison, some examples of MPAs designated within certain EEZs around the world (Kiribati’s Phoenix Islands Protected Area – 410,500 km2, the Papahanaumokuakea National Monument in the North Western Hawaiian Islands - 341,362km2, The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park – 344,400 km2, and the expected forthcoming full designation of the over 300,000 km2 Charles Gibbs Fracture Zone MPA in the high seas of the North Atlantic13) approach the scale of designations required for future additions to a Southern Ocean MPA network. Larger areas will also simplify management of a Southern Ocean protected area network by the ATCM and CCAMLR as recognised by the April 2009 CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop.14


VI.	Key Outcomes Required for 2010

    • Official endorsement should be provided from the CEP and ATCM for CCAMLR’s designation of the South Orkneys marine protected area.

    • ATCPs should extend provisions related to vessel activity of the CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-03 to all vessels of Antarctic Treaty Parties and non-contracting Parties via the adoption of a measure prohibiting the discharge of all ships’ wastes including sewage, sewage sludge, grey water and food wastes within or adjacent to the South Orkneys MPA. In addition, the ATCM should inform the IMO of the measures adopted for ATP flagged ships, and seek similar measures for all international shipping.

    • By the end of 2010, Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR members must have made substantive progress on collating relevant data for all of the 11 regions prioritized for the implementation of marine spatial protection and management (and other regions as appropriate), and have characterised each region in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities.

    • The ATCM endorsement of the SC-CCAMLR timetable of action, and welcome CCAMLR’s commitment to this process and the use of special funds to achieve greater action.

    • Terms of reference and dates agreed for an early 2011 joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop on marine spatial protection and management.

    • To explore the formation of a joint CEP/SC-CAMLR steering group to facilitate coordination and collaboration and oversee work towards the development of marine spatial protection and management in the Southern Ocean.


VII.	Conclusions

Recent developments have demonstrated that the ATCM and CCAMLR have the political will and vision to lead the world in the development and implementation of high seas marine spatial protection and management and are now set on a path to meet agreed international commitments for the protection of  biodiversity across the breadth of the Southern Ocean. ASOC looks forward to working with Antarctic Treaty Parties to achieve by 2012 a comprehensive and representative network of Antarctic MPAs and marine reserves.

