





Scientific Activities in the Law-Racovita Station with Logistic Support of India January-February 2009





Scientific Activities in the Law-Racovita Station with Logistic Support of India
January-February 2009


The granted by Australia and Romania possibility to use the Law-Racovita Station is greatly acknowledged as well as the invitation of the Indian National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research to join the 28th Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (InSEA).
Participants: Indian chemist Bhupesh Sharma (Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi), Estonian geologist, two Australian researchers.
Sen. Researcher, PhD Enn Kaup of Institute of Geology at Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia made in 2009 a preliminary field research for the project "Nutrients in active layers of catchments of polar lakes in a changing climate". The project is included as associated partnership in the European Polar Board supported consortium INTERHEMISPHERE “The structure and dynamics of polar ecosystems”. 
The Austral part of fieldwork was conducted in January-February 2009 in the Larsemann Hills, as a member of 28th Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (InSEA), and the Boreal part in May and July 2009 at Kilpisjärvi, NW Finnish Lapland. In the Larsemann Hills Enn Kaup and his Indian associate MSc Bhupesh Sharma were based for three weeks in the Law-Racovita Base, using its accommodation and laboratory facilities.
The fieldwork included sampling of snow banks and the respective surface and subsurface meltwater inflows into several lakes (Sarah Tarn, Lakes Scandrett, Cameron, No Worries, “Potato”, also ancient lakebed SW of Lake Cameron). The samples were analyzed in the Law-Racovita base laboratory for inorganic nutrients, pH and electric conductivity. Analyses of organic nutrients, major ions and oxygen isotopes were carried out in the Institute of Geology of TUT.
Preliminary results show that melt water was enriched considerably in major ions after flowing on thawed surface and even more so subsurface. The increases in nutrients were conspicuous though variable. The δ18O data showed that evaporation played a minor part in enrichment of major ions and nutrients and hence considerable amounts of these are released into lakes from the active layer. Other results shown that melt water flushed out considerable amounts of also organic N and P forms subsurface that indicate presence of organic matter. Analysis of the role of bacteria in decomposing organic matter subsurface is going on the retrieved cores of active layer/upper permafrost.
The preliminary results will be presented at IPY OSC Conference in June 2010.



