





Report of a Joint Oil Spill Exercise: 
R/V Laurence M. Gould at Rothera Research Station





Report of a Joint Oil Spill Exercise:
R/V Laurence M. Gould at Rothera Research Station

Information Paper submitted by UK and USA

The Environmental Protocol requires Parties to ‘provide for prompt and effective response action to such emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research programmes’ (Article 15,1, a) and furthermore to ‘establish procedures for immediate notification of, and co-operative response to environmental emergencies’ (Article 15,2, b).

The United Kingdom (UK) and the United States (US) place considerable importance on undertaking regular oil spill exercises in Antarctica. The US vessel R/V Laurence M. Gould visited Rothera Research Station on 23rd January 2010. During this visit, British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) undertook a joint oil spill exercise. The aim of the exercise was to test existing oil spill procedures and equipment, to determine how the Rothera Oil Spill Contingency Plan (OSCP) and the LM. Gould Shipboard Marine Pollution Emergency Plan (SMPEP) interface, and to examine the compatibility of equipment used by BAS and the USAP. 

The exercise scenario involved the LM Gould striking an unidentified submerged object whilst coming alongside at Biscoe Wharf, Rothera (Lat. 67°34’19”S, Long. 68°07’47”W). The hull of the vessel is damaged under this scenario and a starboard fuel tank is ruptured. An estimated 10,000 litres (2,200 gallons) of Marine Gas Oil is spilled onto the sea surface. The environmental conditions under the scenario (weather, sea-state, ice and wildlife) were as on the day of the exercise. 

The joint exercise was undertaken successfully. The Rothera Base Commander and the Master of the LM Gould led their respective oil spill response teams, working together to take appropriate action to deal with the incident. 

An action plan was developed, which included an on-site safety risk assessment. Following close-down of the reverse osmosis water plant at Rothera (one of the priorities for protection), inflatable booms were rapidly deployed by small boat teams from the jetty around  the stern of the LM Gould, which was where the spilled fuel was predicted to flow,  and attached to the aft port side. The ‘spill’ was contained and pumped off the sea surface into a containment tank.  Reporting procedures were followed, including reporting back to the UK and USA. 

A debrief on the exercise and lessons learnt was undertaken by the Rothera BC and the Master of LM Gould before the vessel left Rothera.  

Minor recommendations arose out of the exercise - for example it was ascertained that the inflatable booms were robust enough to be used in light brash ice (see Figure 1). The Rothera OSCP and the LM Gould SMPEP will be reviewed and updated if necessary following this successful exercise. 


