The Antarctic voyage experience and visitors’ satisfaction for the
2009/2010 season
The Antarctic voyage experience and visitors’ satisfaction for the
2009/2010 season
Summary
In recent years Antarctica has been identified as an important
remote destination for tourism, with a diverse offer based on its
natural and historical resources that motivates tourist flows to this
inhospitable territory. This paper examines visitors’ expectations
towards the Antarctic voyage as well as the level of satisfaction
achieved once Antarctica has been experienced. To do so,
structured questionnaires were used during the 2009/2010 season.
Introduction
Antarctic seaborne tourism, with a varied offer of themes and
activities and operating with vessels of different capacity,
concentrates visits in the Antarctic Peninsula. Most Antarctic tour
operators take Ushuaia as the connecting base port, carrying 33.526
As per the Information Paper presented by Argentina at this ATCM:
“Report on Antarctic tourist flows and cruise ships operating in
Ushuaia during austral summer season 2009/2010”. visitors in the
2009/2010 season. Of this total, 22.353 were passengers that
landed in the Antarctic Peninsula It refers to visitors who travelled
on ships carrying fewer than 500 passengers each time. Others
sailed Antarctic waters on board vessels that did not land
passengers in Antarctica..
Taking into account the number of passengers who visit the
Peninsula each summer season, it is interesting to consider their
profile as well as the representations they have about Antarctica
and the type of experience expected, in order to clarify how they
value the place and how they might raise other’s awareness when
back home.
In addition, during the XXXI ATCM the interest for considering
different issues about Antarctic tourism was explicit: “(…) tourism
regulation should be carried out consistent with values contained in
the Treaty and the Protocol including the aesthetic and wilderness
values of Antarctica Final Report of the XXXI Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Kiev. Paragraph 186.”. Furthermore, at the
same meeting it was noted that “(…) the nature of the experiences
of visitors was an important consideration, as well as the
relationship between visitor experiences and the values for which
Antarctica is protected Final Report of the XXXI Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, Kiev. Paragraph 187.”.
In this respect, we present a summary that approaches the visitors’
experience in relation with their Antarctic voyage. It should be
pointed out that this is an exploratory stage of a broader study that
is currently underway. In this case some descriptive results are
shown.
The generation of Antarctic images
Antarctica is generally described as an exceptional setting that
awakens emotions generated by the experiences that take place in a
pristine remote area. The superlative way in which it is mostly
characterised -the coldest, driest, windiest, iciest, highest, remotest,
etc.- has imprinted a very specific image that reinforces that idea of
the wild. This strong image stands for the values assigned to the
place, grants it symbolism, giving it the attribute of unique and of
the last place on earth where humans may reach.
The mental construct of Antarctica as a tourist destinations is
specially shaped by different sources such as travel brochures,
documentary films, motion pictures, fiction books, travel book
guides, log books, explorers’ narratives, lectures, photographs,
activities generated by environmental organisations, etc.
Particularly, for 2007/2008, the efforts made by several countries
by reason of the International Polar Year may have had an
important influence after the diffusion of research results, art
works, etc. (Vereda, 2008).
Other studies have undertaken this topic, Bauer (2001) presented
results on Antarctic tourism taking into account visitors’
motivations; Vereda (2004; 2008) analysed visitors’ expectations
and satisfaction of the Antarctic voyage in the Antarctic Peninsula
area and Maher (in press) develops his research into visitors’
experience in the Ross Sea.
The study
Surveys were distributed to Antarctic visitors in order to know
about two moments of the voyage. On the one hand, the stage prior
to departure and, on the other, the end of the trip. In the first case
factors which influenced the decision to take the trip and the
expectations towards it are considered. In the second case, the
satisfaction of expectations, the reasons they were satisfied or not
and the identification of the favourite Antarctic points of visit are
taken into account. A total of 316 valid questionnaires were
analysed. They belonged only to Antarctic visitors who landed in
the Antarctic Peninsula during the 2009/2010 season and passed
through the port of Ushuaia.
Results
The sample consisted mostly of visitors from the United States (38
%), Germany (14 %), United Kingdom (13 %), Australia (9 %) and
Canada (5 %), among others. 55 % were female while the other 45
% were male; 48 % were aged 45-64, followed by 65 or more (30
%) and then 25-44 with the 22 %. It is interesting to underline the
important percentage of visitors with higher studies (college or
university) representing 93 % o the total. The majority of
respondents were employees (39 %) and retired (38 %),
independent (18 %) and, finally, housewives and students.
Furthermore, 68 % have a monthly income of U$S 3.400 or more,
followed by those who earn between U$S 1.700-3.400 (25 %) and
finally the group with a monthly income of up to U$S 1.700 (7 %).
Visitors were also asked if it was the first voyage to Antarctica, 90
% answered affirmatively while the 10 % had already been there
once or twice.
Expectations towards the voyage
Basically two aspects were taken into account: the factors that
influenced them to make the decision of travelling to the Antarctic
Peninsula and their expectations towards it. In the first case a
question was made and multiple choices which considered different
sources of information were provided. In general terms, the choices
were related to reading and images on different Antarctic topics, in
figure 1 percentages for each factor can be seen.
In regard to expectations, an open-ended question was asked in
order to allow for alternatives to emerge from visitors. Then, eight
categories were established according to the answers (see table 1).
Is this sense, most respondents agreed on having a singular
experience in an unspoiled place, referring to the term “pristine” in
several cases. Within this group some concerns were expressed
about climate change and visitors mentioned the possibility of
becoming more involved in environmental issues. The Antarctic
scenery was also made relevant among the answers, mainly due to
icebergs and glaciers followed by wildlife, in particular penguins
and whales were mentioned. In addition, early explorers were
present in visitors’ representations as well as the idea of reaching a
remote area, referring to the Antarctic Polar Circle in some cases.
Figure 1. Factors that influenced visitors’ decision to make the
voyage
Note: each respondent chose more than one item.
Table 1. Expectations towards the Antarctic voyage
Categories
%
Scenery
55
Wildlife
52
Location
6
Adventure and exploration
24
Singular experience
76
Education
15
Photography
3
Quietness
3
Note: each respondent included more than one expectation.
Satisfaction after the voyage
As San Martín Gutiérrez (2005) points out, satisfaction can be
defined as a cognitive-affective judgement that derives from the
visitor’s experience in relation to the product or service. It is the
individual’s response to a process in which the experience is
compared to the expectations. In this respect, the level of
satisfaction achieved by visitors was measured through a five-point
scale. Figure 2 shows the high level of satisfaction that resulted
from the surveys. In spite of this, it should be noted that some
visitors included remarks with regard to some disappointment,
expecting more from the Antarctic experience.
For the first group -those who exceeded their expectations- the main
reasons for the fulfilment basically were:
Learning experience: in 36 % of the answers visitors referred to the
educational value of on-board lectures. They also indicated that the
experience made them change their minds about environmental
matters.
Scenery: 28 % mentioned this item as relevant compared to
expectations. They particularly emphasised the vastness of
Antarctica. Glaciers and icebergs were the main elements in the
descriptions.
Wildlife: 15 % referred to this item as an important part in the
satisfaction of expectations. Of that total, most visitors centred their
attention on penguins and whales. In some cases the abundance of
animals in their natural setting was also highlighted.
Emotion: 15 % pointed out emotion as an effect that had not been
anticipated in the expectations. Some visitors also wrote phrases
related to spiritual and religious aspects, giving the area a special
affective meaning.
History: 9 % of the answers stressed the experience of having been
to places where early explorers had lived extreme situations.
Remoteness: 5 % mentioned the fact of having reached high
latitudes as playing an important role in their Antarctic experience,
specially referring to “the last place on earth”. Also, reaching the
Antarctic Circle (66º 33’) operated as a way to set a material point
to convey meaning for being further south.
In respect of the “not satisfied” expectations, the reasons given by
visitors were:
Little time on the Peninsula: 4 % mentioned they would have liked
to stay longer in the Peninsula area. In some cases respondents said
that this item referred to changes in the itineraries because of bad
weather conditions and due to other reasons.
Wildlife watching: 3 % referred to having seen few species of fauna,
particularly of marine mammals.
Other reasons: 3 % said Antarctica had not been cold enough in
order to be able to experience a real Antarctic environment, also
that the bad weather conditions had not allowed them to take good
pictures and also that not having visited a research station added a
note of disappointment.
Figure 2. Level of satisfaction achieved
Furthermore, the favourite Antarctic points of visit were considered.
Different answers were obtained which are shown in figure 3. It is
worth mentioning that many respondents said they could not
choose a single place since all of them helped to fulfil the Antarctic
experience. Within the group who chose Deception Island some
remarks were given referring to it as a “real Antarctic place”
because of its desolation; a few underscored the polar plunge and
others pointed out the historical value of the island. With respect to
Elephant Island, some visitors emphasised its historical perspective.
Others mentioned Paradise Bay and Lemaire Channel as places of
“perfect beauty”, “serenity” and “beauty beyond words”. Among
those who chose the Antarctic Sound, tabular icebergs became the
relevant aspect from the Antarctic scenery point of view.
Figure 3. Favourite Antarctic points of visit
Conclusions
Antarctica represents a singular destination associated to pristine
values, remoteness and exceptional wildlife. These attributes
reinforce the idea of the wild, last place on earth and unique
environment, motivating tourists’ visits. Different factors influence
these previous representations, in particular, general reading on
wildlife, exploration trips, photographs of landscapes, documentary
films, etc.
Visitors’ expectations towards the Antarctic voyage show a very
high interest in achieving a once in a lifetime experience related to
unique and extreme sceneries and also to the encounter with
marine fauna. These demanding expectations shape an irreplaceable
component of the tourist experience, which determine the base of
what is expected. The satisfaction process is achieved when the on-
site experience is compared to those previous images.
It is worth mentioning the high level of satisfaction achieved since
most visitors far exceeded their expectations. Among the reasons for
this result three main aspects emerge: the learning experience
together with the confirmation of the Antarctic scenery as a remote
and pristine environment and the abundance of wildlife.
Additionally, emotion plays a very important role with regard to
satisfaction, as a feeling that had not been anticipated in the
expectations, with a dominance of sensitivity and intuition from a
perceptive view. In this respect, through specific knowledge and
direct experience, a deeper state of mind about the meaning of
Antarctica has been gained.
The favourite Antarctic points of visit are very much related to
places that give the idea of desolation, considered as “true
Antarctica” and also, areas that can reflect the mental construct of
landscape aesthetics. In addition, early explorers’ hardships are
clearly visualised as symbols of the ruggedness and severity of
region and the difficulties for survival there.
From the above we can also conclude that the Antarctic visitor is an
experienced traveller who shows a particular interest for Antarctica
and who is prepared through reading and other sources of
information in order to have a unique experience, being sensitive
towards environmental issues as well as demanding with regard to
the experience expected.
Bibliography:
Bauer, T. (2001) Tourism in the Antarctic: opportunities,
constraints, and future prospects. The Haworth Press, USA.
Maher, P. (in press) “Awesome size…magnitude of the place…the
incredible beauty…”: Visitors’ onsite experiences in the Ross Sea
region of Antarctica. Routledge, United Kingdom.
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (31st : 2008) Final Report of
the Thirty-first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 2-13 June
2008, Kyiv, Ukraine. Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, Buenos
Aires.
San Martín, H. (2005) Estudio de la imagen del destino turístico y el
proceso global de satisfacción: adopción de un enfoque integrador.
Tesis doctoral. Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, España.
Vereda, M. (2004) El desarrollo de Ushuaia como puerta de entrada
del turismo antártico. Tendencias y competitividad. Tesis de
maestría. Universidad Internacional de Andalucía, Sevilla, España.
Vereda, M. (2008) A study on the expectations of Antarctic visitors
towards their trip. Images created about Antarctica and the
relationship with Ushuaia (Argentina) as a gateway city. Tourism
and global change in polar regions. An International Conference.
University of Oulu, 29 November - 2 December 2007, Oulu,
Finland.
