





Eradication of a vascular plant species recently introduced to Whaler’s Bay, Deception Island





Eradication of a vascular plant species recently introduced to Whalers Bay, Deception Island

CEP Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Spain

In January and February 2009, two vascular plant species new to Antarctica (Nassauvia magellanica and Gamochaeta nivalis; both Compositae = Asteraceae) were reported from Whalers Bay, Deception Island by a visitor on a cruise ship.  Both species are typical components of upland fellfield communities in Tierra del Fuego (900 km to the north across the Drake Passage) and the southern Andes in Argentina and Chile.  
In January 2010 a UK terrestrial biologist and environmental manager visited Whalers Bay, with logistical support from Spain, to assess the colonisation status of the two reported plant species.  Only N. magellanica could be located despite a detailed survey of the area.  It is likely that the small number of G. nivalis plants reported previously were either washed away by melt water, or the initial report was a misidentification.  
It was unclear whether the vascular plant propagules were transported by natural means (e.g. wind-borne, attached to sea birds, etc.) or associated with humans (attached to visitor’s clothing, bags, etc.).  Both species have seeds with adaptations for wind dispersal and, due to their close proximity to South America, Deception Island and surrounding areas of the Antarctic Peninsula region are one of the areas of Antarctica most likely to be colonised by natural means.  Nevertheless, Whalers Bay is one of the most frequently visited tourist sites in Antarctica and is regularly visited by national operator personnel.  
Conclusive evidence to determine if N. magellanica was a natural immigrant or human-mediated introduction/non-native species was not available. However, in light of the close proximity of N. magellanica to the popular visitor site at Whalers Bay, all visible plant material was removed and either destroyed or added to the plant collection held in the British Antarctic Survey Herbarium.  


Nassauvia magellanica at Whalers Bay, Deception Island

