





Dismantling and subsequent use of Neumayer Station II  for SANAP Summer Station and Russian Antarctic Expedition





Dismantling and subsequent use of Neumayer Station II for SANAP Summer Station and Russian Antarctic Expedition
1. Introduction
After 17 years of service to researchers and staff stationed on the Ekström Ice Shelf the German Neumayer Station II (NM II) was decommissioned in February 2009 and finally dismantled during the Antarctic summer season 2009/2010. The Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI), Germany replaced the old station with a state-of-the-art new research facility – Neumayer Station III – about 6 km further south.
Over a period of 17 years the Neumayer Station II provided a platform for countless scientific activities in geophysics, glaciology and meteorology, and other fields, and it also provided a home for the station's crew during the austral winters. 

Figure. 1 Neumayer Station II at Ekström Ice Shelf – on service from 1992 until 2009; right entrance to staircase towers.
Built on the ice the station was buried deeper into the ice each year because of the snow accumulation. After 17 years of service the tube construction was about 15 m below the surface. The destruction of the building progressed because of increasing snow loads and deformation forces in the flowing ice shelf. The technical and scientific operation must be shut down.
The Protocol on Environmental Protection requires that buildings and equipment no longer in use be removed and the site remediated whenever possible, necessitating the station’s deconstruction and removal.
The draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was presented to ATCM XXVIII IP 30° Rebuild and Operation of the wintering station Neumayer III and retrogradation of the present Neumayer Station II. The national permit was issued for these three activities by the Federal Environment Agency in October 2005. The notification on the final CEE was distributed by Diplomatic Note to the Consultative Parties in April 2006.
The removal of the decommissioned station was planned in the frame of the CEE and the national permit. The primary reason to give up the station was the destruction of the tubes deep in the snow. However many components of the building like container modules and power plant as well as many other devices and assemblies were not worn out and are still in good shape. Therefore the challenge was to coordinate the dismantling with the option for subsequent use. Furthermore it was recommended to minimize additional logistic efforts by international coordination of available transport capacities in the frame if scheduled activities of National Antarctic Programmes.
With this aim a project for dismantling and subsequent use was developed between AWI and the national programmes of South Africa, South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP), and Russia, Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). The coordination took place in 2009 and during season 2009/2010 the activity was completed as planned. The Neumayer Station II was dismantled according to the schedule and the requirements of the CEE and components of the station building were subsequently used in Antarctica avoiding the disposal of valuable material. 
2. Description of the Neumayer Station II building and installations
The station building in the snow
The Neumayer Station II (NM II) is an underground station made of corrugated steel tubes with containerised and heated accommodation insides. The station was set up into service in 1992 replacing the first German station Georg von Neumayer Station (GvN) constructed in 1981 on the Ekström Ice Shelf. 


Figure 2: Construction of Neumayer Station II in season 1991/1992.
The station comprises an underground complex with access ways leading to the snow surface and several scientific and technical on-ground installations up to about 4 km distant from the main building. 
The station building is housed in tubes of 8.38 m diameter made of corrugated steel plates. There are two parallel tubes of 90 m (Tube West) and 83 m (Tube East) lengths and one interconnecting tube of 95 m length running crosswise (Cross Tube). A smaller cross tube, 4.19 m in diameter and 16 m long, connects the parallel tubes at about half their lengths. The tube ends are closed with strong steel bulkheads. The bulkhead at the east end of the cross tube has a large two-winged entrance gate giving way to a ramp structure wide enough to allow access for the biggest vehicles. The bulkheads at the southern ends of the parallel tubes are part of the staircases leading to the main entrances at the top (see also Figs. 1 and 4). These stair towers are steel framework construction with plywood cladding on flat timber foundations and contain steel staircases. The towers were regularly extended with the growing snow surface by inserting a new steel framework section. There are altogether 5 shafts (indicated by circles in Figure 3) installed on the tubes reaching above the snow surface by intermittent extension, housing the insulated exhaust gas pipes, and the ventilation shafts for the air conditioning system.
The Cross Tube has no substructure to support a floor but is filled with snow to a level where at least 6 m floor width is reached. The floor is plain snow. Vehicles can manoeuvre in the eastern section of the Cross Tube and enter the Tube East and the large workshop situated there. The ramp of the Tube East has snow floor and walls and is covered with a roof following stepwise the gradient of the ramp. The ramp covering is made of timber and plywood. At the top end of the ramp the covering consists of small timber-plywood elements which can be lifted by two men. The ramp is extended by a new step whenever the snow accumulation makes adjustments necessary. A 60 m long passable snow tunnel connects the station tubes with the garage building.



Figure 3 Neumayer Station II layout with garage building
In 2009 the tube building was buried in snow about 15 to 20 m below the snow surface. This part of the station is going to be further destructed. The garage building has a different construction. The roof of the garage can be raised up from time to time to compensate the snow accumulation. Therefore the garage building is still operational and will be accessible in future. 
The building installations
All building installations are placed in the two parallel tubes. With the exception of the workshop building they are all containerised modules on the basis of ordinary 20-foot transport containers. The container modules are mounted on an adjustable steel understructure to transfer and distribute the building loads via bearings embedded in volcanic slag to the tube wall. Areas not taken by container modules are covered with timber flooring. Normal passage is inside the container rows where a corridor leads from end to end. The containers have steel frames equipped with corner fittings. Walls and roofs are steel sheet at the outer sides and mineral-based (fireproof) plates on the inside with mineral wool insulation in between. The floor has plywood instead of mineral plates and carpet or rubber covering. The workshop and the attached workshop store (size l/w/h = 19.0/6.5/5.0 m) are made of steel framework and 150 mm plywood sandwich panels. The insulation is 120 mm rockwool throughout. Fire protective lining (plates) on mineral basis is fixed to walls and roof on the inside. The detailed room layout can be seen in Figure 4.
The bulk of the technical equipment (power and water generation, HVAC, sewage treatment etc.) is installed inside the container modules. Cables and ducts are laid on the container roofs, while water pipes run underneath the containers. A steel fuel line is connecting the tanks in the cross tube with the day tanks on the roofs of the three power stations. 
Lighting is distributed over all installations, and electric fans are placed at the air tunnel and at various used air exits. There are no cables or pipes running under the snow floor in the Cross Tube. A 96.5 m long sewage water discharge pressure pipe runs horizontally from the Tube West towards the pit in the snow. The pipe is laid directly into the snow in the foundation level of the tube building. It consists of prefabricated 6 m sections of 60.3x5 mm steel pipe with CFC-free polyurethane foam insulation and protective PE sheathing. The sections were joined by press fittings when the pipe was laid. A 10 W/m trace heating tape is fixed to the steel pipe over the whole length. The sewage pipe is bolted to a spigot welded to the Tube West on the outside. 
The garage building 
The garage building has a different construction. The roof was raised up from time to time to compensate the snow accumulation. Therefore the garage building is still operational and will be accessible in future (Figure 13).
It is a comparatively light structure placed in a snow trench and consisting of a 46.4 m by 16.7 m roof supported by three rows à 7 numbers of 4.3 m to 4.8 m height-adjustable tubular steel pillars resting on flat timber/steel foundations directly on the snow floor of the trench. The flat roof consists of steel girders and plywood sandwich plating. There are several joints between roof plates sealed with silicone rubber strips. The walls are plain snow. A 1.5 m high plywood skirting mounted on steel supports is running along the roof edges to provide horizontal stability and sealing against snow ingress. The roof is tied down by around 40 steel wire ropes of 12 mm diameter reaching about 8 m down in the snow (2004) where they are fixed to snow anchors. These wire ropes are extended when the roof is raised. 
A snow ramp is arranged at the small side of the garage in the north with a steel-plywood composite hinged ramp cover that can be worked with pulleys attached to a steel portal. 
Outside facilities 
Protected by a dome of 4 m diameter the satellite dish antenna is mounted on a bolted steel framework tower. The antenna was raised from time to time by inserting a new tower section of 2.8 m height. The 6 by 5 m flat foundation is made of timber logs and steel sections and is buried about 9 to 10 m deep in the snow.
The wind generator is mounted on a tubular shaft and placed on a steel framework foundation. As the framework was regularly raised up the foundation reach about 10 m down into the snow ground. Cables from generator to station are led above ground on poles.     
The containerised modules of the air chemistry observatory, the data collecting unit of the geophysical observatory and the balloon launching shed of the meteorological observatory are placed on three separated jackable steel platforms. The steel legs of these platforms reach far down into the snow ground where they rest on timber spread footings. 
A containerised module (20-foot) made of wood is placed for seismic and magnetic measurements in a snow cavern 12 m below ground. It is accessed by ladder in a snow shaft lined with plywood.
Electric cables to the outside locations are above-ground with the exception of a 1,650 m long 20 kW triple power cable connecting the station with the seismic container below the snow surface and with the air chemistry observatory on the platform.  
3. Project performance
Project frame, tasks and coordination 
The commissioning of Neumayer Station III and the necessary decommissioning and dismantling of Neumayer Station II afforded the AWI the opportunity to offer accommodation units and other components instead of disposing it, which would have entailed transport form Antarctica to either Cape Town or Bremerhaven. Invited by AWI for detailed inspections on-site SANAP and RAE developed options for subsequent use of selected construction elements of the Neumayer Station II. Both AWI and SANAP appointed a South African engineering company to develop the work plan combining both the dismantling of Neumayer Station II and construction of the new SANAP Summer Station as well as to allocate and prepare selected container modules for RAE. The sharing scheme for container modules is shown in Figure 4. 
Under the umbrella of the MoU between AWI and SANAP together with RAE the on-site work and transport co-ordination was jointly planned for season 2009/2010. All ship transport requirements were accommodated to the sailing schedules of SANAP for SA Agulhas and RAE for RV Akademik Federov. The construction team of the engineering company - project leader and 16 technicians – was task with the on site work. Two technicians of RAE joint the construction team.
Figure 4: Building installations in the tubes and sharing scheme for subsequent use of container modules; red for SANAP, blue for RAE, black for disposal to Cape Town and/or Bremerhaven.
Performance of dismantling
After the opening of Neumayer Station III in February 2009 the old Neumayer Station II was closed down. During this season 2008/2009 AWI personnel performed the cleaning up as the first part of the dismantling work in parallel to the commissioning of the new station. 
Cleaning up
All outside and inside scientific equipment and communication facilities were transferred to and installed in the new laboratories. Likewise all movable parts, spares, workshop devices, furniture etc. were taken out meant for subsequent use in the new station. All pipes and tanks were drained. The glycol-based antifreeze-liquid from the secondary cooling circuits of the diesel generators was pumped into 200 litres steel drums for transportation. These drums and all drained liquids were returned together with the waste liquids of Neumayer Station III under the waste management plan at the end of season 2008/2009. 
The 6 tank containers were emptied when the station was closed down. At the end of season 2008/2009 the station was left with building installations in the tubes. During the winter of 2009 the garage building was further used to accommodate vehicles.
Dismantling
The second part of dismantling was performed in cooperation between AWI, SANAP, and RAE one year later. The dismantling was performed in reverse order of the building construction and installation. Cables, ventilation channels, lighting fixtures and pipes running on the outsides of the container modules or along the tube walls were disassembled first. The container modules were one by one pulled into the Cross Tube. Here selected container modules were refurbished for the construction of the SANAP Summer Station or prepared for packing of disassembled material and waste to be removed from Antarctica. Finally the upper segments of both staircases as well as ventilation and exhaust shafts were disassembled. Container modules and cargo containers were used for packing of dissembled material.
The milestones of dismantling and construction works are as follows: The construction team departed on board SA Agulhas from Cape Town on 08 December 2009. The ship arrived Atka Bay on 26 December 2009. Unloading was performed on sea ice. Dismantling of Neumayer Station II was performed from 27 December until 29 January. In parallel the SANAP Summer Station was constructed from 29 December until 7 February. Vehicles and sledges of SANAP were deployed to pull out the container modules from the Cross Tube after refurbishing and/or preparing for ship transportation. Communication service and technical support on-site were provided by the staff of Neumayer Station III, if needed. 
While Tube East was completely dismantled the construction team was accommodated in Tube West, which was already set up using external power supply on 22 December 2009 by staff of Neumayer Station III. The SANAP Summer Station became operational on 19 January 2010 and the construction team moved house. Tube West was completely dismantled until 29 January 2010. After completion of the SANAP  logistic operations SA Agulhas took over all cargo for disposal in Cape Town. The construction team departed with the ship for Cape Town on 10 February 2010. The construction team was very successful and efficient under the leadership of Hennie Stassen, project leader. The prepared cargo for RAE was loaded on board RV Akademik Federov on 10 March 2010.
Figure 5: Dismantling works, January 2010.
Results of dismantling
The steel tubes – fully cleared of all installations – are left approximately 15 to 20 m deep in the snow ground together with steel bulkheads and steel parts of the staircases. Additional items that remained are plywood segments from the emergency exit and volcanic slag, which was used for bedding the bearings for the container modules, the power cable for to the air chemistry and geophysical observatories outsides. 
All steel and timber parts which stick out above the snow surface or could be reached from there were dismantled and removed. This applies to the upper segments of stair towers, ventilation shafts, emergency exit and ramp cover. The deeper parts of these elements are left in the snow. Steel legs and timber foundation pads of the outside platforms (balloon launching shed, air chemistry laboratory, and geophysics observatory) were also left in the snow, likewise the containerised module of the magnetic/seismic observatory, which is made of timber. For details refer to Annex 1, Table 1. The separate garage building not buried in the snow was not dismantled. The empty location of the former Neumayer Station II is marked by poles. These poles will be set higher every year to overcome snow accumulation.
Figure 6: Clean tubes; Tube East – Tube West (above); Cross Tube (below); 29 January 2010.
Remaining in Antarctica:
For Neumayer Station III: 
6 tank containers for further use at Neumayer Station III.
For SANAP Summer Station: 
15 container modules, technical equipment and material refurnished for the construction of the SANAP Summer Station. The garage building was taken over by SANAP.
For RAE: 
21 container modules including power plant, 1 Reefer container, and 2 vehicles to be refurbished and further used at Progress station and at Novolazarevskaya station. 
Removal from Antarctica by SA Agulhas for disposal in Cape Town:
10 container modules packed with dismantled material and waste.
9 cargo containers packed with dismantled material and waste. 
3 Reefer containers
Transportation to Cape Town next season 2010/2011:
7 container modules from NM II, 
1 container module (balloon launching platform)
The total weight of dismantled modules, equipment and dissembled material amounts 440.8 ton. For details refer to Annex 1, Table 2. This table also indicates which items were fully or partially used in Antarctica.
4. Construction of SANAP Summer Station (SSS)
Background 
The increasing height of the ice-shelf next to Blaskinen Ice Rise the discharge point for the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) for more than 40 years forced SANAP to explore other options for its loading and back loading operations in Antarctica. The AWI and SANAP through a joint venture investigated and established a save overland heavy vehicle route between their respective Antarctic stations.  As a result of this SANAP could shift its offloading operations to Atka Bay (Ekström Ice Shelf).
















Figure 7: Offloading operations at the high ice-shelf with a ramp cut into the shelf (an extremely high risk exercise)
However being more than 300 km away from SANAE IV station and doing multiple trips necessitated the construction of a small Summer Station to be used as accommodation at the Ekström Ice Shelf, particularly for periods when the supply ship is not at Atka Bay.
Design and construction
SANAP contracted the same company for the engineering design of the new station, which was contracted for dismantling Neumayer Station II. In parallel to the dismantling works the team was tasked to refurbish selected container modules and to construct the new SANAP Summer Station on the Ekström Ice Shelf. 
A trench of 2.5 m dept was dozed. Nine foundation ‘foot’ pieces supporting 12 legs were constructed using 200 mm x 200 mm x 3600 mm wooden beams reclaimed from NM II. The total area of each ‘foot’ was 3.6 m x 3.6 m. The 12 legs which include a hydrolic hoisting mechanism manufactured in Cape Town were placed on these wooden bases. Metal beams that supported the bulk fuel tanks in NM II were used to form the basis for the platform onto which the refurbished containers were placed and bolted together.
Fifteen container units were selected from NM II. Since these units were originally designed to be utilized inside the steel tubes (making up the outer structure of NM II) no windows were installed. Furthermore, since the units were interlinked most did not have sidewalls. Ventilation and heating were controlled centrally inside NM II. The selected units were refurbished as and when they became available e.g. windows inserted, sidewalls installed and ventilation vents inserted, etc. The refurbishment of each unit was completed inside the steel tubes before it was removed from the steel tubes to the surface.










Figure 8  Steel beams that formed the basis of the platform for the container units (left) and wooden beams that formed the basis for the foundation of SSS (right), taken form NM II
.












Figure 9. Summer Station under construction











Figure 10. Hoisting up the units.
The new SANAP Summer Station (SSS) was erected about 100 m from the entrance to the underground garage of NM II. This garage facility is retained, and  will be utilized by both SANAP and AWI during coming years.
Performance of the Summer Station 
A simple heat, ventilation and air-conditioning system is employed. Cold air is sucked in through a heating mechanism and a fan blows the heated air through out the facility. Waste heat from the generator is used to further regulate the inside temperature. 










Figure 11. Ventilation and heating system.
The powerplant of the SSS is an 80-kva generator using 13 liters of fuel (Polar diesel) per hour. A Swedish Pacto toilet system is utilized where the sewage is contained in a plastic sleeve – sealed off after each use. This is captured in waste fuel drums, which in turn are sealed and returned to Cape Town. Grey water is discharged into the ice. Most of the internal fittings (stove, beds, basins, etc.) were also recycled from NM II.



















Figure 12. Internal fixtures reclaimed from the NM II.
Results and Utilization 
Apart from painting the outer structure to make the Summer Station more conspicuous than the current white colour, and a stair structure that will be retracted onto the platform when not in use, only minor refurbishing is required. These will be done during the coming 2010/2011 Antarctic season. The construction team already stayed in the Station during the final stages of the dismantling process and found if comfortable and suitable for the purposes it was designed for.
                                                                                                   







Figure 13. Almost completed SANAP Summer Station with the entrance to the underground garage in the background (left), underground garage (right).
The key motivation for this station is to provide accommodation for SANAP personnel during the supply operation for SANAE IV. Once all the cargo and fuel is discharged from the SA Agulhas at Atka Bay, the ship can leave for other activities such as buoy deployment exercises. Meanwhile the technicians prepare and perform all cargo transportation by multiple trips to SANAE IV. It is envisaged that the SSS will be occupied during SANAP logistic operations for about 6 weeks on average per summer season. The underground garage building, taken over by SANAP, will be further used and maintained as a part of the SANAP Summer Station.






Figure 14: Map of Ekström Ice Shelf showing locations of the current operational facilities - the Neumayer Station III and the Sanap Summer Station (SSS). The initial positions andsubsequent  positions for the year 2009 are also shown for the dismantled stations Georg von Neumayer (GvN) and Neumayer Station II. Both are buried deep in the accumulated snow and will be released to the ocean below the sea level after approximately 40 years (GvN) and approximately after 100 years (NM II).
The newly established facility will be available for both SANAP and AWI in the frame of their long-tern logistic co-operation. Being so close to Neumayer Station III it is envisaged that the staff can start up the station prior to the vehicle convoy arriving from SANAE IV. On the other hand it will also serve as the emergency refuge for the staff at Neumayer Station III during the winter period.
With the establishment of a safe heavy vehicle route over a distance of 300 km between both Neumayer Station III and SANAE IV the two stations are also regarded as Emergency Stations for each other in the frame of a joint contingency concept. 
5. Subsequent usage of modules for Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE)
During the dismantling works two technicians of RAE worked together with the South African team. The 21 selected container modules for RAE were prepared for transportation and other material packed. A depot was arranged at the barrier of the Ekström Ice Shelf.
Figure 15: Loading of RV Akademik Federovat Ekström Ice Shelf on 18 March 2010
The final scheduled activitiy was the call of RV Akademik Federov to Atka Bay scheduled for process March 2010. The ship arrived Atka bay on 11 March and was in waiting position because of strong swell for several days. Finally, despite of harsh weather conditions the master Mikhail Kaloshin and his crew on board performed an excellent and highly professional job together by the staff of Neumayer Station III and personnel from the South African station SANAE IV to discharge fuel and cargo delivered from Cape Town for AWI, SANAP and to load the container modules and vehicles for RAE from the Ice Shelf. 
On 18 March 2010 the message was received from Neumayer Station III that RV Akademik Federov completed the operation at Atka Bay heading further for Progress station. This date marks the end of project.
6. Summary and conclusion
This international project has been a very successful example to remove facilities not further in use from the Treaty area according to the Protocol and also gives an example on subsequent use of valuable equipment and material. 
After so many years of service to science and logistics modules and elements of the Neumayer Station II are being subsequently used in Antarctica by 
    • the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) – operating a new summer station for logistic purposes on the Ekström Ice Shelf
    • the Russian Antarctic expedition (RAE) – using selected modules an equipment for new  installation at Progress station
    • the German Antarctic programme (AWI) – completing the removal earlier than scheduled
In conclusion the project is indicative of the good co-operation and collaboration between National Antarctic Programmes as has become the custom. Secondly, all parties involved benefited from this collaboration e.g. no need to transport large quantities of dismantled/discarded units and components over large distances to either South Africa or Germany for disposal. Furthermore, SANAP and RAE benefited significantly by refurbishing and utilising selected units already in Antarctica. No need for additional manufacturing processes and transport of similar units to Antarctica. Thirdly, even the environment benefited in the sense of efficiently coordinated transport.
This joint project by the AWI, SANAP and RAE resulted in both economic and environmental advantages and is regarded as a good example of a sensible and responsible custodianship of our responsibility towards the conservation of the Antarctic continent in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol.
7. Acknowledgement
AWI and SANAP acknowledge the excellent and efficient co-operation and contribution of their partners in this regard. Furthermore, the efforts of the South African construction team in dismantling NMII and building the SANAP Summer Station (SSS) in record time, given the difficult and extreme circumstances are highly appreciated. The contributions and commitment of the masters and crew of the RV SA Agulhas and RV Akademik Federov are greatly appreciated. Last but not least, the assistance and support throughout this operation of the staff of Neumayer Station III and SANAE IV are acknowledged.



Annex 1:

Table 1: Construction elements left behind in the snow

Description of parts
Materials
tons
Steel tubes (corrugated sheets), shaft sockets
Steel (ca 75% galvanised)
	578.5
Fasteners, connecting elements (tubes, shafts)
Steel galvanised
	23.1
Shafts (on tubes, deeply buried sections))
Steel galvanised
	7.1
Bulkheads
Sectional and sheet steel, galvanised or primered
	46.2
Structural steelwork staircase towers 
(lower sections only)
Sectional steel, primered/ galvanised
	33.0
Container bearings (bedding)
Volcanic slag
	32.0
Emergency exit (cross tube)
Timber, plywood
	2.5
Snow anchors, steel wires in garage
Steel, steel galvanised
	1.7
Power cable H07RN-F3*70, l = 3*1,500 m, 
d = 41 mm
Copper, rubber, steel wire, 
sheath PCP (Neoprene)
	16.6
Sewage pipe
Steel, PU-foam CFC-free, PE protective sheathing
	1.5
Satcom antenna tower, steel legs, 
depth 2008:  -9 m to -0.4 m
Sectional steel, 
35% galvanised
	4.1
Foundation pads
Timber 10/20 cm, 5.0 m
	1.8
Dipole antennas, triangular steel formwork
sections, steel section foundation beam, 
depth 2008: -10 to -1m
Steel tubes (galvanised) and sectional steel (primered)
	1.0
Guy wires 
Steel wire 10 mm galvan.
	0.1
Foundation pads, dead men
Timber var. sizes
	0.9
Wind generator foundation, steel construction, depth 2008:  -10 m to -0.5 m
Sectional steel, sheet steel
35% galvanised
	5.9
Balloon launching platform, steel construction depth 2008:  -6 m to -0.5 m (bottom section)
Sectional steel, primered
	2.4
Foundation pads
Timber 10/20 cm, 1.6 m
	0.6
Air chemistry platform, steel legs
depth 2008:  -9.5 to -0.4 m
Sectional steel, 
35% galvanised
	3.6
Foundation pads
Timber 10/20 cm, 1.0 m
	0.4
Geophysics platform, steel construction,
depth 2008:  -6 m to -0.5 m
Sectional steel, primered
	2.2
Foundation pads
Timber 10/20 cm, 1.0 m
	0.4
Empty container module, seismic and magnetic measurements
depth 2008: -12 m
Timber, plywood
         2,0
Sum of parts which will be left in the snow
	736,8


Table 2: Modules and material for disposal (white) or for partial or full subsequent use (grey) 

Neumayer Station II: Parts and pertinent weights for disassembly and retrogradation 
Description of parts
Materials
tons
Antifreeze "Tyfocor L" heating medium, 2000 Litres
Glycol-water mixture,
200 litres steel drums
	2.3
Oil spill trays for tank containers
Sheet steel, sectional steel, untreated
	9.6
Fuel tanks (day tanks), pipes, pumps
Steel, aluminium, plastics
	4.1
Exhaust gas piping system
Steel, rockwool
	3.6
Water pipes with insulation, partly trace heated
Steel, PU foam, Armaflex elastomeric rubber, PVC, copper
	6.1
Air ducts with insulation
Sheet steel PVC-coated/ galvanised, PU foam, rockwool mats
	9.0
Tubes and mountings of the steel tube ventilation
Steel, aluminium
	7.7
Electric cables (mostly ship's cable MGCG)
Copper, tinned copper wire braid, EPR/PCP insulation/sheath
	6.3
Power cable H07RN-F3*70 from air tunnel, 
ca 3*150 m, d = 41 mm 
Copper, rubber, PCP (Neoprene)
	1.7
Cable guides with fittings
Steel, aluminium, plastic
	1.5
Containers (50 Nos 20', 1 No 10')
          with the following installations and equipment:
Steel, rockwool insulation, wood, plastic 
	248.4
          Equipment, furniture
Steel, wood, plastic
	15.5
          Diesel generators and accessories
Steel, copper, plastic
	8.2
          Electrical installations, switchboards
Copper, steel, rubber, silicone
	10.1
          Lighting
Metal, glass, plastic
	1.6
          Sanitary installations
Steel, ceramics
	2.4
          Cold/warm water installations
Steel, PVC, plastic
	12.8
          Air conditioning installations 
Steel, plastic
	22.3
          Fire protection installations
Plastic, copper, PVC
	1.4
Shorings, container supports
Timber, hardwood
	3.3
Steel framing, protective floor covers in workshop
Steel section galvanised, sheet steel untreated
	18.8
Wall/roof panels with fire protective lining, workshop
Plywood, rockwool, embedded mineral fibres
	10.5
Floorboards 
Timber, impregnated against fire
	64.0
Steel structures in tubes, gratings
Steel, steel galvanised
	54.6
Head section emergency exit
Timber, plywood, steel fittings
	0.6
Wall/roof plates staircase towers 
Plywood, phenolic-resin-coated
	2.6
Flooring of stairs and landings in staircase towers
Wood
	4.1
Steel construction staircase towers
steel sections, primered/ galvanised
	2.7
Exhaust air hoods
Sheet steel, galvanised
	3.9
Neumayer Station II: Parts and pertinent weights for disassembly and retrogradation 
Description of parts
Materials
tons
Ramp construction main entrance East
Steel galvanised, timber
	37.0
Roof panels of garage building
Timber, plywood painted,
CFC-free PU foam
	52.7
    Sealing gaskets (garage roof)
Silicone rubber
	0.3
    Plating (Roof edges & skirtings, garage)
Plywood
	3.9
    Steel construction of garage (columns, beams)
Steel, primered
	94.6
    Ramp cover garage (in one piece)
Steel, timber, plywood painted
	4.6
Dangerous goods:   Batteries
Plastic, lead, acid
	0.6
Dangerous goods:   Halon fire extinguishing system
Steel, Halon, plastics 
	1.2
Dangerous goods:   Fire extinguishers
Steel, extinguishing powder, CO2
	0.9
Dangerous goods:   Ionisation-smoke detectors
Plastic, radioactive element
	--
Sum of parts marked for dismantling and retrogradation 
	735.5



