ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTION AND CONTINGENCY
PLANNING

Agenda item 11             Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/WP9
April, 1997
Original: English
Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning

Working Paper Submitted by

the UK

Summary

This paper examines the interim steps which have been taken to implement the provisions of the Environmental Protocol on Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning.

It identifies areas where further action is required.

It outlines substantive proposals for consideration by ATCM XXI.

Introduction

The principal purpose of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty is to ensure that impacts of human activities on the Antarctic environment are minimised to an acceptable level. There is an increasing awareness that a cause of impacts could be accidents or emergencies - for example the grounding or sinking of a vessel and resultant pollution. There is also a realisation that, as the number of aircraft and ships travelling to and within Antarctic increases, so does the risk of accidents.

Perhaps because there have been so few accidents in Antarctica, relatively little attention has been focussed by the Treaty Parties on the issues of emergency response and contingency planning.  As early as ATCM I, the Treaty Parties demonstrated their awareness of the problem (see Recommendation I-X) but little has been done since. Even within CRAMRA the provision on Response Action (Article 8(1)) was brief, and then linked directly to the issue of liability. In 1989 Recommendation XV-4 (which in effect will be superseded by Annex IV of the Protocol) called for the convening of a Group of Experts to consider and provide advice on the establishment of contingency plans for marine pollution response, and additional requirements to reduce and prevent pollution of the Antarctic marine environment.  The Group never met.

With the number of vessels, particularly tourist vessels going to Antarctica increasing each year, and with their size increasing, it is now time for attention to be focused by the ATCM on the issues of Response Action and Contingency Planning.

The Provisions of the Protocol

Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol contains provisions relating to emergency response action and contingency planning to address emergencies within the Antarctic Treaty Area which might impact on the environment.  The provisions require Parties to :-
- provide prompt and effective response action;
- establish contingency plans for response to incidents;
- cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such plans;
- establish notification, and cooperative response procedures to emergencies.

In addition, Article 12 of Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution) specifies more precisely the need for contingency plans to address marine pollution response, including plans for ships (in particular ships carrying oil as cargo), and for oil spills emanating from land-based installations which might enter the marine environment. This Article elaborates on Article 15(3) of the Protocol by indicating that, in drawing upon the advice of appropriate international organisations, the views of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) shall be sought.

Other than the exemptions in Annexes I to V relating to emergencies, the other provision of the Protocol which has particular relevance to dealing with accidents and emergencies is Article 10 of Annex IV. This states that :

"In the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships engaged in or supporting Antarctic operations, each Party shall take into account the objectives of this Annex".

This Article, when implemented, would have significant implications for the operators (whether governmental or non-governmental) of vessels in Antarctica.

Implementation

(a) General

Although the Protocol has yet to enter into force, the ATCPs have agreed "that the practical implementation of the Protocol should be advanced as rapidly as possible" (ATCM XVIII Final Report, para 36).

In this spirit Parties have actively sought to implement elements of the Protocol and its Annexes, and considerable progress has been made in some areas eg waste disposal technologies.

However, similar action by the Parties to address the provisions of its Article 15, and Articles 10 and 12 of Annex IV has been less evident. The subject has received little attention during the past four ATCMs except for Working Paper (XIX ATCM/WP 22) submitted by Chile.

(b) Detail

Initiatives have been taken by individual Parties and COMNAP directly to address Article 15, whilst more indirect measures to improve safety at sea, and theraby reduce
environmental impacts have been introduced by others (eg the IHO Working Group on Hydrographic Co-operation in Antarctica).

(i)     COMNAP

COMNAP and its sub-group, SCALOP, have addressed topics related to marine pollution, and in particular oil spill prevention and response, at each of their annual meetings since 1988. A sub-group on Oil Spill Prevention and Response was established by SCALOP in 1990 whilst a series of recommendations on spill prevention and response was adopted by COMNAP in 1991. These included:-
- development of contingency plans for all stations by December 1992, and for all vessels by December 1995;
- establishment of Regional Planning Committees.

In 1992 SCALOP's sub-group introduced a set of "Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning" to assist national operators with the task of developing contingency plans for their Antarctic installations. The Guidelines were adopted by COMNAP and included (as Annex 5) in COMNAP's report to ATCM XVII. These were followed up in February 1995 by MNAP Notice No 121 which requested that "all National Programmes which have not already done so are to expedite the completion, at least to draft stage, of appropriate facility contingency plans for oil spills".

In addition, COMNAP has held discussions with the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) to establish liaison and facilitate the exchange of information. The UK understands that COMNAP and the MEPC will liaise further to develop additional guidelines concerning response equipment and standardisation.

(ii)    IMO

In April 1993 Regulation 26 of Annex I of the Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78) came into force. This requires that all vessels (of contracting Parties) over 400 tons gross shall carry a ship-board Oil Pollution Emergency Plan.

In July 1996 the IMO Sub-Committee on Ship Design and Equipment circulated a draft of an International Code of Safety for Ships Navigating in Polar Waters (Code of Polar Navigation). This draft sets out guidelines on, inter alia, the construction, design and equipping of vessels
operating in polar waters with a view to its 
mandatory implementation in 2001.

(iii)    National Implementation

Many national operators in Antarctica have 
introduced Oil Spill Contingency Plans (OSCPs) for 
their research stations and vessels.

In addition, some operators have established 
training courses for oil spill contingency planning 
and response.

(iv)   Indirect Aspects

Aspects of oil spill response action and 
contingency planning in Antarctica are being 
examined by others. For example, the only computer 
model designed specifically for oil spills in 
Antarctica is in the final stages of development by 
the Management Unit of the North Sea Mathematical 
Models (MUMM) of the Institute of Hygiene and 
Epidemiology, Brussels. The model is being 
developed to predict the fate and spread of oil 
spills in the Weddell Sea. Coupled with existing 
(non-Antarctic) models, such as ADIOS (Automated 
Data Inquiry for Oil Spills) developed by the 
Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment 
Division of the National Oceanographic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, US), this may 
provide enhanced predictive capability on the fate 
of oil spills in Antarctica.

Other initiatives, with a bearing on maritime 
safety, have been introduced since the Protocol was 
adopted. These include the considerable progress 
made by the IHO's Working Group on Hydrographic 
Co-operation in Antarctica towards standardisation 
of charting in Antarctica and the introduction of 
INT charts. Enhanced reporting of sea-ice cover 
has also been achieved from satellites (see XVII 
ATCM/WP18 (Russia) and XVII ATCM/INFO 50 (WMO)).

The Effectiveness of Measures

The initiatives taken by individual Parties, 
their operators, other organisations, and in particular by COMNAP and SCALOP in 
circulating their 1992 Guidelines are commendable.

But in the view of the UK the ATCPs require to focus more 
attention on those provisions of the Protocol that relate to 
Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning. This is 
becoming increasingly relevant given that failure to carry out 
adequate response action may give rise to liability (see 
Articles 4 and 5 of the draft Liability Annex under discussion 
by the Group of Legal Experts).
The results of a survey in 1996 by the British Antarctic Survey (Downie, 1996) indicated that, despite the 1992 COMNAP Guidelines:

- approximately 40% of Antarctic Research Stations had no Oil Spill Contingency Plans;

- some Plans remained only in draft;

- Plans were highly variable in quality;

- Plans conformed only partially, or barely at all, to the COMNAP Guidelines.

(Relevant to Article 15(1)(b) and (2)(a))

The situation with vessels was more favourable. Over 80% of vessels, both Governmental and NGO, now carry a Ship-board Oil Pollution Emergency Plan (SOPEP).

(Relevant to Article 12 (1))

For the majority of Antarctica little attention has been given to multilateral co-ordination. However, COMNAP proposed that Response Action and Contingency Planning within defined geographical sectors of Antarctica could be dealt with by "Regional Planning Committees".

(Relevant to Article 15(1)(a) and (2)(b))

Additional studies relating to Oil Spill Response are being undertaken, eg oil spill modelling and coastal sensitivity mapping for spills, but their planning and implementation has not been placed within a standardised framework for response action and contingency planning developed by the ATCPs.

Further elements of Article 15 and related provisions which have not been addressed, or addressed only partially, are:-

- Article 15 (2)(b): The establishment of procedures for immediate notification of environmental emergencies;

- Article 12(2) of Annex IV

   - procedures for co-operative response to such emergencies

- Article 15(3) and Article 12(1)(b) of Annex IV: Liaison with appropriate international organisations, in particular the IMO. (Also determining the role of the Committee for Environmental Protection in relation to this topic).

- Article 10 of Annex IV: The determination of appropriate standards for the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships.

(The draft IMO Code of Polar Navigation has not been discussed by the ATCM, though the Emergency, Prevention, Preparedness and Response (EPPR) Working Group of the Arctic Environmental
Protection Strategy (AEPS) was informed of the work on this 
Code at their meeting in August, 1996.

It is understood that the issue of standards for polar shipping 
is not high on the current agenda of the IMO, but that a 
revised draft of the Code has recently been submitted by Canada 
to the IMO with a view that the issue be discussed at the 68th 
meeting of the Marine Safety Committee.

Conclusions and Recommendations

From the foregoing it is apparent that:-

- Article 15 and related provisions on Emergency Response 
Action and Contingency Planning have received little 
attention from the ATCM;

- major initiatives having a direct, or indirect, bearing on 
those provisions have been taken by others (both within and 
outside the ATS);

- additional work is required by the ATCM. This should 
include the introduction of possible further measures.

To address this last point, the following substantive proposals 
are presented by the UK for consideration by ATCM XXI:

- the provisions of Article 15 of the Protocol, and related 
provisions in Annex IV should be elaborated by means 
of a further Annex to the Protocol - on Response Action and 
Contingency Planning, to complement the draft liability 
Annex under discussion;

- the ATCM should request formally the IMO to provide a copy 
of the draft International Code of Safety for Ships 
Navigating in Polar Waters (Code of Polar Navigation) for 
consideration by the Consultative Meeting;

- those Parties whose research stations and vessels in 
Antarctica are not covered by contingency plans should 
ensure that their operators introduce such plans within a 
timetable to be determined by the ATCM;

- that the 1992 Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning 
prepared by COMNAP be reviewed, and that the ATCPs examine 
COMNAP's concept of Regional Planning Committees designed to 
address international response action with geographically 
defined sectors in Antarctica.

- Parties, individually and collectively, should carry out 
emergency contingency exercises, both theoretical and 
practical, to test and refine their response actions and 
contingency plans. Parties should report back, through the 
CWP, on such exercises so that co-operative response 
procedures can be formulated.
18:21 FROM FCO SAAD        TO OII  9005444729596

                                  7

References

Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP), 
1992. Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning, COMNAP, 
Washington DC. (See Annex 5, Report of ATCM XVII).

Downie, R. 1996. Contingency Planning for Oil Spill Response 
in Antarctica. Masters Thesis. BAS, Cambridge, Pg. 63.

National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, 
Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division.  1994. 
ADIOS Users Manual, pgs 45. NOAA, Seattle.

TOTAL P. 08
