ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
____________________________________________________
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SITE OF SPECIAL
SCIENTIFIC INTEREST Nº 13 "POTTER PENINSULA",
25 DE MAYO (KING GEORGE) ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS


Agenda item 6f                  Submitted by Argentina
XXI ATCM/WP30
May 1997
English
Original: Spanish
DRAFT MEASURE

Revised Description and Management Plan for Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for 
approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;

For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below:

(i)     the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to 
        Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific 
        research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest to be deleted;

(ii)    the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific 
        Interest, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted 
        in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of 
        scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned is:

SSSI No. 13 Potter Peninsula, 25 de Mayo (King George) 
Island, South Shetland Islands.
Management Plan
for Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No 13

POTTER PENINSULA, 25 DE MAYO (KING GEORGE) ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. Description of values to be protected

This Area was originally designated as SSSI No 13 in ATCM Recommendation XIII-8, after a 
proposal of Argentina because of its diverse avian and mammal fauna and locally rich 
vegetation, providing a representative sample of a maritime Antarctic ecosystem. Coastal 
areas support large breeding colonies of ten seabird species, including three penguin species, 
and three species of marine mammals.

The reasons for the original designation of the Area are still relevant. Scientific research on the 
breeding ecology of elephant seals and seabirds has been undertaken since 1982. This includes 
both the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program and basic ecological research that must be 
developed without interference by other human activities. Long-term research programs could 
be endangered by accidental interference, especially during breeding periods.

2. Aims and objectives

Management of Potter Peninsula aims to:

• Avoid major changes in the structure and composition of communities of flora and fauna.
• Prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area.
• Permit scientific research which cannot be served elsewhere, and allow the continuity of 
the ongoing long-term biological research programs established in the Area.

3. Management Activities

The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:

• Because the Area is close to a station permanently occupied, a marker board will be placed 
at the principal access point illustrating the location boundaries and stating entry 
restrictions.
• Within the Area those locations used for research should be clearly marked.
• Priority circulation routes within the Area will be established for transit to sample sites.
• Collection of samples will be limited to the minimum required for approved scientific 
research.
• Visits shall be made as necessary to ensure management and maintenance measures are 
adequate.

1
4. Period of Designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Potter Peninsula in relation with the Antarctic Peninsula. Map 2 
shows the location of Potter Peninsula in relation with 25 de Mayo (King George) Island. Map 
3 shows the Protected Area in greater detail.

6. Description of the Area

i Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the area

The site is located on the east side of Maxwell Bay, south-west of 25 de Mayo (King 
George) Island between Mirounga Point (the north-west most extreme point of Potter 
Peninsula) and the east side of Stranger Point (lat. 62° 15' S - long 58° 37' W). The site 
occupies the coastal zone of variable width up to 500 m from the shoreline (low water mark) 
and rising to about 70 m altitude at Stranger Point. It is mainly an area of raised beaches, 
mostly pebble-covered, backed by basalt cliffs, terminal or lateral moraines and small 
glaciers. The coastline is very irregular and alternates between small bays and rocky 
headlands.

This area offers a great scientific value by the presence of many bird colonies (Adelie 
penguin, gentoo penguin, chinstrap penguin, Dominican gull, brown skua, Antarctic tern, 
sheathbill, giant petrel and cape petrel) and breeding groups of marine mammals (Crabeater 
seal, Weddell seal, Southern elephant seal). There is a relatively abundant development of 
lichen-dominated plant communities, especially on the succession of prominent rocks along 
the beach. Long-term and monitoring research programs could be endangered by accidental 
interference, destruction of vegetation and soil, and perturbation of breeding birds and 
mammals.

ii Restricted zones within the Area

None.

iii Location of structures within the Area

Within the Area there is a small Argentine refuge used by research teams. The refuge, 
measuring 3 by 2.5 m, is built of metal sheets and glass-fiber roof. It can accommodate up 
to two persons. Approximately 500 meters outside the site is placed Jubany Station.

iv Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SSSI No . 5, Fildes Peninsula, lies about 20 km to the east direction. SSSI No. 8, Western 
Shore of Admiralty Bay, lies 10 km to the north-east direction. SSSI No.14, Harmony Point, 
lies about 30 km to the WSW direction.

2
7. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by appropriate national authorities.
Condition for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
• It is issued only for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere.
• The actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area.
• Any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
• The actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan.
• The Permit, or an authorized copy, must be carried within the Site of Special Scientific Interest.
• A report or reports are supplied to the authority or authorities named in the Permit.

i Access to and movements within the Area
The access to the Area is restricted to the northern end near the helipad. Marine access will be restricted to a landing site in front of the refuge. No vehicles nor aircraft are permitted in the Area except under emergency.
Limitation on access to particular localities used by breeding birds and mammals for specific periods may be necessary.

ii Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place
• Compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and which will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the area.
• Essential management activities, including monitoring.

iii Installation, modification or removal of structures
No additional structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for essential scientific or management activities, as specified in a Permit.

iv Location offield camps
Parties using the Area will normally be able to use Jubany Station. In the event that this is not possible, a camp site should be used near the existing station and outside the Area.

v Restriction on material and organism which may be brought into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area.
No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Area.
No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for compelling scientific purpose specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted. As far as possible the use of chemicals should be clearly documented for the benefit of later researchers.
Fuel, food and other materials are not to be stored in the area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots are not permitted.

3
vi Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

vii Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder
Material may be collected and /or removed from the Area only according to a permit, except debris of man-made origin from the beaches or dead biological specimens for pathological analysis.

viii Disposal of waste
All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area to the nearby research station. Human waste may be deposited in the sea.

ix Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant material or small numbers of animals for scientific purposes, to erect or maintain notice boards, or protective measures.
All scientific structures and instrumentation, including research markers, installed in the Area must be approved in the Permit and clearly identified by country, name of investigator and year of installation. Research markers and structures must be removed at or before the expiry of the Permit. If specific scientific projects cannot be concluded within the permitted time, application must be made for an extension to leave the items in situ.

x Requirements for reports
The principal permit holder for each issued permit shall submit a report of activities conducted in the Area using the accepted Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. This Report shall be submitted to the authority named in the Permit as soon as practicable, but not later than 6 months after the visit has taken place. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to interested Parties, SCAR, CCMLAR and COMNAP if requested, to provide the documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good management.

4
60° W                  50° W
                  60° S
60° S
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS
Potter Peninsula
70° W
ANTARCTIC
PENINSULA
WEDDELL
SEA
70° S                  70° S
ESCALA GRAFICA
Km 100 50 0 100 200 Km
Proyección Estereográfica Polar
                  60° W                  50° W
70° W                  70° S
59°W
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
             25 DE MAYO                                    
            ( KING GEORGE )                                
              ISLAND                                        
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
              GUARDIA NACIONAL                              
             ( MAXWELL ) BAY                              
                                 62°15' S                          
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
              NELSON                                        
               ISLAND                                       
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                
58°39'W                                      
POTTER COVE                              
Mirounga Point                           
HELIPAD                                  
MC                                       
Access                                   
Helicopter                               
Route                                    
Jubany Station                           
                                         
Three Brothers Hill                      
POTTER PENINSULA                         
                                         
                                         
SSSI N° 13                               
                                         
MAXWELL BAY                              
                                         
                                         
ISLA 25 DE MAYO                          
(KING GEORGE ISLAND)                      
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
Refuge                                   
Access                                   
Stranger Point                           
                                         
                       0      1Km         
             58°34'W      62°14'S         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
             62°16'S                       
