ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE    TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE    XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


REPORT OF THE TRANSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
WORKING GROUP TO THE XXI ATCM


Submitted by Secretariat

XXI ATCM/WP39
May, 1997
Original: English
REPORT OF THE TRANSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
WORKING GROUP TO THE XXI ATCM

1    The following items were on the Agenda of the Transitional Environmental
Working Group:

6    (b) Matters covered by Annex I (Environmental Impact Assessment)

     (c) Matters covered by Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora)

     (d) Matters covered by Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste
Management)

     (e) Matters covered by Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution)

     (f) Matters covered by Annex V (Area Protection and Management)

14   Environmental Monitoring and State of the Antarctic Environment

Item 6 (b): Matters covered by Annex I (Environmental Impact Assessment)

Concepts of 'minor' and 'transitory'

2    New Zealand introduced Working Papers (XXI ATCM/WP 34 and 35) which
reported on intersessional work since ATCM XX, and developed a further
understanding of the terms 'minor' and 'transitory'. Russia and Brazil introduced
Information Papers (XXI ATCM/INF 80 and 97) on the latter topic. Argentina
introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 55) on the interpretation of
environmental impact assessment procedures established in Annex I of the Protocol.
Several Parties commended Argentina on its valuable paper.

3    There was discussion on the usefulness of trying to further define what was
understood by the terms 'minor' and 'transitory'. It was noted by several Parties that

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 1
determination of the status of activities was context dependent, based on value 
judgements and information available at the time. SCAR noted that it was important 
to ensure transparency of methodology so as to allow Parties to assess the basis of the 
determination. The United States commented that the focus of the discussion should 
not be on developing prescriptive definitions but rather on providing guidance for 
making determinations.

4       The Meeting discussed ways of further advancing understanding of 'minor' and 
'transitory' in the context of the environmental impact assessment process, and 
accepted the offer by Australia to coordinate intersessional work amongst Parties to 
analyse the usefulness of existing environmental impact assessment guidelines, to seek 
the feedback of experienced environmental impact assessment practitioners, and to 
collate the information for presentation to ATCM XXII. Parties interested in taking 
part in this intersessional work should provide the name and e-mail address of their 
contact to the Australian coordinator, Mr Tom Maggs on e-mail: 
Tom_Mag@antdiv.gov.au.

5       The Meeting thanked New Zealand for leading this very useful intersessional 
work. The long history of discussion of the terms 'minor' and 'transitory' was noted, 
and it was recognised that understanding had been advanced by this type of work. The 
Meeting agreed to New Zealand's suggestion that the developing body of 
environmental impact assessments could be drawn upon in developing further 
understanding of the terms.

Examination of the Environmental Impact Assessment Process.

6       A second aspect of the intersessional work described in XXI ATCM/WP 34 
was expanded in the New Zealand Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 36) on the 
understanding of environmental impact assessment processes.

7       The United States introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 3) on its 
experiences with Antarctic environmental impact assessment. Norway introduced an

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                     Page 2
Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 38) which describes the Norwegian 
environmental impact assessment procedures and legislation. The IUCN introduced 
the relevant sections of their Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 61) on minimisation 
and management of cumulative effects. IUCN brought to the attention of the Meeting 
several recommendations from the paper of relevance to this discussion; in particular 
that consideration of cumulative impacts should include all relevant past, present and 
reasonably foreseeable activities; and that wherever obligations regarding 
environmental impacts are identified, it should be taken that this includes cumulative 
impacts.

8    New Zealand introduced two papers prepared by the Secretariat, 
XXI ATCM/INF 57 rev.1, which provides a summary of environmental impact 
assessments, audits/reviews and related documents prepared for activities in Antarctic; 
and XXI ATCM/INF 46 on the circulation of information on environmental impact 
assessments, as required by Resolution 6 (1995) to be presented by the host.

9    In relation to XXI ATCM/INF 57 rev.1, New Zealand thanked the United 
Kingdom for initiating the list of documents, and proposed that host governments 
undertake this as an annual task. Norway, as host country for the next ATCM, offered 
to provide an updated list of environmental impact assessments, audits/reviews and 
associated guidance documents for that meeting.

10   It was noted that the information provided to New Zealand as the basis for 
Information Paper 57 did not constitute a definitive list of IEEs and CEEs undertaken 
since 1988, but rather a compilation of data provided in response to information 
requests. New Zealand invited Parties to advise it of any additional environmental 
impact assessments which should be added to the list.

11   Russia noted that the Paper did not include any Russian reports but that a 
number of documents were being translated and it was hoped they would be presented 
at ATCM XXII. The United States noted that the lack of reports from many Parties 
could indicate that they are carrying out few new activities or had not done 
environmental assessments for new activities. The United States further noted that 

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                         Page 3
Parties were not obliged to prepare IEEs and CEEs yet as the Protocol had not entered 
into force, but that Parties had agreed to act as if it were.

12   Some parties noted the desirability of exchanging environmental impact 
assessments, preferably through electronic media (e-mail). IUCN observed that an 
exchange of environmental impact assessments was recommended by the IUCN 
cumulative impacts workshop, which is discussed in para 22, and may assist in 
assessing the possible cumulative impacts of activities on the Antarctic environment. 
The Meeting urged Parties to comply with the requirements of Resolution 6 (1995) 
relating to the collection and dissemination of environmental impact assessment 
information.

13   The Meeting noted that once the CEP was established, all draft CEEs would be 
forwarded to the Committee. It was noted that it was important to focus on the 
process of environmental impact assessment in general, and to consider whether this 
was working well. SCAR remarked that although different approaches were taken to 
preparing environmental impact assessments, it had noticed an increasing level of 
professionalism and detail apparent in the reports over time.

Transparency of the Environmental Impact Assessment Process and Flow of 
Information.

14   New Zealand introduced a joint Working Paper with South Africa 
(XXI ATCM/WP 13) on further initiatives in the implementation methodology for 
CEEs. The paper expressed the view that the independent review of the activities 
carried out following the completion of the CEEs has proven useful, outlined a 
suggested process for CEE follow-up, and set out a draft resolution for consideration.

15   Some Parties noted differing interpretations regarding what constitutes an 
'independent' review, and proposed further drafting changes to the draft Resolution. 
It was agreed to remove reference to 'independent' in the draft Resolution. Parties 
subsequently adopted Resolution 1 (1997).

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 4
16    South Africa introduced Information Papers (XXI ATCM/INF 94 and 11) 
      reporting on, respectively, the South African initiative to acquire ISO 14001 
      accreditation for its SANAE IV base, and the Environmental Health and Safety 
      Management Systems- a follow-up report. The Meeting welcomed the information in 
      these papers.

Examination of Individual Environmental Assessments

17    Italy introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 23) outlining environmental 
      management problems relating to joint research activities. The Meeting noted the need 
      for further work on this, and that the Antarctic Environmental Officers Network might 
      be a useful medium for it.

18    New Zealand introduced Information Papers (XXI ATCM/INF 5) updating the 
      Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of the Cape Roberts drilling project and 
      (XXI ATCM/INF 20) presenting a model IEE for New Zealand-based tourism 
      operators in the Ross Sea region.

19    IAATO presented an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 74) which included 
      draft terms of reference for an IEE of ship-based activities in the Antarctic Peninsula 
      and South Shetland Islands.

20    Several Parties noted the difficulties of employing a single IEE, given the range 
      of tourist activities, locations visited, and differing legislative requirements of the 
      Parties. It was noted that a programmatic approach to tourist environmental impact 
      assessment was one useful way of assessing possible cumulative impacts. Several 
      Parties suggested that wide circulation of individual environmental impact assessments 
      would also assist in assessing possible cumulative impacts. IAATO noted that 
      individual operators would each submit their documents to the appropriate national 
      authority. The Meeting congratulated IAATO on its continuing efforts to satisfy 
      Annex 1 of the Protocol.

                                                     XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting        Page 5
21    Information Papers were presented by Italy (XXI ATCM/INF 21), Argentina 
      (XXI ATCM/INF 36), and China (XXI ATCM/INF 89) on environmental measures at 
      their stations.

22    IUCN presented an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 61) outlining the 
      findings of its 1996 workshop on the minimisation and management of cumulative 
      environmental impacts in the Antarctic. IUCN observed that an exchange of 
      environmental impact assessments was recommended by the workshop, and may assist 
      in assessing the possible cumulative impacts of activities on the Antarctic environment. 
      The Meeting welcomed the Paper and congratulated IUCN on its important work on 
      this difficult issue. It was noted that the CEP will have to consider how cumulative 
      impacts should be addressed. It was noted that some actions recommended in the 
      IUCN Paper are already being undertaken. In particular SCAR had already set in train 
      investigations to locate pristine areas, to provide reference to operational databases in 
      the Antarctic Digital Data System, to identify control areas for monitoring, and to 
      consider the implications of translocation of species within the Antarctic.

23    The Meeting also noted that it was important to further this work 
      intersessionally, and suggested that Parties, and interested Observers and experts, 
      including SCAR, forward their comments to IUCN. It was hoped that a follow-up 
      paper could then be completed and circulated well before ATCM XXII so that the 
      issue of cumulative impacts could be considered at the next Meeting.

      Item 6 (c): Matters covered by Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
      Flora)

24    Australia introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 51) on the 
      introduction of disease into Antarctic birds. The Meeting noted the data presented by 
      Australia and welcomed the Australian initiative to host a workshop on further 
      research. This initiative was strongly supported by SCAR. Parties were encouraged to 

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 6
contact the workshop organiser Dr Knowles Kerry if they were interested in 
participating in such a workshop (email: knowle_ker@antdiv.gov.au).

Item 6 (d): Matters covered by Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste 
Management)

25     Argentina introduced Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 17) on a waste 
management plan for Marambio Station. The meeting took note of the information 
presented and congratulated Argentina on its extensive efforts on waste management 
relating to a scientific station with considerable logistic activity.

Item 6 (e): Matters covered by Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution)

26     Chile introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 21) outlining the Chilean 
Antarctic environmental management programme and encouraging other member 
countries to implement the environmental measures mentioned in the appendices of the 
Madrid Protocol. The Meeting commended the initiative taken by Chile.

27     China introduced two Information Papers (XXI ATCM/INF 87 and 88) 
outlining the oil spill contingency plans for its Antarctic bases. The Meeting 
commended China on these plans.

Item 6 (f): Matters covered by Annex V (Area Protection and Management)

Specially Protected Areas

28     New Zealand introduced Working Papers (XXI ATCM/WP 5 rev.1, 4 rev.1, 
and 15 rev 1) proposing a revised Management Plan for Beaufort Island (SPA 5), and 
new Management Plans for the Cape Evans Historic Site (SPA 25), and the Lewis Bay 
Tomb (SPA 26). Parties adopted Measure 1 (1997) for SPA 5, and Measure 2 (1997) 
for SPAs 25 and 26.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting             Page 7
29     Parties recognised that, until Annex V of the Environmental Protocol enters 
       into force, there is no means for designating Antarctic Specially Protected Areas 
       (ASPAs), and that an interim process was required to ensure appropriate protection 
       for, and management of, areas which include historic sites and monuments. Parties 
       agreed that pending entry into force of Annex V, proposals to designate and adopt 
       management plans for these types of areas should be viewed as proposals for the 
       designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in accordance with the Agreed 
       Measures.

30     Brazil introduced Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 40) which reported on 
       measures adopted for the implementation of a Specially Managed Area at Admiralty 
       Bay.

31     A point was raised relating to possible confusion when prohibitions on activities 
       set out in the various Annexes of the Protocol are repeated in Management Plans for 
       protected areas. It was suggested that prohibitions should be cited in the relevant 
       Management Plans so they are complete, but that these should be worded in such a 
       way that they are consistent with and refer to the relevant Article in the Protocol, eg 
       "in accordance with Article ... of the Protocol ...".

Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

32     New Zealand introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 6 rev.1) proposing 
       a Management Plan for a new SSSI in Botany Bay (SSSI 37, and a Working Paper 
       (XXI ATCM/WP 7 rev. 1) proposing a revised Management Plan for Canada Glacier 
       (SSSI 12). In addition to this, New Zealand proposed a change in the term 'restricted 
       zone' in the current Tramway Ridge site (SSSI 11) to 'prohibited zone' 
       (XXI ATCM/WP 17). Parties adopted Measure 3 (1997) to accept these plans and to 
       reflect the amended zone description for Tramway Ridge. The United Kingdom 
       congratulated New Zealand on the excellent quality of the maps in their Working 
       Papers.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 8
33   In respect of the plan for Botany Bay it was noted that areas listed as historic 
     sites traditionally related to specific sites or monuments, rather than historic 'areas' or 
     'zones' as discussed in the Working Papers. It was however also noted that this 
     confusion would be alleviated once Annex V came into force.

34   Argentina introduced Working Papers (XXI ATCM/WP 29, and 30), proposing 
     revised Management Plans for Cierva Point (SSSI 15) and Potter Peninsula (SSSI 13). 
     Argentina introduced a joint Working Paper with Chile (XXI ATCM/WP 31) 
     proposing a revised Management Plan for Harmony Point (SSSI 14). Parties adopted 
     Measure 3 (1997) to accept these plans.

35   It was noted that Management Plans for SSSI are voluntarily adopted. There 
     was therefore a problem with incorporating prohibitions on activities in those sites. 
     The Meeting noted that, until Annex V enters into force, it will be incumbent on 
     Parties to ensure that their nationals comply with prohibitions within SSSI. This was 
     reflected in Measure 3 (1997) adopted by the Parties.

36   It was noted that in preparing Management Plans for SSSIs, the Management 
     Plan for the Rothera Point SSSI (SSSI 9) might be a useful model.

     Historic Sites and Monuments

37   New Zealand introduced Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 3) proposing that 
     the Lewis Bay Cross be designated as a historic site. New Zealand noted that this was 
     the site of the 1979 Mt Erebus tragedy. Argentina introduced a Working Paper 
     (XXI ATCM/WP 27) proposing an amendment to Historic Site 41 on Paulet Island to 
     include a rock cairn built by the survivors of the "Antarctic" wreck in 1903. Parties 
     adopted Measures 4 (1997) to add the Lewis Bay Memorial Cross to the "List of 
     Historic Monuments Identified and Described by a Proposing Government or 
     Governments", and Measure 5 (1997) to amend Historic Site 41.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 9
Area Protection and Management under Annex V

38   At ATCM XVII a report (XVII ATCM/WP 4) was tabled by SCAR and IUCN, 
     containing the recommendations of a workshop SCAR and IUCN had organised in 
     1992, which examined the Antarctic protected area system. Based on a number of 
     these recommendations, the United Kingdom presented a Working Paper 
     (XXI ATCM/WP 10) to the Meeting which contained proposals for improving the 
     protected area system, including a proposal for a further workshop on this topic.

39   The Meeting noted that a protected areas workshop was consistent with 
     Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol which calls upon Parties to seek 
     to identify and protect areas of outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic 
     or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific 
     research within a systematic environmental-geographical framework.

40   The Meeting agreed that the protected areas currently designated in Antarctica 
     should be examined to see if they include representative examples of all the categories 
     of areas identified in Article 3 (2) of Annex V. The Meeting further agreed that a 
     workshop should be convened for this purpose.

41   The Meeting decided that the Terms of Reference of the workshop will be to:

     i)   compare the protected areas currently designated against the categories of 
          areas set out in Article 3 (2) of Annex V in order to identify gaps in the 
          existing system;

     ii)  examine the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix for protected areas to 
          identify the changes that are needed so that the matrix better incorporates 
          the categories of areas set out in Article 3 (2) of Annex V;

    iii)  identify, where possible, areas which might be designated to fill any gaps 
          found in the existing system; and

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 10
iv) examine, and where possible identify ways to improve, the procedures for 
developing and reviewing proposals for ASPAs.

42   The Meeting agreed that participants in the workshop should have appropriate 
scientific, technical or environmental expertise and include representatives from Treaty 
Parties, and from interested observers and experts, including SCAR, CCAMLR, IUCN 
and other observers and experts.

43   The Meeting agreed that the workshop should be organised by a small Steering 
Committee chaired by the United Kingdom working during the intersessional period 
via email. The Meeting further agreed that representatives from Australia, Chile, 
Norway, SCAR and IUCN be invited to serve on the Steering Committee.

44   Norway offered to host the workshop on the Saturday immediately preceding 
the start of the meeting of the TEWG/CEP at ATCM XXII in Tromso in 1998. This 
offer was gratefully accepted by the Meeting.

45   SCAR introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 18) setting out a Draft 
Guide for Preparing Management Plans for Specially Protected Areas. The Meeting 
thanked SCAR for their efforts and noted the draft guide was a useful step forward in 
how to prepare a management plan for any Antarctic Specially Protected Area.

46   The Meeting considered that the Guide required further improvements before 
its adoption could be considered. Delegates were urged to provide written comments 
to SCAR, who undertook to amend and circulate the text. The Meeting thanked the 
United Kingdom for its offer to coordinate intersessional work on this matter and 
report back to ATCM XXII.

47   IUCN introduced Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 65) regarding the 
United Nations list of Protected Areas.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 11
48    Article 6(2) of Annex V sets out the requirement that no marine area shall be 
      designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or Antarctic Specially Managed 
      Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
      Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

49    ATCM XX agreed that a list of existing SSSIs containing marine areas be 
      submitted to CCAMLR XV. The Commission subsequently requested that the Treaty 
      Parties advise on the definition of ‘marine area’.

50    The Meeting agreed that the draft text, below, should be transmitted along with 
      the draft list of SSSIs to CCAMLR for its consideration and possible endorsement:

      “For the purpose of implementation of Article 6(2), draft management plans 
      requiring the endorsement of CCAMLR are those that include marine areas in 
      which:
      -    there is actual harvesting or potential capability for harvesting of marine 
           living resources which might be affected by site designation; or

      -    there are provisions specified in a draft management plan that might 
           prohibit or restrict CCAMLR-related activities.

      The draft list is given at Appendix X. In addition, further proposals for 
      ASPA/SPA designations which contain such elements will also be submitted to 
      CCAMLR.”

51    It was further agreed that proposals for site designations which might have 
      implications for CCAMLR Environmental Monitoring Program (CEMP) sites should 
      also be submitted to CCAMLR.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                Page 12
Item 14: Environmental Monitoring and State of the Antarctic Environment

52   New Zealand and SCAR presented Working Papers (XXI ATCM/WP 32 and 
19 respectively) on the need for, and suggested structure of, a State of the Antarctic 
Environment Report (SAER). Discussion then focused on the potential benefits and 
concerns facing Parties in the production of such a report, and ways in which it might 
be taken forward.

53   Parties acknowledged that a SAER could provide a valuable benchmark against 
which environmental change might be monitored and impacts measured, and that it 
might provide a valuable synthesis of the large and diverse amount of scientific 
information available. The discussions noted that such a report could be done in 
several ways, each with a differing focus and level of detail.

54   The Meeting raised concerns about the potential scope, focus, cost and 
production of an SAER, noting that while there are numerous models for State of the 
Environment reporting elsewhere, an Antarctic report was likely to be a comprehensive 
undertaking. Existing world experience of SOE reporting suggests that the more 
comprehensive a report, the greater the time and financial resources required.

55   Parties noted New Zealand’s intention to prepare a framework for a Ross Sea 
Region State of the Environment Report (SOE-RSR) by the year 2000 in consultation 
with other Parties active in the region. While it was acknowledged that this 
regionalised report could be used as a pilot for a larger, continent-wide report, it was 
felt that commencement of work on the SAER should not be tied to the timing or the 
completion of the SOE-RSR.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                         Page 13
56	The Parties agreed that the objectives for the SAER needed clarification to take 
      into account different audiences and, consequently, foci for the Report. Uses to which 
      the Report might be put include:

      i)	as an archival benchmark/baseline document of global relevance;
      ii)	as a basis for the provision of policy guidance; and
      iii)	as a basis for the provision of trend analysis in environmental monitoring.

57	The Meeting agreed that any one, or combination, of these uses might be 
      appropriate and the approach should be clearly established by the ATCM before work 
      on the SAER began.

58	It was suggested that it could be useful for the SAER to distinguish the process 
      of data collection, validation, and compilation, in which SCAR would play a major 
      role, from the process of providing advice and formulating recommendations, which 
      would have to be done by the TEWG/CEP.

59	The Meeting noted that the Antarctic scientific community could be expected to 
      play a major role in the preparation of the report. It expressed its appreciation for the 
      work that SCAR had already done in preparing draft guidelines and a schema for the 
      Report. SCAR had identified a number of organisations with the relevant specialist 
      capabilities which might usefully be consulted in the development of the SAER.

60	The Meeting agreed to form an open-ended contact group facilitated by New 
      Zealand to consider intersessionally how uncertainties about the focus of a SAER and 
      the methodology of production might be resolved, and report back to ATCM XXII. 
      The contact group would be tasked with:

      i)	developing clear objectives for the Report;
      ii)	recommending whether the Report should be comprehensive or summary 
            in nature;
      iii)	proposing a time-frame for the Report;
      iv)	considering the financial and human resources required to meet the 
            proposed time-frame and scope of the Report, and
      v)	considering what progress might be made on the Report framework.

      XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                         Page 14
61     The Meeting noted that there was likely to be a range of options involving 
       possible financial commitment from Parties. The contact group should consider 
       preparing indicative cost estimates based on different options, investigate possible 
       sources of funding and potential outlets for publication.

62     New Zealand's offer to coordinate the work of the contact group prior to 
       ATCM XXII was gratefully accepted by the Meeting. New Zealand was asked to 
       facilitate the intersessional work of the contact group by correspondence, including 
       email, and to report back to ATCM XXII. The Meeting noted that such intersessional 
       work should take account of the financial, technical and other resource implications for 
       participants in the production of a SAER.

63     The Meeting agreed that the project should be open to the widest participation 
       by Parties, observers and experts, and that interested Parties, observers and experts 
       should notify the New Zealand national contact point by the end of June 1997 of their 
       interest in participating in the intersessional work to be carried out by the contact 
       group.

64     COMNAP introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 67) summarising 
       existing environmental monitoring activities in Antarctic.

65     Korea introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 27) outlining the 
       environmental monitoring programme conducted at the Korean Antarctic base. The 
       Meeting thanked Korea for this Paper.

66     Chile introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 12 Rev 1) on 
       contamination of the Southern Ocean. The Meeting decided to refer this to Working 
       Group II for discussion.

67     SCAR and COMNAP introduced Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 20) on 
       the monitoring of environmental impacts of scientific activities and operations in

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 15
Antarctica. The Meeting welcomed these joint efforts and endorsed the following proposals, contained in the Paper, for future action:

i)     a technical handbook of standardised monitoring techniques to be prepared by COMNAP, with advice from SCAR, based on the parameters and key indicators identified in the workshop report;

ii)    a review of existing data and of key research issues to be undertaken through SCAR;

iii)   the process of data management to be developed through the SCAR/COMNAP Data Management Group to allow synthesis of data for comparative purposes; and

iv)    methods of co-ordination of monitoring activities to be developed through COMNAP to avoid wasteful duplication and ensure effective use of resources.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 16
APPENDIX 1

Resolution 1 (1997)

Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE):
Methodology for Implementation of Activities for which CEE has been Prepared

The Representatives,

Recalling Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that further guidance is desirable for following up on the implementation of activities for which CEEs have been prepared under Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Encourage Consultative Parties to:

1.      Include in their procedures for assessing the environmental impacts of their activities in Antarctica, provision for review of the activities undertaken following the completion of a CEE.

2      Adopt the following process for CEE follow-up:

      (a)     Review activities carried out following completion of CEE, including analysis of whether the activities were conducted as proposed, whether applicable mitigation measures were implemented, and whether the impacts of the activity were as predicted in the assessment;

      (b)     Record any changes to the activities described in the CEE, the reasons for the changes, and the environmental consequences of those changes; and

      (c)     Report to the Parties on the outcomes of (a) and (b) above.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 17
APPENDIX 2

Measure 1 (1997)

Antarctic Protected Areas System:
Revised Description and Management Plan for Specially Protected Area

SPA 5  Beaufort Island (Annex A)

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9/VIII-3

Noting that revised and new Area Descriptions and Proposed Management Plans have 
been endorsed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of the revised and new Area Descriptions and proposed 
Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance 
with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

For Specially Protected Area No. 5  Beaufort Island (Annex A)

1.    That the Description inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the 
      Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora shall be 
      deleted.

2.    That the Description and Management Plan of the Specially Protected Area at 
      Annex A shall be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed 
      Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 18
APPENDIX 3

Measure 2 (1997)

Antarctic Protected Areas System: Specially Protected Areas

Number 25:   Cape Evans Historic Site and its environs (Annex A)

Number 26:   Lewis Bay Tomb (Annex B)

The Representatives,

   Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

   Noting that Management Plans for the above Areas have been endorsed by the 
   Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

   Noting also that the format of the Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V 
   of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under 
   recommendation XVI-10;

   Recognising that both these Areas have outstanding historic and commemorative 
   significance which require long-term protection to ensure that their values are 
   maintained and to avoid undue human disturbance;

   Agreeing that pending entry into force of Annex V, proposals to designate and adopt 
   management plans for the protection of historic or commemorative values should be 
   viewed as proposals for the designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in 
   accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and 
   Fauna.

   Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance 
   with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

   That the Management Plans for the Cape Evans Historic Site and its 
   environs (SPA No. 25) and the Lewis Bay Tomb (SPA No. 26) annexed to 
   this Measure be adopted.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 19
APPENDIX 4

Measure 3 (1997)

Antarctic Protected Areas System: Revised Descriptions and Management Plans
for Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

SSSI 11: Tramway Ridge
SSSI 12: Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land (Annex A)
SSSI 13: Potter Peninsula, 25 de Mayo Island (King George Island), South
            Shetland Islands (Annex B)
SSSI 14: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands (Annex C)
SSSI 15: Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (Annex D)
SSSI 37: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land

The Representatives

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance
with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

1.      For the following Sites of Special Scientific Interest, that the relevant
        Management Plans annexed to this Measure be inserted in the Annex to
        Recommendation XIII-8 to replace those plans previously annexed to this
        Recommendation:
        
        SSSI 12: Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land (Annex A)
        SSSI 13: Potter Peninsula, 25 de Mayo Island (King George Island),
                  South Shetland Islands (Annex B)
        SSSI 14: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands
                  (Annex C)
        SSSI 15: Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (Annex D)

2.      For SSSI No 37 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land, that the
        Management Plan annexed to this Measure (Annex E) be approved and
        adopted.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 20
3. For SSSI No: 11 Tramway Ridge, that the term 'restricted zone' be changed to 
'prohibited zone'.

4. That the Consultative Parties ensure that their nationals comply with the 
mandatory provisions of the new and revised management plans.

 
XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 21
APPENDIX 5

Measure 4 (1997)

Antarctic Protected Areas System: Historic Sites and Monuments

Memorial Cross, Lewis Bay, Ross Island.

The Representatives,

Recalling in particular Recommendation XI-3;

And also Recommendations I-9, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XIII-7, XIII-16, XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments to add the following historic monument to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9, thereby guaranteeing its full protection and respect as envisaged by the Recommendation noted above.

Memorial Cross for the 1979 Mount Erebus Crash Victims, Lewis Bay, Ross Island.

A cross of stainless steel which was erected in January 1987 on a rocky promontory three kilometres from the Mount Erebus crash site in memory of the 257 people of different nationalities who lost their lives when the aircraft in which they were travelling crashed into the lower slopes of Mount Erebus, Ross Island. the Cross was erected as a mark of respect and in remembrance of those who died in this tragedy.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 22
APPENDIX 6

Measure 5 (1997)

Antarctic Protected Areas System: Historic Sites and Monuments: Amendment

Number 41:  Stone Hut on Paulet Island

The Representatives,

Recalling the Measures adopted in Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9; and
Resolution 8 (1995);

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance
with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That an amendment of the description of Historic Site Number 41, which is
contained in the "List of Historic Monuments and Described by the proposing
Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9, be
approved.

Amendment to Listing:

Site Number 41: Stone Hut on Paulet Island.

The following text should be added to the final part of the paragraph;

"...and the rock cairn built by the survivors of the wreck at the highest point of
the island to draw the attention of rescue expeditions".

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                 Page 23
APPENDIX 7

Sites of Special Scientific Interest
that require draft Management Plan endorsement by CCAMLR

SSSI 1:  Cape Royds, Ross Island
SSSI 20: Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
SSSI 26: 'Chile Bay' (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 27: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 28: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
SSSI 32: Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 34: Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 35: Western Bransfield Strait off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 36: Eastern Dallmann Bay off Brabant Island, Palmer Archipelago

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 24
