ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I TO THE ATCM XXI


Submitted by Secretariat

XXI ATCM/WP40
May, 1997
Original: English
REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I TO THE ATCM XXI

Item 6 (a) General Matters and Implementation by ATCPs

1       Germany introduced Working Paper (ATCM XXI/WP 16) on the inspection of ships by port states, which proceeded from the discussion of this topic at ATCM XX. Appreciation was expressed for this contribution. Some Delegations noted the particular problems posed in relation to jurisdiction in Antarctica.

2       The United Kingdom introduced Working Paper (ATCM XXI/WP 22) on the concept of 'departure state jurisdiction' as a means by which Parties to the Protocol could control foreign expeditions departing from their territory for Antarctica. Some Delegations expressed their appreciation for the Working Paper. While the Meeting supported efforts to ensure compliance with the Protocol by non-Parties, concern was expressed by some Delegations about the legality of asserting jurisdiction over future acts of foreign expeditions outside territorial waters, in the light of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969 and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982. Others supported the concept. Argentina noted that proposals in this context going beyond the limits of international law, such as departure state jurisdiction, might endanger the delicate balance provided for by the Law of the Sea Convention 1982. The United Kingdom noted that the legislation of some of the Parties, including the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and to a certain extent, Finland, embodied departure state jurisdiction.

3       The Meeting agreed to keep the broad topic of "How best to promote universal compliance with the Protocol" on the agenda for ATCM XXII. In this regard ASOC encouraged ATCPs who are not already members of MARPOL and CCAMLR, to adhere to those treaties.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 1
4     The United Kingdom introduced Working Paper (ATCM XXI/WP 37) on 
      maritime insurance as a way of ensuring compliance with the Protocol. The Meeting 
      noted with appreciation the willingness of Norway to inform the main maritime 
      insurance markets and the International Group of Protection and Indemnity Clubs of 
      the imminent (and actual) entry into force of the Environmental Protocol, and to seek 
      information from them as to the normal insurance terms and conditions applicable to 
      vessels sailing south of 60° South and whether these may be modified on the entry into 
      force of the Protocol.

5     The United Kingdom introduced Working Paper (ATCM XXI/WP 9) on 
      emergency response action and contingency planning. The Meeting thanked the 
      United Kingdom for its Paper on a subject of vital importance, particularly given the 
      increasing number of ships and aircraft in Antarctica.

6     The Meeting noted that the IMO draft International Code of Safety for Ships 
      Navigating in Polar Waters to be presented to the IMO during 1998 will be relevant in 
      this regard. IAATO noted that all 13 tourist vessels that had visited Antarctica during 
      the 1996-97 season had Ship-board Oil Pollution Emergency Plans (SOPEPs). 
      IAATO is currently working on an IAATO wide amendment to the current SOPEPs 
      and hope to have it in place for the upcoming 1997-98 season. The United Kingdom 
      undertook to provide interested parties with a synopsis of the Report (Downie, 1996), 
      referred to in ATCM XXI/WP 9.

7     The Meeting expressed support for the substance of the proposals outlined in 
      the ATCM XXII/WP 9, and adopted Resolution 2 on Emergency Response Action and 
      Contingency Planning (Appendix 1).

Item 6(g) Matters related to Article 16 of the Environment Protocol (Liability)

8     Professor Wolfrum, Chairman of the Legal Experts Group on Liability, 
      reported on that Group. Professor Wolfrum's report covered the following matters:

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                  Page 2
- the procedure followed by the Group;
- where the Group stood at present;
- some of the difficult issues facing the Group;
- how the work of the Group might continue.

9    Professor Wolfrum reported that while there were still other issues which 
     required consideration by the Group, the Group had been able to identify particular 
     matters on which the guidance of the ATCM should be sought. These were, for 
     example, issues relating to the definition of 'damage', the actions required to be taken 
     by operators, the reimbursement of costs, unrepaired damage and the process for 
     settlement of disputes.

10   Professor Wolfrum proposed that to this end the Group provide a written 
     report to ATCM XXIII which would:
     -  describe the results achieved;
     -  identify the major problems with respect to the draft texts before the 
        Group;
     -  set out the different alternatives and approaches.

11   The Meeting expressed its appreciation to Professor Wolfrum for his work as 
     Chairman of the Group. The Meeting agreed with Professor Wolfrum's proposal that a 
     written report should be developed by the Group for submission as a working paper to 
     ATCM XXII and that the latest Offering of the Chairman's draft text as well as 
     different alternatives and approaches should be appended to it. It was agreed that the 
     written report would need to be approved by the Legal Experts Group on Liability 
     before submission as a working paper to ATCM XXII.

12   Germany introduced Working Paper (ATCM XXI/WP 28) which proposed that 
     the Meeting agree that the mandate of the Group be extended and that an 
     intersessional meeting be convened.

13   Some Delegations were concerned to ensure that the report would discuss both 
     the comprehensive approach of Professor Wolfrum's Offering and the functional

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 3
approach proposed by the United States at Utrecht, as alternatives for the 
consideration of the ATCM XXII.

14 The Meeting agreed:

      a) to take note of the work of the Group of Legal Experts on Liability as 
      reported by the Chairman of the Group;

      b) to extend, in accordance with Recommendation IV-24, the mandate of the 
      Group of Legal Experts on Liability;

      c) that an intersessional meeting of Legal Experts on Liability be convened 
      before ATCM XXII;

      d) that the Group of Legal Experts on Liability prepare a written report on 
      the work undertaken to elaborate an annex or annexes on environmental 
      liability, and that the report should outline the results achieved, identify the 
      major outstanding problems and the different alternatives and approaches;

      e) that the report should be presented to ATCM XXII for discussion and 
      decision on how to proceed further;

      f) that the report should be circulated to ATCM XXII as a Working Paper;

      g) that the Group of Legal Experts should meet in conjunction with 
      ATCM XXII to continue discussion on any issues not addressed by the report 
      and identified by the Group of Legal Experts at the intersessional meeting.

15 The Meeting welcomed the offer of South Africa to host the intersessional 
meeting of the Group of Legal Experts in Cape Town from 17-22 November 1997.

16 ASOC introduced Information Papers (ATCM XXI/INF 63 & 92) relating to 
the work of the Group of Legal Experts. ASOC asked Delegations which had

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                  Page 4
concerns about ASOC participation in the Group of Legal Experts to reconsider their 
positions.

Item 7 Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

17     France introduced a joint France/New Zealand Working Paper (ATCM 
XXI/WP 24) which proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meetings. The Meeting welcomed the further efforts to expedite 
document circulation, but felt that additional consideration was required before a 
Resolution could be agreed. Issues identified as requiring further discussion by some 
Delegations included possible effects on the ability of Experts to contribute effectively 
to the ATCM's discussions if their documents (Information Papers) were excluded 
from consideration in discussions because they had not been translated into the four 
official languages. Other Delegations expressed the view that the content of the 
Guidelines should remain unchanged. Pending resolution of these issues, the Meeting 
reaffirmed that document circulation continue as set out in the Guideline to Pre-
sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling in the Final Report to ATCM 
XX Annex D.

18     New Zealand and the Netherlands introduced Working Papers (ATCM 
XXI/WP 1 Rev.1 and WP 33 respectively) proposing amendments to the Rules of 
Procedure. The Meeting agreed to these as well as other amendments. The revised 
Rules of Procedure be appended to the Final Report of the Meeting.

19     The Meeting examined the draft Rules of Procedure of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection with a view to providing a text which would be available for 
the Committee upon its establishment, anticipated to be at ATCM XXII. The draft 
Rules are attached (Annex X).

20     Norway expressed its willingness to initiate intersessional work prior to ATCM 
XXII, through either written communications or by arranging an informal 
intersessional meeting in Oslo, to facilitate the work of the CEP (provided the

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                        Page 5
Environmental Protocol had entered into force). As some Delegations expressed 
concern as to the need for, and format of, such a meeting, the Meeting agreed that 
Norway would proceed with the intersessional work in the same manner as New 
Zealand had in preparation for ATCM XXI.

21    The Netherlands, New Zealand and South Africa tabled a Working Paper 
(ATCM XXI/WP 2/Rev. 1) as a discussion paper on establishment issues for the 
Committee for Environmental Protection.

22    Professor Wolfram reported on the work of the Contact Group on 
Organisational Aspects of the Establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, under 
his chairmanship. A number of Delegations expressed their preference for an 
arrangement where the specific regulations on privileges and immunities for the 
Secretariat and its staff would be dealt with in a host state agreement. The Meeting 
recommended the reconvening of the Contact Group for one day at ATCM XXII.

23    The Meeting noted Information Paper (ATCM XXI/INF 117) on establishment 
of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, submitted by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, 
Peru and Uruguay. The Paper was introduced by the delegation of Brazil and urged 
the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat considering that the Madrid 
Protocol will shortly enter into force. In the Paper, the sponsors reiterated their full 
support to the establishment of the Secretariat in Buenos Aires, evoking an appropriate 
geographical balance in the distribution of the headquarters of Antarctic fora. In the 
case of the Antarctic Treaty, such a decision would more adequately reflect the 
equitable spirit of cooperation and harmony that has prevailed throughout the last 
thirty-five years. The Information Paper noticed that the candidacy of Buenos Aires 
has obtained an almost unanimous support of the Consultative Parties and a consensus 
on this matter is very close in achieving a satisfactory solution on the establishment of 
the Secretariat and the designation of Buenos Aires as its Headquarters.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                         Page 6
Item 8 Relevance of Developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic

24     Norway introduced Information Paper (ATCM XXI/INF 76) on developments 
in the Arctic and Antarctica. The Paper drew attention to the Ministerial Meeting of 
the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) to take place in Alta, Norway in 
June 1997. The Meeting welcomed Norway's offer to report on the results of ATCM 
XXI in Alta. Attention was also drawn to the September 1996 Declaration on 
Establishment of the Arctic Council. It was noted that the activities of the AEPS will 
be integrated into the work of the Arctic Council and that the first Ministerial meeting 
of the Arctic Council will take place in September 1998. The Meeting noted that the 
legal situations of the Arctic and the Antarctic are quite different.

25     The Meeting agreed on the need to facilitate the exchange of information on 
scientific and logistic activities in the polar regions. Canada and Denmark noted 
several examples. SCAR outlined steps that have been taken to facilitate interaction 
concerning scientific activities in the Arctic and the Antarctic. The Meeting noted that 
SCAR and International Arctic Science Committee are planning to co-sponsor a 
symposium on Polar Aspects of Global Change to be held in Tromso next year.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 7
APPENDIX I

Resolution 2 (1997)

Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties;

Noting the provisions of Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol and related provisions of Annex IV on emergency response action and contingency planning;

Conscious that implementation of the provisions requires actions by the Parties;

Recognising that initiatives bearing on the provisions have been taken by COMNAP and IAATO;

Convinced that additional work on the subject needs to be done by the ATCM;

Recommend;

1.      That those Consultative Parties whose research stations and vessels operating in Antarctica are not covered by contingency plans should take the necessary steps to ensure that the operators of the stations and vessels introduce plans based on the 1992 Guidelines prepared by COMNAP.

2.      That the Consultative Parties, individually or collectively, should to the extent possible carry out regular contingency exercises, both theoretical and practical on land and at sea, to test and thereby refine their contingency plans, and report on the results of the exercises to the ATCM.  Exercises at sea should be carried out in accordance with the relevant maritime conventions.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 8
3. In view of the relevance of work being done by IMO, that the IMO expert 
invited to attend ATCM XXII be requested to take part also in the discussion 
on this subject.

4   That COMNAP and IAATO submit information papers to ATCM XXII 
describing their respective guidelines for contingency plans, the extent to which 
the plans have been put in place and plans for future work.

5   That in the light of the above reports, discussions, papers and other available 
information, ATCM XXII should review the issue of emergency response 
action and contingency planning with a view to implementing further the 
provisions of Article 15, and the related provisions of Annex IV to the 
Protocol, on cooperative response action, and decide on further action.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                 Page 9
APPENDIX II

COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
DRAFT RULES OF PROCEDURE

Part I      Representatives and Experts

Rule 1

Each Party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty ("the Protocol") is entitled to be a Member of the Committee on Environmental Protection ("the Committee") and to appoint a representative who may be accompanied by experts and advisers [with suitable scientific, environmental or technical competence].

Each member of the Committee shall notify the Host Government, as early as possible before each meeting of the Committee, the name and designation of each representative, and before or at the beginning of the session, the name and designation of each expert and adviser.

Part II      Observers and Consultation

Rule 2

Observer status in the Committee shall be open to any Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty which is not a Party to the Protocol.

Observers shall notify the Host Government as early as possible before each meeting of the Committee, the name and designation of its representatives attending the meeting.

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 1
Rule 3

The Committee shall invite the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research and the Chairman of the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources, or their nominated Representatives, to participate 
as observers at its sessions. The Committee may also, with the approval of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, invite such other relevant scientific, 
environmental and technical organisations which can contribute to its work, to 
participate as observers at its sessions.

Rule 4

Observers may submit documents to the Host Government for distribution to members 
of the Committee.

Rule 5

In carrying out its work the Committee shall, as appropriate, consult with the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research, the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources and other relevant scientific, environmental and 
technical organisations.

The Committee may seek the advice of experts as may be required on an ad hoc basis.

Part III   Meetings

Rule 6

The Committee shall meet once a year, in conjunction with the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, and at the same location.

The Committee may meet between annual sessions in order to fulfil its functions as 
agreed by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
[The Committee may convene intersessional meetings or working groups when it 
considers it necessary for the proper fulfilment of its functions of assessment, control, 
inspection, determination of responsibilities, and others matters. Such meetings may be 
held at a different place, preferably at the nearest countries to the Antarctic continent, 
and they will use the administrative services of the Host Government.]

Rule 7

When the Committee meets in conjunction with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, the Rules of Procedure for the preparation for the Agenda of the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting shall apply.

In other cases the Chairperson shall prepare a preliminary annotated Agenda for each 
such Session of the Committee. The Host Government shall distribute the preliminary 
annotated Agenda to all Members of the Committee no later than 100 days prior to the 
beginning of the session. In the event of emergencies or unforeseen developments it 
shall be distributed as early as possible.

The Host Government, in consultation with the Chairperson of both the Committee 
and of any subsidiary body, shall prepare and distribute a preliminary annotated 
Agenda before each session of any subsidiary body.

Rule 8

Members of the Committee proposing supplementary items for the Agenda shall 
inform the Host Government thereof no later than 30 days before the beginning of the 
session and accompany their proposal with an explanatory memorandum.
[Part IV   Submission of Documents

Rule X

The Committee will need to give early attention to drawing up rules relating to the submission of documents. Until it does so, it [shall] [should] follow the Guidelines on Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling set out in Annex D of the Final Report of ATCM XX, at page 99. In the rules it develops, the Committee should avoid duplicating requirements for the submission of documents to ATCPs or ATCMs (e.g., draft CEEs).]

Part V     Conduct of Business

[Rule 9

All matters of a procedural nature shall be decided by a majority of the representatives of parties present and voting at the meeting. Any question as to whether an issue is a procedural one shall be decided by consensus.

A quorum shall be constituted by representatives of two-thirds of the members of the Committee.

The Committee shall endeavour to provide advice and recommendations to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting based on consensus.

Where consensus cannot be achieved, the Committee shall set out in its report all views advanced on the matter under consideration.

All decisions on other matters of a non-procedural nature [shall] [should] be taken by consensus.]
Part VI      Chairperson and Vice-chairs

Rule 10

The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and first and second Vice-chairs. The 
Chairperson and the Vice-chairs shall be elected for a period of 2 years.

The Chairperson and the Vice-chairs shall not be re-elected to their post for more than 
one additional term. The Chairperson and Vice-chairs shall not be representatives from 
the same Party. 1

Rule 11

Amongst other duties the Chairperson shall have the following powers and 
responsibilities:

a)      convene, open, preside at, and close each session of the Committee;

b)      make rulings on points of order raised at each of the sessions of the Committee 
        provided that each representative retains the right to request that any such decision be 
        submitted to the Committee for approval;

c)      approve a provisional agenda for the session after consultation with 
        Representatives and the Host Government;

d)      sign, on behalf of the Committee, the reports of each session for transmission to 
        the Parties, and observers attending the session, and other interested persons, as 
        official documents of the proceedings, and;

1 Explanatory note: it will be desirable to ensure a degree of continuity as well as rotation among the 
Chairperson and the Vice-chairs. The Committee may wish to exempt the Vice-chairs from the two-
term limitation.
e)	present the report on each session of the Committee to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Rule 12

Whenever the Chairperson is unable to act, the first Vice-chair shall assume the powers and responsibilities of the Chairperson.

Rule 13

In the event of the office of the Chairperson falling vacant between meetings, the first Vice-chair shall exercise the powers and responsibilities of the Chairperson until a new Chairperson is elected.

Rule 14

The Chairperson and Vice-chairs shall commence the fulfilment of their obligations at the conclusion of the session of the Committee at which they have been elected, with the exception of the first Chairperson and the Vice-chairs who shall take office immediately upon their election.

Rule 15

The Committee may establish, with the approval of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, subsidiary bodies, as appropriate.

Subsidiary bodies shall operate on the basis of the Rules of Procedure of the Committee as applicable.

The Committee may also establish informal open-ended contact groups to examine specific issues and report back to the Meeting.
Part VII Administrative Facilities

Rule 16

As a general rule the Committee, and any subsidiary bodies, shall make use of the 
administrative facilities of the Government which agrees to host its meetings.

Part VIII Languages

Rule 17

English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages of the Committee.

Part IX Records and Reports

Rule 18

The Committee shall present a report on each of its sessions to the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting. The report shall cover all matters considered at the session, 
including at intersessional meetings and by subsidiary bodies as appropriate, and shall 
reflect the views expressed. The report shall be circulated to the Parties, and to 
observers attending the session, and shall thereupon be made publicly available.

Part X Amendments

Rule 19

The Committee may adopt, by consensus, amendments to these rules of procedure, 
which shall be subject to approval by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
APPENDIX III
XXI
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

CORRECTED AND REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE
(1997)

1       Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty shall be known as 
        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. Contracting parties entitled to participate in 
        those Meetings shall be referred to as "Consultative Parties"; other Contracting Parties 
        which may have been invited to attend those Meetings shall be referred to as "non-
        Consultative Parties."


2       The Representatives of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
        Marine Living Resources, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the 
        Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, invited to attend those Meetings 
        in accordance with Rule 30, shall be referred to as "observers."


Representation

3       Each Consultative Party shall be represented by a delegation composed of a 
        Representative and such Alternate Representatives, Advisers and other persons as 
        each State may deem necessary. Each non-Consultative Party which has been invited 
        to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be represented by a delegation composed of a 
        Representative and such other persons as it may deem necessary within such 
        numerical limit as may from time to time be determined by the Host Government in 
        consultation with the Consultative Parties. The Commission for the Conservation of 
        Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
        and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs shall be represented by 
        their respective Chairman or President, or other persons appointed to this end. The 
        names of members of delegations and of the observers shall be communicated to the 
        Host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting.


4       The order of precedence of the delegations shall be in accordance with the 
        alphabet in the language of the Host Government, all delegations of non-Consultative 
        Parties following after those of Consultative Parties, and all delegations of observers 
        following after non-Consultative Parties.


Officers

5       A Representative of the Host Government shall be the Temporary Chairman of 
        the Meeting and shall preside until the Meeting elects a Chairman.

CORRULE1.DOC                  (Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997))                 Page 1
29 May 8:11 PM
YN
6       At its inaugural session, a Chairman from one of the Consultative Parties shall 
        be elected. The other Representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as Vice-
        Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence. The Chairman normally shall 
        preside at all plenary sessions. If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the 
        Vice-Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established by 
        Rule 4, shall preside during each such session.

Secretariat

7       The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting on the proposal of the 
        Chairman. The Secretary shall be responsible for providing secretarial services, and 
        shall carry out such other tasks as the Meeting may require or direct.

Sessions

8       The opening plenary session shall be held in public, other sessions shall be 
        held in private, unless the Meeting shall determine otherwise.

Committees and Working Groups

9       The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such committees as it may 
        deem necessary for the performance of its functions, defining their terms of reference.

10      The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the Meeting, 
        except where they are inapplicable.

11      Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees.

Conduct of Business

12      A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds of the Representatives of 
        Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting.

13      The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in accordance with 
        customary practice. He shall see to the observance of the Rules of Procedure and the 
        maintenance of proper order. The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, remains 
        under the authority of the Meeting.

14      Subject to Rule 27, no Representative may address the Meeting without 
        having previously obtained the permission of the Chairman and the Chairman shall 
        call upon speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The 
        Chairman may call a speaker to order if his remarks are not relevant to the subject 
        under discussion.

15      During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party 
        may rise to a point of order and the point of order shall be decided immediately by the 
        Chairman in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. A Representative of a 
        Consultative Party may appeal against the ruling of the Chairman. The appeal shall

29 May 8:11 PM                  Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)                   Page 2
be put to a vote immediately, and the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless over-ruled 
by a majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties present and voting.  A 
Representative of a Consultative Party rising to a point of order shall not speak on the 
substance of the matter under discussion.

16  The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to each speaker, and the number 
of times he may speak on any subject. When the debate is thus limited and a 
Representative has spoken his allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to order 
without delay.

17  During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party 
may move the adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. In addition to 
the proposer of the motion, Representatives of two Consultative Parties may speak in 
favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion shall be put to the vote 
immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this 
Rule.

18  A Representative of a Consultative Party may at any time move the closure of 
the debate in the item under discussion, whether or not any other Representative has 
signified his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the closure of the debate shall be 
accorded only to Representatives of two Consultative Parties opposing the closure, 
after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. If the Meeting is in 
favour of the closure, the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate. The 
Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this Rule. (This Rule 
shall not apply to debate in committees.)

19  During the discussion of any matter, a Representative of a Consultative Party 
may move the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting. Such motions shall not be 
debated, but shall be put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to 
be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting.

20  Subject to Rule 15, the following motions shall have precedence in the 
following order over all other proposals or motions before the Meeting:

    a) to suspend the Meeting;
    b) to adjourn the Meeting;
    c) to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;
    d) for the closure of the debate on the item under discussion.

21  Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a 
majority of the Representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, 
each of whom shall have one vote.

Languages

22  English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages of the 
Meeting.

29 May 8:11 PM                  Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)                  Page 3
23    Any Representative may speak in a language other than the official languages. 
      However, in such cases he shall provide for interpretation into one of the official 
      languages.

Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions and Final Report

24    Without prejudice to Rule 21, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions, as 
      referred to in Decision 1 (1995), shall be adopted by the Representatives of all 
      Consultative Parties present and will thereafter be subject to the provisions of 
      Decision 1 (1995).

25    The final report shall also contain a brief account of the proceedings of the 
      Meeting. It will be approved by a majority of the Representatives of Consultative 
      Parties present and shall be transmitted by the Secretary of the Meeting to 
      Governments of all Consultative and non-Consultative Parties which have been 
      invited to take part in the Meeting, for their consideration.

Non-Consultative Parties

26    Representatives of non-Consultative Parties, if invited to attend a Consultative 
      Meeting, may be present at:

      a)  all plenary sessions of the Meeting; and
      b)  all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all Consultative 
          Parties, unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise 
          in any particular case.

27    The relevant Chairman may invite a Representative of a non-Consultative 
      Party to address the Meeting, Committee or Working group which he is attending, 
      unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise. The Chairman 
      shall at any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties who signify 
      their desire to speak and may, in inviting Representatives of non-Consultative Parties 
      to address the Meeting, limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the number of 
      times he may speak on any subject.

28    Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate in the taking of 
      decisions.

29    a)  Non-Consultative Parties may submit documents to the Secretariat for 
          distribution to the Meeting as information documents. Such documents 
          shall be relevant to matters under consideration at the Meeting.
      b)  Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise such 
          documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which 
          they were submitted.

29 May 8:11 PM          Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)          Page 4
Antarctic Treaty System Observers

30    The observers referred to in Rule 2 shall attend the Meetings for the specific 
      purpose of reporting on:

      a) in the case of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
         Living Resources, developments in its area of competence.

      b) in the case of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research:

            i) the general proceedings of SCAR;
           ii) matters within the competence of SCAR under the Convention for 
               the Conservation of Antarctic Seals;
          iii) such publications and reports as may have been published or 
               prepared in accordance with Recommendations IX-19 and VI-9 
               respectively.

      c) in the case of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs, 
         the activities within its area of competence.

31    Observers may be present at:

      a) the plenary sessions of the Meeting at which the respective Report is 
         considered;

      b) formal committees or working groups, comprising all Contracting Parties 
         at which the respective Report is considered, unless a Representative of a 
         Consultative Party requests otherwise in any particular case.

32    Following the presentation of the pertinent Report, the relevant Chairman may 
      invite the observer to address the Meeting at which it is being considered once again, 
      unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise. The Chairman 
      may allot a time limit for such interventions.

33    Observers are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

34    Observers may submit their Report and/or documents relevant to matters 
      contained therein to the Secretariat, for distribution to the Meeting as working papers.

Agenda for Consultative Meetings

35    At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Host Government of that 
      Meeting shall prepare a preliminary agenda for the next Consultative Meeting. If 
      approved by the Meeting, the preliminary agenda for the next Meeting shall be 
      annexed to the Final Report of the Meeting.

29 May 8:11 PM                  Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)                  Page 5
36     Any Contracting Party may propose supplementary items for the preliminary 
       agenda by informing the Host Government for the forthcoming Consultative Meeting 
       no later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting; each proposal shall be 
       accompanied by an explanatory memorandum. The Host Government shall draw the 
       attention of all Contracting Parties to this Rule no later than 210 days before the 
       Meeting.

37     The Host Government shall prepare a provisional agenda for the Consultative 
       Meeting. The provisional agenda shall contain:

       a)     all items on the preliminary agenda decided in accordance with Rule 35; 
              and 
       b)     all items the inclusion of which has been requested by a Contracting Party 
              pursuant to Rule 36.

       Not later than 120 days before the Meeting, the Host Government shall transmit to all 
       the Contracting Parties the provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda 
       and any other papers related thereto.

Experts from International Organisations

38     At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide which 
       international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica shall 
       be invited to designate an expert to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it 
       in its substantive work.

39     Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to 
       other international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica 
       to assist the Meeting in its substantive work; each such proposal shall be submitted to 
       the Host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the beginning of 
       the Meeting and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for the 
       proposal.

40     The Host Government shall transmit these proposals to all Contracting Parties 
       in accordance with the procedure in Rule 37. Any Consultative Party which wishes to 
       object to a proposal shall do so not less than 90 days before the Meeting.

41     Unless such an objection has been received, the Host Government shall extend 
       invitations to international organisations identified in accordance with Rules 38 and 
       39 and shall request each international organisation to communicate the name of the 
       designated expert to the Host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting. All 
       such experts may attend the Meeting during consideration of all items, except for 
       those items relating to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System which are 
       identified by the previous Meeting or upon adoption of the agenda.

29 May 8:11 PM          Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)          Page 6
42   The relevant Chairman, with the agreement of all the Consultative Parties, 
     may invite an expert to address the meeting he is attending. The Chairman shall at 
     any time give priority to Representatives of Consultative Parties or non-Consultative 
     Parties or observers referred to in Rule 30 who signify their desire to speak, and may 
     in inviting an expert to address the Meeting limit the time to be allotted to him and the 
     number of times he may speak on any subject.

43   Experts are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

44   a) Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda item, submit documents to 
        the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.

     b) Unless a Representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise, such 
        documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which 
        they were submitted.

Amendments

45   These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two-thirds majority of the 
     Representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting. This Rule shall 
     not apply to Rules 24, 26, 28, 33, 38-41, and 43, amendments of which shall require 
     the approval of the Representatives of all Consultative Parties present at the Meeting.

 
29 May 8:11 PM                        Corrected and Revised Rules of Procedure (1997)                        Page 7
