ANTARCTIC TREATY          
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


ON THE NEED FOR A STATE
OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT

Agenda item 14               Submitted by New Zealand
XXI ATCM/WP32
May 1997
Original: English
9.MAY.1997  17:20   MFAT NZ 64 4 4948507                  NO.376   P.2/6

WORKING PAPER

ON THE NEED FOR A STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT REPORT

WORKING PAPER SUBMITTED BY NEW ZEALAND TO ATCM XXI

Proposal

This paper argues that a State of the Antarctica Environment report (SAER), is needed
as a 'benchmark' document for Antarctica as well as for Consultative Parties to meet
their reporting obligations under the Protocol for Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. New Zealand sees enormous value in the preparation of such a report
which will draw together for the first time, a wide variety of information which can
then be analysed to identify changes or trends in the Antarctic environment. It would
serve as a 'current account', of the state of the Antarctic environment - acting as an
alerting mechanism for emerging problems as well as providing a basis for
environmental monitoring activities. The SAER would also assist the 'Committee for
Environmental Protection' advise Consultative Parties on the implementation of and
effectiveness of the Protocol.

Background

2      At ATCM XX in Utrecht the question of the need for SAER was raised. A
number of parties expressed some reservation about such a report and questioned the
role of other organisations such as the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) and UNEP, in its preparation. It was agreed that SCAR, in consultation with
other relevant organisations, should begin to explore the issue of a SAER and prepare
some guidelines for the ATCM XXI on how such a report might be produced. New
Zealand welcomes the guidelines which SCAR has produced for consideration at
ATCM XXI.

3      Based on its own experience, New Zealand is in no doubt about the value of
such a report. In its view the benefits of a 'state of the environment' report far exceed
the difficulties associated with its preparation. New Zealand has developed its own
nation-wide State of the Environment Report (SOER-NZ), adopting the
"pressure/state/response" framework4, developed by the OECD, which has proved very
satisfactory. New Zealand is ready to offer its experience to parties when considering
how a continent-wide report might be prepared for Antarctica.

Footnote

The "pressure" is those factors which are likely to impact on the environment such as pests and weeds.
The "state" refers to the condition of the land, air and water etc. "Response" is the raft of practical
measures taken to change and ameliorate the state such as legislation and quality guidelines.

0222619.01
2

4     New Zealand believes that SAER will enable the Parties' to discharge their 
primary obligations under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty. A number of articles in the Protocol identify the need for environmental 
reporting by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). For instance, Article 
12.1 outlines the functions of the CEP which includes advising the Consultative Parties 
on 'the state of the environment'. It also requires the CEP to advise on 'the need for 
scientific research including environmental monitoring related to the implementation of 
the Protocol'. Furthermore, Article 6 of Annex II identifies a requirement to obtain 
information on the 'status of native mammals, birds, plants and invertebrates' in 
Antarctica, and the extent to which any population needs protection.

5     To be able to fulfil these obligations the CEP must have access to the reliable 
and up-date information on the state of the Antarctic environment which would be 
provided in a SAER. This information is necessary to ensure that informed decisions 
can be made in respect of the sustainable management of Antarctica's resources  A 
SAER would also enable the CEP to be able to advise Consultative Parties on the 
implementation and effectiveness of the Protocol.

Role of CEP

6     New Zealand considers that preparing a report of this nature is a comprehensive 
task that is beyond the scope of any one group or nation - not only in terms of human 
resources but also in terms of funding. It feels, however, that one organisation needs to 
take responsibility for leading the process. Given the obligations of the Parties under 
the Environmental Protocol, New Zealand considers that the CEP should undertake this 
role.

7     New Zealand envisages that the CEP would take on a "leadership and 
coordination" role with the SAER. As the CEP is unlikely to have the full skill-base 
necessary to prepare such a comprehensive report, it would need to obtain input from a 
variety of sources. Antarctic Treaty Organisations such as SCAR and the Convention 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), together with 
relevant international organisations and individual experts, will need to be called upon 
to assist in writing various sections of the report.

8     To produce a report able to serve as an 'archival benchmark and a standard 
reference work', there will need to be close coordination of the various interest groups 
and their respective inputs. The CEP will also be required to act as coordinator and 
facilitator of this process, to ensure the 'standardisation' of data collected and to provide 
necessary 'quality assurance' with respect to the writing of chapters. The CEP will also 
be required to report back to Parties regularly on the progress being made with the 
SAER and to keep them informed on the report's development.

0222619.01
9.MAY.1997 17:21   MF?3T NZ 64 4 4948507        NO.376   P.4/6

                                  3

SAER Reporting Process

9  Consideration will also need to be given to whether the report is to be a 'one off' 
document or used as the basis for further on-going reporting on the state of the 
environment. New Zealand, in parallel to producing its own SOER-NZ, has developed 
a series of 'environmental indicators' which are to be used to show trends or sudden 
changes in a particular environmental condition. This state of the environmental 
'reporting' has enabled on-going environmental information to be produced. It has also 
provided data for a regular publication of 'state of the environment' reports. With 
Antarctica, as more information comes to hand there may be value in the report being 
up-dated on a regular basis, say every five to ten years. The SAER could be available 
electronically which would improve the ability of the report to be updated.

Structure of the SAER

10  The SOER-NZ has focused on the physical domains with five key areas - 
atmosphere, air, water, land and biodiversity. With respect to Antarctica there are a 
number of ways of shaping a state of the environment report. Possible structures could 
include:

·  Geographic (eg simple sector divisions)

·  Political (national use)

·  Physical domains (eg air sea, land atmosphere)

·  Biological or environmental domains

·  Issues (eg sources of contamination)

·  Problems (eg indicators)

·  Purpose (eg according to how various activities might be affected)

Geographical Parameters

11  The geographical perimeters of the SAER will also have to be established. New 
Zealand suggests that it should include the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean, 
if an 'ecosystem approach' is to be taken. CCAMLR's boundary is the Antarctic 
Convergence which represents the broadest sampling of Antarctic marine ecosystems. 
Information from CCAMLR's database is essential to the SAER. It will also enable the 
report to be useful to the larger Antarctic Treaty community.

0222619.01
9.MAY.1997  17:22   MFAT NZ 64 4 4948507           NO. 376   P.5/6

4

The SAER Audience:

12 The SAER would primarily serve the purposes of Treaty Parties, advising them 
on the implementation of the Environmental Protocol. Its aim would be to give policy-
makers a broad over-view and the scientists, baseline data on the state of the 
environment. It would provide both audiences the necessary information to be able to 
make judgments on the effectiveness of the implementation of the Environmental 
Protocol. It may, however, be necessary to prepare more than one version of the report 
if there are likely to be more audiences than those already discussed. For iristances, a 
glossy summary of the report's findings could be useful for the general public and as a 
standard reference text for educational purposes.

The Time Frame

13 New Zealand believes that early work on a SAER is needed to signal Parties' 
commitment to Protocol implementation. To give the preparation of the SAER purpose 
and momentum, New Zealand believes that Parties should set a four year deadline for its 
publication. An early target might be the year '2001' which marks the fortieth 
anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty coming into force. Completing the SAER that year 
would be an important marker of this anniversary. Additionally, the SAER could feed 
data and information to assist in the development and sharing of the 'Global 
Environment Outlook programme' report on the 'Global State of the Environment' 
which is to include a chapter on Antarctica, and is to be completed by 2002.

Group of Experts

14 In order to progress the SAER prior to establishment of the CEP, New Zealand 
suggests that the ATCM appoint a 'Group of Experts' (GoE) drawn from Parties and 
other interested organisations. This group could comprise environmental experts, policy 
officers, scientists and representatives from SCAR, CCAMLR and other appropriate 
international organisations. It would be tasked with working internationally to define 
the objectives of the SAER, its scope, suggested contents and a process for preparation 
of the report. It might be required to report back to the ATCM XXII on progress to 
date, including proposals for timetabling and resources.

15. In the absence of a Secretariat to support this intersessional work, New Zealand 
is ready to offer its assistance in the perioć to ATCM XXII.

16 The agenda for the GoE, prior to ATCM XXII, could include:

    Finalisation of the suggested contents and chapters of the report.

0222619.01
9.MAY.1997   17:22   MFA&T NZ 64 4 4948507                      NO. 376   F.6/6

                                  5

-    Determination of methodology for the collection of information, the 
     standardisation of all data assembled and quality assurance, to ensure that data 
     compiled is relevant and not duplicated.

-    Determination of the resources required to produce a SAER, including funding.

-    Suggestions for principal writers and teams of experts to prepare respective 
     chapters.

-    Development of a peer review process.

-    Proposals for an Editorial Board.

-    Proposals for a SAER support unit to prepare and co-ordinate production of the 
     SAER.

Recommendations

17   New Zealand proposes that Parties:

     1.    agree that preparation of a Comprehensive State of the Environment For 
           Antarctica is a priority for the CEP.

     2.    agree that 2001 be the target year for its production

     3.    agree that until the CEP comes into being an interim Group of Experts be 
           established, drawn from representatives from the TEWG, SCAR, CCAMLR 
           and co-opting relevant international agencies and experts as it deems 
           appropriate.

     4.    agree that the GoE work intersessionally to define the parameters of the 
           SAER as set out in para 15 above.

     5.    invite the GoE to appoint a Chair to manage the intersessional work.

0222619.01
