ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




TRAMWAY RIDGE SITE OF SPECIAL INTEREST NO. 11
PROPOSED CHANGE TO RESTRICTED ZONE





Agenda item 6f                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/WP17
April, 1997
Original: English
Tramway Ridge Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 11
Proposed Change to Restricted Zone

New Zealand
(Agenda Item 6f)

1. Introduction

A new management plan for Tramway Ridge (SSSI No. 11) was adopted by the XIX ATCM in Seoul in 1995 (Measure 2). This site contains a 'Restricted Zone', where access is prohibited until agreed otherwise by a review of the management plan.

When preparing a new management plan for Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land, New Zealand faced a question over terminology in attempting to describe a 'Restricted Zone' proposed for the area. The science community supported controls on access to the proposed 'Restricted Zone' at Botany Bay but favoured access to the proposed zone to be 'restricted' and not 'prohibited', as at Tramway Ridge. The justification for allowing access was the presence of a lichenwort within the zone that scientists do not want to place completely off-limits until a management plan review.

The access policy for the 'Restricted Zone' proposed for Cape Geology would therefore be inconsistent with the 'Restricted Zone' policy now adopted for Tramway Ridge. New Zealand is concerned that as far as possible Consultative Parties should attempt to achieve consistency in policy for zones of the same name within Antarctic protected areas.

2. A Prohibited Zone at Tramway Ridge SSSI No. 11

One possible way to achieve consistency is to change the name of the 'Restricted Zone' on Tramway Ridge to a 'Prohibited Zone' and to proceed with the proposal to call the zone for Botany Bay a 'Restricted Zone'. This proposed change in terminology would more accurately reflect the actual level of restriction/prohibition that applies, given that access to the 'Restricted Zone' at Tramway Ridge is already strictly prohibited in order to preserve the northern half of the area as a reference site for future comparative studies.

New Zealand notes that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides for 'prohibiting' in Antarctica, and within protected areas specifically. Annex V, Article 5.3(f) provides for the "identification of zones within the area, in which activities are to be prohibited, restricted, or managed for the purpose of achieving the aims and objectives" of the management plan. In this, the Protocol makes a specific distinction between 'prohibited' and 'restricted'.

In June 1996, the SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) considered the question of zoning terminology. GOSEAC concluded that use of the terms 'Prohibited Zone' and 'Restricted Zone' under Annex V would be appropriate from a scientific, technical and environmental standpoint.

3. Conclusion

In view of these points, New Zealand considers that it would be appropriate to change the management plan for SSSI No. 11 at Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, so that the current designation of the 'Restricted Zone' be changed to 'Prohibited Zone'.
