ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


ENHANCING COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL:
DEPARTURE STATE JURISDICTION


Agenda item 6e                  Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/WP22
April, 1997
Original: English
02-HK-1997  16:33  FKUM  FAX SHAD        IU      9006444729596  P.02


ENHANCING COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL:
DEPARTURE STATE JURISDICTION

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)

Summary

1. Antarctic is unique in its geophysical
characteristics and governance. Ensuring compliance
with the wide-ranging and strict requirements of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty and its proposed liability Annex will require the
deployment of a suite of jurisdictional measures. The
problem is not so much caused by a conflict of
jurisdictions, as by a lack of effective jurisdiction,
especially over expeditions mounted by, or from, States
which are not parties to the Protocol.

The governance of Antarctica

2. The governance of Antarctica is provided by the
Antarctic Treaty system, which has inherent
deficiencies. Questions of jurisdiction within the
Antarctic Treaty area are touched on only peripherally
by the Treaty: Article IV deals with territorial
claims; Article VII provides for observers to monitor
compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, and for
advance notification of expeditions organised in or
proceeding from the territory of a Contracting Party.
Article VIII provides for observers and exchanged
scientists to remain subject to the jurisdiction of
their States. But the Treaty did not resolve the
question of jurisdiction over nationals of Treaty
Parties who are not observers or exchanged scientists;
nor did it address the question of jurisdiction over
third-State nationals. Article IX(1)(e) envisaged that
questions relating to the exercise of jurisdiction in
Antarctica would become the subject of Measures, but
none have been adopted by the Consultative Parties.

Territorial jurisdiction

3. A Treaty Party can exercise jurisdiction over
expeditions organised in its territory even if the
organiser or the members of the expedition are not
nationals of that Party, though the concept of
"organized" may not always be easy to apply in practice.
United Kingdom legislation requires a permit for an
expedition organised in United Kingdom territory,
whatever the nationality of the organiser or of the
members of the expedition. (In this paper "expedition"
includes tourist cruises, yachts etc.)

1
02-HK-1991  10.33  rKUT  rW 3HHW         IU                  9006444795596  P.03

Jurisdiction over nationals

4. A Treaty Party can generally exercise jurisdiction over its nationals while in Antarctica, even if they are part of an expedition organised in the territory of a non-Treaty Party.

5. The problem of lack of adequate jurisdiction was not of particular concern in the 1960s or for many years after, but it may need to be addressed now. Recent changes to practices in Antarctica, in particular in the tourist industry, mean that ensuring comprehensive compliance with the Protocol will be a problem, and that the problem is likely to increase. Antarctica is no longer visited only by governmental scientific expeditions mounted by Treaty Parties. More and more tourists (around 10,000) now visit Antarctica each year. Their numbers far out number governmental scientists. Many are not nationals of Treaty Parties, and the vessels and aircraft in which they travel to Antarctica are often not registered in the territory of Treaty Parties (e.g. Bahamian - registered cruise ships). In the 1995/96 season almost 50% of tourist vessels visiting Antarctica were flagged with non-Treaty Parties.

6. Despite the increasing number of such visitors, it is only relatively recently that the problem has become more acute. It has always been possible to deal with a serious offence committed by a visitor by leaving action with the State of nationality. Acts such as murder are universally considered to be criminal offences, and most States have laws under which they can prosecute their nationals for such offences when committed abroad. But a problem arises when the offence is a breach of legislation to implement regulatory requirements, such as those of the Environmental Protocol. Even were non-Treaty Parties to share the same values and objectives with regard to the Antarctic environment, enforcement of the implementing legislation against third-State nationals, vessels and aircraft will never be easy.

Enforcement of the Protocol against Third States

7. The objective of the Antarctic Treaty Parties when they adopted the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991 was to safeguard Antarctica through rigorous environmental obligations. Implementation of the Protocol will ensure that consistently high standards of environmental care are met by the Contracting Parties. This general objective of ensuring maximum protection to the Antarctic environment, whilst providing for freedom for scientific research has been expressed more generally by the global community. Support for the introduction of the Protocol, as a means of enhancing protection, has been voiced by others outside the Antarctic Treaty System, including in UN Resolutions. But, in accordance with international law,

2
the provisions of the Protocol bind only those who are Parties to it. Third States, their nationals, vessels and aircraft are not so bound.

8. Comprehensive implementation of the provisions of the Protocol therefore faces a major obstacle. Possible means to reduce or overcome that obstacle are:

(i)    Voluntary compliance with the provisions of the Protocol by States which are not party to it;

(ii)   Voluntary compliance through non-Governmental mechanisms, eg IAATO;

(iii)  States whose nationals, vessels or aircraft visit Antarctic accede to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol;

(iv)   Contracting Parties seek to ensure that third Parties abide by the provisions of the Protocol through measures taken, under their jurisdiction, outside of Antarctica.

Options (i) and (ii) would go some way to ensuring that, from a practical viewpoint, the provisions of the Protocol would be complied with. IAATO in this regard already imposes a Code of Guidance on its member companies in line with the stringent obligations of the Protocol. But such voluntary compliance can not be enforced by legal means. Option (iii) is not a realistic solution to the problem. The number of Third States who may wish to accede to the Treaty and its Protocol is likely to be very limited, if indeed there are any at all.

9. The most effective, practical way of ensuring that the objective of the Protocol (tough environmental standards in Antarctica) is met is through option (iv). This paper sets out a possible means to achieve that end.

Departure State jurisdiction

10. The exercise of territorial and national jurisdiction is not sufficient to control activities in Antarctica when carried out by nationals of non-Treaty Parties. Because of problems in exercising jurisdiction in Antarctica, one of the more effective ways of controlling activities there is through the exercise of jurisdiction by the departure State. Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires each Contracting Party to give advance notice of all expeditions to Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its territory. It is usual practice for most expeditions, especially tourist cruises, to use as their final place of departure for Antarctica one of the ports adjacent to the continent (the so-called "gateway ports"). Even if an expedition proceeds directly to Antarctica by-passing the gateway ports, it will have to leave from somewhere.

3
11. By voluntarily seeking admission to the port of a foreign State, a vessel impliedly accepts the jurisdiction of that State even in respect of matters arising outside its EEZ. States historically exercised restraint, but in recent years the need to extend jurisdiction, especially for the purpose of ensuring the safety of shipping and the prevention of marine pollution, has been recognised and developed, in particular by the Paris Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Port State Control of 1982. Under that the participant States undertake to maintain an effective system to ensure that vessels visiting their ports comply with SOLAS and MARPOL, irrespective of whether the flag State of the ship concerned is party to those conventions.

12. A radical innovation to the enforcement of marine pollution standards was made by the UN Law of the Sea Convention 1982. Article 218 empowers a State to take legal proceedings where a foreign vessel is alleged to have discharged polluting matter, in violation of applicable international rules and standards, even if the discharge occurs outside that State's territorial sea and Exclusive Economic Zone. Articles 219 and 226(1)(c) empower the State to prevent a foreign vessel from leaving if it is in violation of applicable international rules and standards relating to seaworthiness and thereby threatens the marine environment (or imposes unreasonable demands on rescue services). Article 23 of the recent 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks confirms the right and duty of port States to take measures to promote the effectiveness of subregional, regional and global conservation and management measures. (See also the 1996 Report of the UN Secretary-General on the Law of the Sea, paragraphs 92-110 (A/51/645)).

13. The above examples of jurisdiction are in respect of previous conduct or the condition of a vessel. But exercising jurisdiction over future conduct outside an EEZ is justifiable if the object is to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol and thus the protection of the Antarctic environment.

14. There have been no objections by third States to the Environmental Protocol or to implementing legislation, including powers taken by several departure States. The effect of the Protocol, and especially Articles 3(4) and 8(2), is that many of its restrictions will have to be applied to expeditions of non-Party States, their vessels, and aircraft. In addition, Article 13 requires the Parties to exert appropriate efforts to see that no-one engages in activity contrary to the Protocol; and ATCPs are required to draw the attention of other States to any activity undertaken by 
4
them or their nationals which affect the implementation 
of the Protocol. Moreover, there is a growing 
acceptance of a general duty to cooperate.

15. These evolving principles, and acquiescence in the 
terms of the Protocol, are sufficient justification for 
the exercise of departure State jurisdiction to ensure 
more comprehensive compliance with the Protocol.

Objective regime

16. Justification for the exercise of departure State 
jurisdiction to enforce the requirements of the Protocol 
can also be said to stem from the objective nature of 
the regime created by the Antarctic Treaty system. That 
is to say the regime is valid for, and confers rights 
and imposes obligations on, States which are not Parties 
to the Antarctic Treaty or its associated instruments. 
The concept of the objective regime has been much 
debated, is not free from controversy and must be 
approached with caution. Nevertheless, an objective 
regime may be said to exist if there is (1) an intention 
by the States immediately concerned to establish a 
regime valid for all States, not just themselves, (2) a 
sufficiently precise object, (3) a general interest of 
the international community in there being such a regime 
and (4) general acceptance that the regime has an 
objective quality.

17. Meeting such criteria is not easy, but if any 
regime could be said to be objective, the Antarctic 
Treaty system would appear to be one.  The regime 
established by the Antarctic Treaty and its associated 
instruments governs a particular region which, it is 
generally accepted, requires special treatment in view 
of its particular characteristics and needs. The 
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty represent a wide and 
important spread of the total membership of the 
international community.  They have set themselves the 
task of establishing a regime to govern comprehensively 
various forms of human activity in Antarctica.  They 
have demonstrated an intention that third States and 
their nationals should act consistently with the 
principles and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty 
system.

18. The position adopted by a number of States in the 
United Nations General Assembly in the decade since 
1983, although critical of the Antarctic Treaty system, 
may be a thing of the past.  The criticism was in any 
case more directed to the exclusive nature of the 
Antarctic "club" rather than to its objectives.  If 
anything the critics were for even stronger 
environmental measures than those contained in the 
Protocol.  Moreover, criticism was not voiced until the 
Antarctic Treaty system had been in operation for some 
20 years, by which time the objective quality of the 
regime could be said to have been established by the 
acquiescence of the international community.

5
19. To acknowledge a right for third States and their 
nationals to be active in the Antarctic Treaty area in 
disregard of the rules of the system would be 
detrimental to the interest of the international 
community in the well-being and future of Antarctica.

20. Even if there were still doubt as to whether the 
Antarctic Treaty system is an objective regime, that is 
not to say that part of the system may not have an 
objective quality. The provisions on non-militaris-
ation and non-nuclearisation of Antarctica are clearly 
candidates in this respect. The requirements of the 
Protocol, and measures taken under it, might also be 
said to possess an objective quality, given the general 
acceptance today by the international community of the 
pressing need to protect the environment, especially in 
near pristine wilderness regions.

Proposal

21. The objective of the ATCPs must be to achieve 
maximum effective implementation of the provisions of 
the Environmental Protocol, including in respect of the 
nationals, vessels and aircraft of third States; and to 
ensure that, where appropriate, implementation is 
harmonised. The ATCPs should therefore consider means 
to enhance the effective implementation of the Protocol, 
in particular by nationals, vessels and aircraft of 
third States. One way to achieve this would be through 
a departure State agreement or arrangement between all 
the Parties to the Protocol, which would lay down the 
minimum standards to be met by all vessels and aircraft 
leaving for Antarctica from a departure State. Such an 
agreement or arrangement might be initially embodied in 
a resolution of the ATCM. Negotiations could proceed on 
the basis that nothing would prejudice the position of 
any Antarctic Treaty Party as regards its recognition, 
or non-recognition, of any other Party's claim to 
sovereignty, whether in the Antarctic Treaty area or its 
vicinity.

[1/4/97]

Antarctica: Compliance: 29.8.95

6

TOTAL P.07
