ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVING THE PROTECTED AREA
SYSTEM


Agenda item 6f                  Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/WP10
April, 1997
Original: English
PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVING THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

1.      Background

In June 1992 SCAR and IUCN held a workshop in Cambridge, UK to discuss the new requirements for protected areas established under the Environmental Protocol and to provide advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) on this topic. The Proceedings of the workshop were published by SCAR and IUCN in 1996 as Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System (Eds. Lewis-Smith, Walton and Dingwall, 1996).

The key recommendations made by the report which are of relevance to the ATCM are that:

-       SCAR should develop an improved and internationally agreed Antarctic ecosystem classification system which could be used by the Parties to ensure representative examples of all ecosystem types are designated as protected areas;

-       SCAR should continue to receive and evaluate draft management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs, and pass advice on these plans to the ATCM directly, or through the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) once it is established;

-       SCAR should prepare a Handbook to assist in the preparation of Management Plans for protected areas;

-       The ATCPs should encourage proposals for new Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs);

-       The ATCPs, through the CEP when constituted, should develop an information strategy to advise on the collection, storage and evaluation of data associated with the management and monitoring of protected areas.

The recommendations from the SCAR/IUCN workshop were discussed in general at ATCM XVII. However, action has been taken on only two of the five key recommendations outlined above. First, SCAR announced at ATCM XVII that it intended to produce a Protected Areas Handbook, and will update Parties on progress at ATCM XXI. Second, SCAR presented revised ecosystem classification matrices at ATCM XIX which the Meeting encouraged Parties to use when selecting protected areas. It is the view of the UK that the ATCPs should examine the other three key recommendations from the SCAR/IUCN workshop and that these should be progressed further at ATCM XXI.
2. Substantive Proposals

The Antarctic protected area system is an agenda item discussed by the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) which then provides advice to the ATCM. It is suggested that the TEWG/CEP could be given the task of developing a long-term action plan for designating protected areas in Antarctica. This plan might include the following elements:

i)    Clarification of the procedures for designating new protected areas at the ATCM;

ii)   Development of an information strategy for use by those visiting or managing protected areas;

iii)  Designation of new, extensive ASPAs and ASMAs

2.1   Clarification of the procedures for designating new protected areas at an ATCM

Protected area proposals from Parties are adopted by the ATCM as Measures, usually after the proposal has been reviewed by SCAR, and also by CCAMLR if the proposed area contains a marine component. This procedure is lengthy. It is not widely known amongst the Antarctic community. Lack of knowledge of the procedures and requirements has caused considerable difficulties and long delays for some recent proposals, often at a very late stage in the process. The complexities of the system may be deterring Parties from submitting new protected area proposals.

Proposal:      That procedures for evaluating protected areas should be explained more clearly by the ATCM through a layman's guidance note. The note should be prepared after advice from the TEWG/CEP and annexed to the Final Report of an ATCM and reproduced in the SCAR Protected Areas Handbook.

               That the ATCM should consider whether to establish a small technical committee of the TEWG/CEP to examine, and advise on, proposals for protected areas, and revised Management Plans for existing areas.

2.2   Development of an information strategy

Knowledge of protected areas in Antarctica is sparse and easily accessible information on the type, description and location of protected areas is lacking.

Proposal:      That the ATCM should develop, with advice from the TEWG/CEP and SCAR, a protected areas information database. The database should be in a digital format so that it can be easily updated and be made widely available to the Antarctic community as a World Wide Web page on the
Internet and as a CD Rom.

2.3  Designation of new, extensive ASPAs and ASMAs

Most designated protected areas in Antarctica are restricted in area. This in large part 
is due to the minimalist philosophy of Recommendation VII-2 which required SPAs to 
be of the minimum size necessary.

Recent research carried out by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) for the List of 
Protected Areas in Antarctica (FCO, 1997) has shown that as at ATCM XX the total 
land area given special protection as Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) or Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) is only 709 km2. The total land area of Antarctica 
(including all islands, but excluding ice shelves) is approximately 12,093,000 km2. This 
means that only some 0.007% of the total land area of Antarctica is given special 
protection.

Proposal:                                                             
                                  That the ATCM delegate the TEWG/CEP, with assistance from 
                                  SCAR and IUCN, to convene a workshop in 1997/98 to identify 
                                  new and extensive protected areas in Antarctica using as a 
                                  basis the revised SCAR ecosystem classification matrix.

3.   Conclusion

The adoption of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol rationalised the protected 
area system in Antarctica considerably. However, only a small proportion of Antarctica 
is specially protected, whilst the complexities of the protected areas system are not 
widely understood. The ATCM should rectify this situation by adopting a long-term 
action plan. This paper outlines substantive proposals (see above) which might be 
included as elements in such a plan.

TOTAL P.04
