ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


              STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT              


Agenda item 14              Submitted by SCAR              

XXI ATCM/WP19              
April, 1997              
Original: English
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT
Working Paper submitted by SCAR to XXI ATCM

Agenda Item 14

1. Introduction

Several articles in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty identify the need for state of the environment reporting. Article 12.1 outlines the functions of the Committee for Environmental protection (CEP), which includes advising the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the effectiveness of environmental protection measures, the need to improve or add to such measures, the requirements for information and scientific research, including monitoring, related to the implementation of environmental protection measures.  Most specifically, item (j) under Article 12 calls for the CEP to report to the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the state of the Antarctic environment. Fulfilment of these functions requires the CEP to have access to the best and most up-to-date information available on the state of the Antarctic environment. Article 6 of Annex II identifies a requirement to obtain information on the status of native animals in Antarctica, and the extent to which any population needs protection. An initiative to prepare a comprehensive State of the Antarctic Environment Report (SAER) is thus timely with entry into force of the Protocol expected in the near future.

The Draft Final Report of the XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (XX ATCM/WP37) included the following statement at Paragraph 164 under Agenda Item 22: Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic Environment:

(164) The suggestion was made that SCAR should examine the question of a report on the State of the Antarctic Environment and, in consultation with other appropriate organizations, including those with expertise in the Arctic, provide a proposal to the XXI ATCM on how to prepare such a report.

SCAR has responded by establishing a small committee to draft a proposal on the preparation of such a report. Consultations have been held within SCAR to develop a draft proposal. A possible framework for a report is attached to this paper.

Imperatives to prepare a State of the Antarctic Environmental report also issue from agreements in separate fora, most notably under Agenda 21 concluded at 1992 Rio Earth Summit. Specifically in the text of Chapter 7 of Agenda 21 there was consensus among both Treaty Parties and non-Treaty governments to "enhance access of the international scientific community and specialised agencies of the UN to such data" arising from scientific research relevant to understanding of the global environment. While not stated explicitly as such in this text, much of the data of global concern are related to the state of the Antarctic environment, prominent examples of which are data on ozone depletion, climate change and distributions of various pollutants. Preparation of an Antarctic State of the Environment Report would contribute in a timely manner to this synthesis. For the Protocol to be implemented effectively it is important that up-to-date information is available on the current state of the Antarctic environment against which any future changes may be compared. The report would for the first time draw together a wide variety of data dispersed throughout the Antarctic literature and environmental databases world-wide, into an accessible and easily interpreted form amenable for use by policy-makers at national and international levels. It would be intended as a sound basis for preparing measures; strategies and policies related to the protection of the Antarctic environment and for the guidance of environmental research and data collection. Of primary consideration in the former regard is the work of the CEP with its responsibilities for advising on implementation of the Madrid Protocol, while the latter goal would be of direct importance to SCAR and CCAMLR environmental research agendas. The report would also play an important educational function informing all members of the global community about Antarctica.
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT

2. Report - scope and content

The aims of the Report as envisaged here would be to provide a comprehensive and reliable information base on the state of the Antarctic environment to:
· evaluate and develop environmental policy;
· identify areas for future research;
· identify areas where monitoring is required, and assist review and co-ordination of existing monitoring programmes;
· identify key indicators for the State of the Antarctic Environment;
· document the principal pressures on the environment;
· document how and where the environment is responding;
· develop the basis for a State of the Antarctic Environment reporting system to the CEP.

The geographical scope proposed is the area south of the Antarctic Convergence, which is an environmental boundary that includes all of the Antarctic Treaty area, and most of the areas subject to CCAMLR and the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. This Report would be based on existing research results, at this stage synthesizing existing knowledge.

3. Consultation

It is proposed that the following organizations should be invited to provide specialist input to the document:

    ASOC     Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
    CCAMLR   Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
             (Scientific Committee)
    IAATO    International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators
    ICSU     International Council of Scientific Unions (relevant Unions and Committees)
    IHO?     International Hydrographic Organization
    IMO      International Maritime Organization
    IOC?     Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
    IUBS?    International Union of Biological Sciences (ICSU)
    IUCN     World Conservation Union
    IUGS?    International Union of Geological Sciences (ICSU)
    IWC      International Whaling Commission
    SCAR     Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (relevant Working Groups and
             Groups of Specialists)
    SCOR     Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
    UNEP     United Nations Environment Programme
    WMO      World Meteorological Organization

4. Report preparation

Funding for the project will be sought from ATCPs and other appropriate agencies. Funding will be applied to any or all of the following:
· support for the production of a final text;
· the production of illustrations;
· payment to authors;
· secretarial assistance.

In addition, efforts will be made to find a commercial publisher.

Timing for completion of the State of the Antarctic Environment Report envisaged in this paper would be around 2001.

2
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT

State of the Antarctic Environment Report
Draft Structure of the Report

1.  INTRODUCTION
    1.1  Development of SAER
    1.2  Goals
    1.3  Institutional framework
    1.4  Current research, monitoring and management activities

2.  STATUS AND TRENDS
    2.1  Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
         2.1.1  Ice sheets and ice shelves
         2.1.2  Ice-free areas
         2.1.3  Lakes and streams
    2.2  Marine
         2.2.1  Physical oceanography
         2.2.2  Sea ice
         2.2.3  Marine chemistry
         2.2.4  Marine ecosystem and biology
    2.3  Atmosphere
         2.3.1  Atmosphere dynamics - features and circulation
         2.3.2  Chemistry - trace gases
         2.3.3  Radiation and effects on the biosphere

3.  PRESSURES ON THE ENVIRONMENT
    3.1  Science and support activities
    3.2  Fishing
    3.3  Tourism
    3.4  Long range pollutants
    3.5  Cumulative pressures
    3.6  Other potential threats (minerals?)

4.  CONCLUSIONS, OUTLOOK AND RESPONSES
    4.1  Key environmental pressures and impacts
    4.2  Status of scientific values
    4.3  Status of aesthetic and wilderness values
    [4.4  Future reseach and monitoring, identification of key indicators]
    [4.5  Policy implications and recommendations]

APPENDICES
Text of the Antarctic Treaty
Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
Text of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes

3
