ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED
AREA (SPA) NO. 5 BEAUFORT ISLAND, MCMURDO
SOUND, ROSS SEA


Agenda item 6f                                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/WP5 Rev 2
May, 1997
Original: English
Management Plan
for Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 5
BEAUFORT ISLAND, McMURDO SOUND, ROSS SEA

1. Description of values to be protected
Beaufort Island was originally designated in Recommendation IV-5 (1966, SPA No. 5) after a 
proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that it "contains substantial and varied avifauna, that it is 
one of the most important breeding grounds in the region, and that it should be protected to preserve 
the natural ecological system as a reference area". The Area has been set aside primarily to protect the 
site's ecological values and these reasons for long-term special protection still apply.

The island comprises a variety of terrain and habitats: gently sloping ice-free ground with 
summer ponds and small meltwater streams draining to the coast; moderately sloping ice fields 
covering much of the west side of the island; and steep, rugged cliffs on the eastern slopes. Recent 
investigations indicate the avifauna is not as varied as first thought, but there exists a large Adélie 
penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony, a small breeding colony of Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes 
forsteri), and several breeding colonies of South polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki). The 
boundaries of the Area, which previously excluded the Emperor colony, have been extended to 
include fast-ice occupied by breeding birds.

Site visits in January 1995 and 1997 discovered and described a significant area of vegetation 
previously unrecorded on an ice-cored moraine bench of up to 50 m wide and 5-7 metres above the 
beach on the north of the island. The vegetation is exceptional both in its quantity and quality, and is 
the most extensive, continuous area of mosses yet known for the McMurdo Sound region. Although 
the area is extensive (approximately 2.5 ha), the moss community is dominated by a single species, 
Bryum argenteum: the essentially monospecific character of the site is also unique. The site enjoys 
warm summer temperatures because of its northerly aspect and shelter from southerly winds by high 
ice cliffs. The local microclimate, stability of the substrate and supply of water from the nearby ice-
cliffs and snow banks are favourable for vegetation growth. As a result there is also a diverse 
community of algae, and while a detailed algal survey has not yet been undertaken, Prasiola crispa is 
particularly abundant throughout the site, together with a number of unicellular chlorophytes and 
xanthophytes (including Botrydiopsis and Pseudococcomyxa), and cyanobacteria (particularly 
scillatorians) mixed with the Prasiola. Green snow algae, a mixture of Chloromonas and 
Klebsormidium, are present as well as the red snow algae Chlamydomonas sp., Chloromonas sp., 
and Chlamydomonas nivalis. This represents one of the most southerly locations where red snow 
algae have been observed. The exceptional plant communities at this site are fragile and vulnerable to 
disturbance and destruction by trampling, sampling and/or through foreign introductions. 
Conservation of the ecological and scientific values of this community are important reasons for 
special protection at Beaufort Island.

As an isolated island difficult of access, the site is known to have been visited only 
infrequently. Beaufort Island has not been comprehensively studied or documented but is largely 
undisturbed by direct human activity. In particular, Beaufort Island has been exposed to fewer
opportunities for direct exotic biological introductions than many other sites in the Ross Sea. The 
ecological, scientific and aesthetic values derived from the isolation and relatively low level of human 
impact are important reasons for special protection at Beaufort Island.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Beaufort Island aims to:
  • avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
    human disturbance to the Area;
  • preserve the natural ecosystem as a reference area largely undisturbed by direct human activities;
  • allow scientific research on the natural ecosystems, plant communities, avifauna and soils in the 
    Area provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere;
  • minimise human disturbance to plant communities by preventing unnecessary sampling;
  • minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
  • allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
  • Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall 
    be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no longer necessary.
  • Visits shall be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for 
    which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.
  • National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to 
    ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation
Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs
Map A: Beaufort Island regional topographic map. The map is derived from the orthophotograph in 
     Map B, using Map B specifications. Inset: McMurdo Sound, showing Ross Island and the 
     location of McMurdo Station (US) and Scott Base (NZ). The nearest protected areas are 
     SSSI-10 (Caughley Beach) and SPA-20 (New College Valley) at Cape Bird, and SSSI-1 
     (Cape Royds).

Map B: Beaufort Island regional orthophotograph. Orthophotograph specifications:
     Projection: Lambert conformal conic; Standard parallels: 1st 76° 40' 00" S; 2nd 79° 20' 
     00"S; Central Meridian: 167° 00' 00" E; Latitude of Origin: 78° 01' 16.211" S.
     Spheroid: WGS84. The original orthophotograph was prepared at 1:5000 with a positional 
     accuracy of ±2.5 m (horizontal and vertical) with an on-ground pixel resolution of 1 m. 
     Photography: USGS/DoSLI (SN7850) 22 November 1993.
Map C: North Beaufort Island site orthophotograph. Specifications are the same as in Map B. The site of rich vegetation is indicated by hachures. The precise area of fast-ice occupied by breeding Emperor penguins is subject to variation both seasonally and inter-annually.

Map D: South Beaufort Island site orthophotograph.. Specifications are the same as in Map B.

Figure 1: Perspective view of Beaufort Island from an elevation of 225 m, 900 m out from the preferred Helicopter Pad at an azimuth of 300° W.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
The designated Area encompasses the whole of Beaufort Island (76°58'S, 167°00'E Map A) above the mean high water mark, and includes adjacent fast-ice occupied by breeding Emperor penguins. The 7 km by 3.2 km island rises to 771 m at Paton Peak. The west side of the island is predominantly an ice field with ice cliffs of about 20 m on the coast, while the east and south sides of the island are largely ice-free, with steep and inaccessible cliffs rising straight from the sea. In view of the isolation of Beaufort Island and the current low levels of shipping activity in the region, boundary markers and signs have not been installed to mark the Area: the need for marking should be re-evaluated at each management plan review.

Beaufort Island is one of a series of late Tertiary volcanic vents that developed along a line of weakness in the Ross Sea floor. The geology is typical of an eroded, sub-aerially produced basaltic complex, with lava flows and explosion breccias and tuffs evident. Many of the volcanic rocks have been intruded by a series of late stage basaltic dikes, and there is evidence of layered ash-fall tuffs and welded spatter flows from local subsidiary cinder and spatter cones. Cadwalader Beach comprises a beach foreland and cuspate spit, backed by steep basaltic cliffs and several talus cones. A series of beach ridges, which are generally occupied by the breeding penguins, have trapped meltwater ponds and mark the growth of the beach face away from the cliffs with time. A series of raised beaches is evident at the northeastern end of the island, some with evidence (quills and guano) of former and apparently substantial penguin colonies. Sub-tidal (abrasion) platforms and massive boulders are found below the highly weathered eastern and southern cliffs.

An Adélie colony of 46,000 pair (1987 count) occupies the flat area at Cadwalader Beach (Map D). Above the steep cliffs that rise behind the colony, a population of skuas (numbers unknown) nest on more gentle ice-free slopes at the edge of the permanent ice field on the west flank of the island. This ice field is punctuated mid-way by a 2 km line of rocky outcrops at an elevation of approximately 200 m. In the north the ice field broadens into an extensive flat area of less than 50 m elevation, NE of which extends an ice-free beach about 1000 m in length and 50 m wide (Map C). In January 1995 a newly-established, possibly transitory, colony of Adélie penguins (comprising 2 pairs with 3 chicks and a approximately 10-15 non-breeders) occupied the west end of this beach. Above the beach, a raised ice-cored moraine terrace (5–20 m elevation, ranging from 2-3 metres wide
over most of its length but broadening to 20-50 metres at its eastern end) extends for 550 m before 
rising more steeply toward the unstable basaltic cliffs which persist around the entire eastern side of 
the island. At least three sub-fossil penguin colony deposits have been identified within the moraine 
terrace, each layer vertically separated by around 50–100 cm of gravels and sand, suggesting this part 
of the island had been occupied by a sizable breeding penguin colony in the recent past. The deposits 
may be useful for determining the age of former penguin colonies in the region.

A population of approximately 100 skuas (1995 count) breeds on the terrace and ice-free slopes 
leading toward the cliffs. The proportion of breeders to non-breeders in this population is not 
known, but approximately 25 and 50 chicks were counted in January 1995 and 1997 respectively.

On the fast-ice adjacent to the northern coastal reaches, a small colony of breeding Emperor 
penguins (1787 pairs at 1976 count; 179 pairs at 1983 count, 1355 adults at October 1994 count) is 
present annually between the months of approximately April to January. The size of the colony is 
limited by the areal extent and condition of the fast-ice, which affects the availability of breeding sites 
in the lee of the northern slopes of Beaufort Island. The precise location of the colony varies from 
year to year and the colony moves within a breeding season, but the general area of occupation is 
indicated on Map C.

The ice-free moraine terrace on the north end of the island (Map C) also supports the richest 
growth of vegetation recorded on Beaufort Island. This vegetation is exceptional both in quantity and 
quality, and is the most extensive, continuous area of mosses yet known for the McMurdo Sound 
region. The site enjoys warm summer temperatures (an air temperature +13°C was recorded on 18 
January 1997) because of its northerly aspect and shelter from southerly winds by a 20 m high semi-
circular ice cliff. The local microclimate, stability of the ground surface and supply of water from the 
nearby ice-cliffs and snow banks are favourable for vegetation growth. Initially the water forms a 
diffuse flush but becomes progressively entrained into rivulets that have eroded narrow valleys in the 
edge of the terrace. The moss community is extensive (approximately 2.5 ha), with much of the site 
showing 100% ground cover, dominated by a single species, Bryum argenteum. One specimen of 
another species, Pottia heimii, was found after an extensive search: the essentially monospecific 
character of the site is also unique. The Bryum occurs in scattered patches at the upper (southern) 
margin of the bench, adjacent to the annual drift snow at the base of the ice cliff, and more 
continuous mats (hummocks) occur in the middle of the bench and in areas where spreading water 
drainage occurs, especially at the eastern end. In the upper (southern) part of the area the Bryum is 
intermixed with Nostoc colonies (cyanobacterium). At lower and more northerly sites in areas of 
high water flow the moss may be overgrown with a brown coloured mixed cyanobacterial 
community, particularly in areas prone to flooding, cryoturbic disturbance and, possibly, skua 
activity. Bryum argenteum produces dehiscent shoot tips which disperse the plants down stream. 
Evidence of this dispersal was commonly seen with B. argenteum sometimes occurring as small, and 
probably ephemeral, communities on the beach below the terrace. The moss community is known to 
support significant populations of mites, but a detailed survey of invertebrates on Beaufort Island has 
yet to be undertaken.
The vegetation at Beaufort Island is comparable to the upper, wetter parts of the flush at Canada 
Glacier (SSSI-12), Taylor Valley, Victoria Land. The Canada Glacier flush has a common, second 
species, Pottia heimii, that grows in drier areas but this was almost completely absent at Beaufort 
Island. The reason for this is unknown, but could be due to substrate differences, the presence of 
numerous skuas occupying the drier areas at Beaufort Island, high nutrient levels in the melt water at 
Beaufort Island, or limited dispersal and colonisation opportunities. At Botany Bay (ASPA-XYZ), 
Granite Harbour, Victoria Land - a warmer site than at Canada Glacier but at a similar latitude to 
Beaufort Island - the wetter areas are occupied by the moss Ceratodon purpureus or Bryum 
argenteum, so that there may be a sequence from wet to dry of C. purpureus - B. argenteum - P. 
heimii. While there is no understanding as to why C. purpureus is absent at Beaufort Island it is 
likely that limited dispersal and colonisation opportunities, as well as water nutrient status, may be 
important.

There is also a diverse community of algae, and while a detailed algal survey has not yet been 
undertaken, Prasiola crispa is particularly abundant throughout the site, reflecting the high nutrient 
status and abundance of melt water. A number of unicellular chlorophytes and xanthophytes 
(including Botrydiopsis and ?seudococcomyxa) and cyanobacteria (particularly scillatorians) were 
found mixed with the Prasiola. Green snow algae, noticeable as a green band at the lower levels of 
snow banks above the beach and below the ice cliffs, contained a mixture of Chloromonas and 
Klebsormidium. The snow and ice cliffs forming the upper edge of the beach also contain a pinkish-
brown deposit, consisting largely of fine silty material as well as the red snow algae Chlamydomonas 
sp., Chloromonas sp., and Chlamydomonas nivalis. This represents one of the most southerly 
locations where red snow algae have been observed.

During a NZ/US visit in January 1995 abandoned equipment was removed from among the 
Adélie colony at Cadwalader Beach. No other human impact was visually evident in 1995.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
The only structure known to exist on the island is a signpost on a prominent rock in the Adélie colony 
at Cadwalader Beach (Map D). The sign, erected in 1959–60, bears the names and home-towns of 
seamen and the Captain of the HMNZS Endeavour: the sign is set in concrete and was in good 
condition in January 1995. The sign is of potential historic value and should remain in situ unless 
there are compelling reasons for its removal, which should be kept under review.

An astronomical survey station is recorded on a map of the island compiled in 1960, but it is 
unknown whether any associated permanent marker exists. The station is recorded as located at the 
south end of the main island ridge-line divide at an altitude of 549 m (Map A).
6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area

The nearest protected areas to Beaufort Island are Caughley Beach (SSSI-10) and New College Valley (SPA-20) located 35 km to the south at Cape Bird, Ross Island. Cape Royds (SSSI-1) is a further 35 km to the south (Inset: Map A)

7. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by appropriate national authorities. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
- it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, or for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection or review;
- the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area;
- any management activities are in support of the aims of the Management Plan;
- the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
- the Permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried within the Area;
- a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit;
- permits shall be issued for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Land vehicles are prohibited within the Area and access shall be by small boat or by aircraft. Aircraft should land on the island only at the designated site (166° 58' 20" E, 76° 55' 50" S: Map A) on the large flat toe of ice on the north end of the island. Should snow conditions at the designated landing site at the time of visit militate against a safe aircraft landing, a suitable mid- to late-season alternative to the designated landing site may be found at the nominated northern camp site at the western end of northern beach on Beaufort Island. It is preferred that aircraft approach and depart from the designated landing site from the south or west (Map A, Figure 1). When it is found necessary to use the alternative site at the northern beach campsite, practical considerations may dictate a northern approach: when this is the case aircraft shall avoid overflight of the area east of this site indicated on Maps A-C and Figure 1. Use of smoke grenades when landing within the Area is prohibited unless absolutely necessary for safety, and all grenades should be retrieved. There are no special restrictions on where access can be gained to the island by small boat. Pilots, air or boat crew, or other people on aircraft or boats, are prohibited from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing site unless specifically authorised by a Permit.

Overflight of bird breeding areas lower than 750 m (or 2500 ft) is normally prohibited: the areas where these special restrictions apply are shown on Maps A-D and Figure 1. When required for essential scientific or management purposes, transient overflight down to a minimum altitude of 300 m (1000 ft) may be allowed over these areas: conduct of such overflights must be specifically authorised by Permit.

Visitors should avoid unnecessary disturbance to birds, or walking on visible vegetation. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise effects.
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place

-   Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area and which cannot be served elsewhere;

-   Essential management activities, including monitoring.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be a condition of the Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping is permitted only at two designated sites (Maps A-D). The north camping site is located on the flat area north of the designated landing site, on a more sheltered location at the NW end of the beach, 200 m from where several pair of Adélie penguins and skuas nest (if present). The second site is located on the snow 100 m from the northern edge of the large Adélie colony at Cadwalader Beach.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted. Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ : if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met

1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or review, or for protective measures.

2. Any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked.

3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and historically low level of human impact at Beaufort Island visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. Visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:

    d) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and, to the maximum extent practicable, maintained in a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry-bags) shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering the Area;

    e) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by washing exposed surfaces in 70% ethanol solution in water.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.
Map A - Beaufort Island, Specially Protected Area Area No. 5, topographic map

                                 
166°55'00"E                                  167°00'00"E
                                 
Inset: McMurdo Sound showing sites of
nearby protected areas and stations.

ROSS SEA

McMurdo
Sound

Cape Bird

Beaufort
Island

Cape
R[?]oss Island
Royds

Scott Base
McMurdo Stn.

              20 km

76°00'S

HELICOPTER
APPROACH AND
DEPARTURE

Approximate area of
Emperor Penguin Colony

Skuas

Overflight below "750m (2500 ft)
prohibited north of this line (see text)

76°05'S

Permanent Ice
(crevassed)

76°10'S

Overflight below 750m
(2500 ft) prohibited

76°15'S

Adelie
Penguin Colony

Skuas

Cadwalader
Beach

Astro survey station
(549m)

Paton Peak (771m)

0
metres
1000

Contour interval: 20m

Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84

Rich plant growth
Protected area boundary
(includes fast ice occupied
by breeding Emperor penguins)

Designated helicopter pad
Designated camp site
HMNZS Endeavour signpost

Source: Beaufort Island management plan
Map B - Beaufort Island, Specially Protected Area No. 5, regional orthophotograph
166°55'00"E                                  167°00'00"E
 
 
                                                                                  South of this line (see Map A)
              Approximate area of 
              Emperor Penguin Colony
HELICOPTER 
APPROACH          H        OVERLIGHT-BELOW 750m (2500 ft) 
              Skuas and hair
              grass growth
DEPARTURE
Map C
                                                                                  Permanent Ice
                                                                                  (crevassed)
 
 
                                                                                  Caution Peak
                                                                                  (413m)
 
76°57'00"S                                                                                  Astro survey station
                                                                                  (549m)
 
                                                                                  Skuas
 
76°59'00"S                                                                                  Gluck Peak
 
                                                                                  Map D
                                                                                  Gluck Peak
                                                                                  Beach
 
 
0          metres         1000
Contour interval: 20m
 
Imagery: 22 November 1993
Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84
Source: Beaufort Island management plan
 
—    Protected area boundary 
     (includes fast ice occupied 
     by breeding Emperor penguins)
     H    Designated helicopter pad
     ▲    Designated camp site
•    HMNZS Endeavour signpost
Map C - North Beaufort Island, Specially Protected Area No. 5, site orthophotograph

76°55'40"S                                  166°54'00"E                                  166°56'00"E

 
                                    166°52'31"E
                                    76°55'49"S


Helicopter approach / departure


76°56'00"S


0                  metres                  250

Contour interval: 20m


—      Protected area boundary
       (includes fast ice occupied by breeding Emperor penguins)

       Designated helicopter pad

       Designated camp site


Imagery: 22 November 1993
Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84
Source: Beaufort Island management plan
Map D - South Beaufort Island, Specially Protected Area No. 5, site orthophotograph
166°54'00"E                                                         166°56'00"E

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 Overkill below                                                                 
                                                      750m (2500 ft)                                                               
                                                                                
                                                  Prohibited west of this line                                                
                                                (Refer text)                                                 
                                                                                
                                                                 Skuanesting                                                   
                                                                 area                                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 Adélie                                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                
Figure 1 Beaufort Island, perspective view

Observer position 900m (approx. 3000ft) from helicopter pad,
at an azimuth of 300° and an altitude of 225m (736ft).

Paton Peak (771m)
Astro survey
station (549m)

Overflight below 750m
(2500ft) prohibited
this side of line

Cadwalader
Beach

Protected area boundary

Emperor Penguin
Colony

Overflight below 750m (2500ft) prohibited
in this area

Skuas and rich
plant growth

166°52'31"E
76°55'49"S

HELICOPTER APPROACH
AND DEPARTURE

H     Designated helicopter pad
A     Designated camp sites
