ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION (CEP): ESTABLISHMENT ISSUES


Agenda item 7                        Submitted by Netherlands/New Zealand/South Africa

XXI ATCM/WP2/REV1
April, 1997
Original: English
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): Establishment Issues

Introduction

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides for a Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) to be established once the Protocol enters force. It is envisaged that the CEP will provide Antarctic Treaty Parties with technical, scientific and environmental advice on the Protocol. Its establishment will also demonstrate the Antarctic Treaty Parties' commitment to a comprehensive environmental regime.

2       Some progress has been made on CEP establishment issues. Draft Rules of Procedure for the CEP were prepared in 1992, based heavily on those for the CCAMLR Scientific Committee, but they have yet to be adopted. In 1994 the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) was set up by Parties to begin, as far as possible, the work of the CEP before its establishment. Its success in this respect has been tempered by its inability to begin the substantive work required to implement the Protocol. There has been little progress on determining the substantive role and functions to be undertaken by or assigned to the CEP.

Role and Functions: What would the CEP do?

3       Article 12 of the Protocol (attached) lists the functions of the Committee. These can be broadly summarised as the :

      provision of advice on implementation and effectiveness of the Protocol

      provision of advice to improve the implementation of the Protocol

      maintenance of an information base of Protocol-related environmental data.

4       Within this, the key function of the CEP is to advise on the development of procedures to implement the Protocol and to oversee these as directed by the ATCM. This might require the development of standardised procedures for Parties, followed by monitoring and review processes. The CEP might also be expected to assess the effectiveness of these procedures and make recommendations to ATCPs on the need to strengthen, update or improve them.

5       The CEP (and Parties in general) need to develop an information exchange system that is both efficient, timely and appropriate. The establishment of the CEP provides the ideal opportunity for Parties to consider what sort of information is required, and how it is to be collected, stored and disseminated.

0187658.01
2

Role and Functions of CEP: How will it do this?

6       The draft Rules of Procedure for the CEP, which are yet to be adopted by 
Parties, provide for an annual meeting (immediately before the ATCM) and to meet 
"between annual sessions in order to fulfil its functions as agreed by the ATCM". 
Annual meetings would provide the CEP with the opportunity to review progress in the 
preceding year and to establish its priorities for the forthcoming year. These priorities 
would be mandated by the ATCM. On the basis of this, the CEP would then develop a 
work programme. The practice of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee might prove to 
be a useful model in this respect.

Membership

7       The role of the CEP is to advise the ATCM on the implementation of the 
Environmental Protocol as directed by the ATCM. It will be important to maintain the 
intention in Rule 1 of the draft Rules of Procedure which notes that those attending the 
CEP should have the technical, scientific or environmental competency to do so. 
Desirably those with the relevant background and/or experience should be represented 
on the CEP from its inception. Political, legal and policy issues should not be discussed 
by the CEP given the Committee's purpose to advise on Protocol implementation.

Relationship with the ATCM

8       The success of the CEP will depend largely on how it operates within the 
Antarctic Treaty system and the relationship that it develops with the body politic, the 
ATCM. The CEP is to be an advisory body to the ATCM which works at the direction 
of Antarctic Treaty Parties. As an advisory body, represented by those with the 
technical/scientific competency to do so, the CEP is not an executive or decision 
making body. This means that Antarctic Treaty Parties will need to establish clearly the 
work priorities for the CEP and to approve its annual work programme. Parties will 
also need to focus on long term strategies and objectives for the implementation of the 
Protocol (and, indeed, for the Antarctic Treaty itself) that the CEP can work towards 
achieving.

Relationship with SCAR

9       Currently SCAR is tasked by the ATCM to provide expert advice on a wide 
range of Antarctic scientific, technical and environmental issues. This has included the 
establishment of a Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation 
(GOSEAC). As the range and complexity of issues considered by ATCPs have grown, 
more and more matters have been referred to SCAR. With SCAR's focus on scientific 
issues, this has not always been an appropriate arrangement.

10     The establishment of the CEP to provide Parties with expert advice on the 
Protocol would suggest that SCAR's role in the implementation of the Protocol would

0187658.01
3

benefit from some reassessment. As noted above, it is envisaged that the CEP will act 
as a technical advisory body to ATCPs. The Protocol provides for SCAR to attend 
meetings of the CEP in an expert capacity. SCAR's wisdom and advice will greatly 
benefit the deliberations of the CEP. It will be important, however, to establish the 
primacy of the CEP as the ATCM's advisory body on the Protocol with SCAR 
providing advice as required. The involvement and role of COMNAP in this context 
could also benefit from some reassessment.

Relationship with CCAMLR

11    Currently, the relationship between the ATCM and CCAMLR is not as strong as 
it might be. The Convention is an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System. The 
Commission's experience in eco-system management is very relevant to the 
ATCM/CEP as they grapple with the tasks set by the Protocol. Given its experience and 
international reputation in the management of marine resources and information 
technology, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee will have information of benefit to the 
CEP. It is desirable to establish a sound working relationship between the two bodies. 
This was envisaged in both the Protocol (Article 11 (4)) and in the Draft Rules of 
Procedure 3 which provide for CCAMLR's attendance at meetings of the CEP.

Key Issues for the CEP

12    The CEP may hold its inaugural meeting at ATCM XXI. Even if this is not 
possible, Parties could establish, in advance, two or three key areas of work for the 
TEWG/CEP to focus on. (Ideally, Parties would have progressively developed a range 
of implementation measures in the interim period so that the Protocol could be fully 
operational as soon as possible after entry into force). The development of standardised 
procedures to cover all the Protocol's Annexes will be a considerable undertaking. Care 
is needed to focus work programmes on a small set of objectives that are deliverable. 
Progress in this respect will be incremental.

13    The following might be considered by the CEP as useful priorities for any work 
programme subsequently approved by the ATCM:

  •  application and implementation of EIA procedures to provide for coordinated 
     and consistent standards;

  •  Preparation of Response Action Contingency plans;

  •  Data Management system;

  •  State of the Environment Report for Antarctica;

  •  Follow-up on outstanding TEWG issues.

0187658.01
4

Application and Implementation of EIA Procedures

14   This is the key component of the Protocol and forms the basis of its 
environmental management regime. Because of the delay in the Protocol's entry into 
force, however, Parties have tended to apply their own procedures for EIA. This has 
produced a range of measures with varying degrees of success in terms of effort, quality 
and effectiveness. The CEP will need to establish some order and consistency from 
existing practice. The work that New Zealand is doing in this respect (ie intersessional 
consultations with Parties on working definition of "minor" and "transitory" and on EIA 
procedures) will assist the development of these concepts further.  Areas for 
consideration within this could be the need for agreed guidelines on EIA, a consistency 
for definitions and the identification of models for future use.

Response Action Contingency Plans

15   The increasing number of visitors to Antarctica and the emergence of adventure 
and "eco-tourism" brings with it the added risk of accidents and disasters - both human 
and environmental. Parties should begin work on developing contingency response 
action plans, as required under Article 15 of the Protocol.  (The Peninsula area would 
seem be a priority in this respect given that the greatest number of tourists visit this 
region). It would be helpful if Parties could develop some thoughts on response 
contingency planning. More widely, Parties active in other areas of Antarctica could 
collaborate on similar plans which could be prepared on a sectoral basis.

Data Management

16   The exchange of information within the Antarctic Treaty system is in need of 
thorough review. The establishment of the CEP and the additional Protocol-related 
reporting requirements will exacerbate an already overwhelming paper flow.  Thought 
needs to be given on how this information can be managed effectively.

State of the Environment Report for Antarctica

17   Article 12 (1) (j) of the Protocol requires the CEP to provide advice on the state 
of the Antarctic environment. It will be important for the CEP to establish a framework 
under which it can do this. New Zealand believes that an Antarctic State of the 
Environment Report would be a timely response to this need. It intends to submit a 
working paper on this subject to ATCM XXI  Such a Report would need to be clearly 
identified with the Protocol and to the needs of the CEP. A SOE Report would provide 
the CEP with the necessary benchmarks from which it could develop baselines for 
monitoring and which it could use to check the effectiveness of the implementation of 
the Protocol.

0187658.01
