ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF              
SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS IN              
ANTARCTICA              


Agenda item 14              Submitted by SCAR/COMNAP              

XXI ATCM/WP20              
April, 1997              
Original: English
MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS
OF
SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS IN ANTARCTICA
Working Paper submitted by SCAR and COMNAP to XXI ATCM
Agenda Item 14

Introduction

Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have recognized for some time the need to monitor the impacts of human activities on the Antarctic. The science programmes conducted by several Parties have for many years been monitoring changes in the global environment linked to human activities outside the Antarctic eg. ozone destruction, increasing carbon dioxide etc. More recently ATCPs have become concerned about measuring the direct impacts on the Antarctic of activities on and around the continent within the Antarctic Treaty area, south of 60° South latitude.

At ATCM XV (1989) the Meeting adopted Recommendation XV-5 which set out a series of activities which should be monitored (waste disposal, contamination by hydrocarbons or toxic chemicals, construction and operation of logistic facilities, conduct of scientific programmes, recreational activities). In addition it was recommended that a Group of Experts be convened to offer more specific advice on how monitoring should be implemented.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was signed in October 1991. This provided an organized framework for all environmental recommendations and specifically called for regular and effective monitoring to allow assessment of the impacts of on-going activities on the Antarctic environment and associated ecosystems. There is no indication in the Protocol of how such monitoring should be targeted or implemented.

In 1991 XVI ATCM developed the discussion on monitoring using a working paper provided by SCAR and COMNAP, and provided the Terms of Reference for the First Meeting of Experts (para 66 if the XVI ATCM Report). This Meeting was convened in June 1992 in Buenos Aires and provided a report containing nine recommendations to XVII ATCM in November 1992. One of these recommendations was for a meeting of technical experts and at XVIII ATCM in April 1994 SCAR and COMNAP offered to convene such a meeting. Terms of Reference were agreed and details of the two workshops circulated to all SCAR National committees, to all MNAPs and all NGOs with an interest in the Antarctic. This allowed for the fullest participation by the Antarctic community. In addition, through the financial support by SCAR and especially by the National Science Foundation, the organizing committee was able to ensure participation by monitoring experts with extensive experience in non-Antarctic areas.

The reports from the two workshops were edited into a single document and published with assistance from COMNAP, NSF and Texas A & M University. This consolidated report, entitled "Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica", was sent to all Antarctic Treaty Parties in November 1996.

Key conclusions

The workshops addressed only those aspects of monitoring relevant to impacts attributable to activities within Antarctica. Impacts measurable in Antarctica but attributable to activities outside the region eg. pesticide residues, increases in greenhouse gases etc. were not in the Terms of Reference and were not considered. The SCAR/COMNAP consolidated report provides a detailed response to all of the individual Terms of Reference. In this paper attention will be called to the key conclusions only:
1. Environmental monitoring is only useful when it is firmly tied to an environmental strategy. It needs to be hypothesis based, precisely targeted and used directly to inform policy and activities.

2. Key chemical and physical variables can be related to specific activities but biological variables at present provide ambiguous cause and effect interpretations. A review is needed to determine to what extent existing data can provide baseline information.

3. The present understanding of ecosystem functions is such that ecosystem health indicators are not at a stage where cause and effect can be easily determined. A review is needed to determine to what extent existing models can be used to identify useful key indicators.

4. Prioritization of activities for monitoring must be site specific and based on such features as intensity, frequency, duration etc.

5. Detailed scientific protocols already exist for monitoring many of the variables associated with impacts; the most useful of these should be codified in a technical manual.

6. Quality control and quality assurance of data will be essential to promoting data interchange and synthesis.

Recommendations for Future Actions

The two workshops held so far have provided considerable clarification of how monitoring programmes should be structured, key activities that should be monitored, some of the potential ways to make the monitoring measurements, how the data could be handled and how to assess whether or not a monitoring project has been successful. There remain, however, several areas of unfinished business.

SCAR and COMNAP therefore propose the following course of action:

1. A technical handbook of standardised monitoring techniques to be prepared by COMNAP, with advice from SCAR, based on the parameters and key indicators identified in the workshop report.

2. A review of existing data and of key research issues to be undertaken through SCAR.

3. The process of data management to be developed through the SCAR/ COMNAP Data Management Group to allow synthesis of data for comparative purposes.

4. Methods of co-ordination of environmental monitoring activities to be developed through COMNAP to avoid wasteful duplication and ensure effective use of resources.

This step-wise approach to improvement should ensure that all existing data and protocols are considered in preparing an agreed manual, that the scientific soundness of monitoring is firmly established, and that the organizational framework will permit all Parties to contribute to both measurements of existing impacts and the reduction of future impacts in the Antarctic.

2
