ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA        
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II TO THE ATCM XXI

                                                         Submitted by Secretariat

XXI ATCM/WP41
May, 1997
Original: English
REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II TO THE ATCM

Item 9 Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

1       New Zealand introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 25) on a standard 
form for reporting on tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area. This paper was submitted as a follow-up to Recommendation 1 (1994), 
Resolution 3 (1995), and the development of a trial report form at ATCM XX. The 
trial form was used by tour operators in 1996/97 and consequently several minor 
changes were made to the form by New Zealand.

The Meeting welcomed the paper and expressed its appreciation for the work done by 
New Zealand. Several delegations suggested further changes to the report form. The 
Meeting adopted Resolution 3 agreeing that a standard form be used for reporting on 
tourism and non-governmental activities. The Meeting agreed that a trial form be used 
for the 1997/98 season and asked that interested Parties and IAATO report back to 
ATCM XXII on its use. This trial form is attached in Annex B. Several delegations 
questioned the need for, and usefulness of, information regarding the nationality of 
passengers, staff and crew as required by Section C of the trial post-visit report form. 
Others indicated that such information would be required if a standard form were to be 
adopted. The Meeting agreed that this issue could be examined at ATCM XXII.

2       Issues were raised relating to data management. The Meeting noted that 
developments in electronic data handling may facilitate the gathering, storage, access 
and analysis of data on tourism and non-governmental activities.

3       The United States submitted a paper (XXI ATCM/INF 90) providing 
information on Antarctic ship-borne tourism status and trends. The United States and 
the United Kingdom submitted an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 114) 
describing results to date of the Antarctic Site Inventory project. The project

WG2.DOC                                  XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                                  Page 1
objectives are: (i) to determine whether small groups of researchers on tour ships and 
other vessels can cost-effectively gather information needed to detect and determine 
how to avoid the possible cumulative impacts of tourist activities on the Antarctic 
environment; and (ii) to begin gathering data to characterise the current state of sites 
being visited by tourists in the Antarctic Peninsula.

Germany noted that the information being obtained by the project would contribute to 
meeting the goals of the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme as well as 
assessing the possible cumulative effects of Antarctic tourism.

The United States noted that the project was being carried out cooperatively with the 
United Kingdom and that valuable assistance had been provided by Argentina, Chile, 
and several tour operators. It encouraged other Parties to become involved in the 
project.

4       France introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 25) on tourism and 
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic and raised concerns relating to 
navigational safety in Antarctic waters.

5       Several delegations were concerned about the safety of ships operated in 
Antarctica, and considered that operational safety issues should be examined by the 
next ATCM.

6       A number of delegations referred to the International Maritime Organisation 
(IMO) “Polar Code” for ships sailing in polar waters, and considered that the technical 
issues raised by this Code should be discussed by the next ATCM.

7       IAATO submitted an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 75) which described 
the number of tourist visits to the Antarctic during the 1996/97 season and which 
included a forecast of predicted visitor numbers over the next five years.

8       Additional Information Papers were tabled by New Zealand (XXI ATCM/INF 
7) Reporting of tourist and Non-Governmental activities in Antarctica: Antarctic

WG2.DOC                    XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                   Page 2
tourism data: Prototype post-visit data entry tool, (XXI ATCM/INF 20) A model IEE 
for an Antarctic tourism cruise, Argentina (XXI ATCM/INF 54) Report on Antarctic 
tourism through USHUAIA in 1996/97.

Item 10 Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

9       Norway submitted a paper (XXI ATCM/INF 37) containing the findings of the 
Norwegian inspection undertaken under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty carried out 
in December 1996. The stations inspected were Neumayer (Germany), SANAE IV 
(South Africa), Maitri (India) and Novolazarevskaya (Russia), all situated in Dronning 
Maud Land.

The report noted that all the stations were used for purposes consistent with the 
provisions of the Treaty. Notwithstanding the fact that the Madrid Protocol has not 
entered into force, the stations visited were managed as if most of the Protocol's 
provisions were already binding. The observers were generally impressed with the 
quality of scientific research carried out at the stations inspected.

The Norwegian inspection report contains a number of recommendations, including:

(i)     Nations which for economic reasons are unable to carry out clean-ups and 
dismantling of former stations and installations should be offered practical 
and logistic support.

(ii)    An inventory of locations of former activities, including fuel depots and 
waste sites should be made, to avoid such information being lost.

(iii)  More efforts should be made to develop alternative energy sources 
adapted to Antarctic conditions.

(iv)   Development of contingency plans for possible fuel spills and innovative 
means to further reduce risks of such spills should be given priority.

WG2.DOC                                  XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting             Page 3
(v) A better gender balance in over-wintering operations should be encouraged.

10     Many delegations commented on the high quality and level of detail of the Norwegian report and the satisfactory nature of its findings. Several delegations commented that Norway had used the inspection checklists agreed at ATCM XVIII as guidelines, and noted that Norway had found the checklists useful.

11     The Netherlands stated that they had carried out an examination of Checklist B (Vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Area) in the context of existing international shipping provisions. The Netherlands had concluded that no alteration of the checklist was necessary and that the ATCM could proceed to see if the checklists could be merged into a single publication.

12     New Zealand tabled an Information Paper describing an inspection handbook which had been used domestically to assist compliance with environmental protection requirements (XXI ATCM/INF 121). Several delegations considered this was useful.

13     The United Kingdom announced that it would be undertaking an inspection in the Antarctic Treaty Area under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty during the 1997/98 austral summer season.

14     Australia noted the imbalance between inspections in East and West Antarctica and offered two places on its vessel to allow inspection in Eastern Antarctica.

15     The Meeting agreed that the list of inspections should be updated to include those reported at the Meeting and that the list be annexed to the Final Report.

Item 11 Operational Issues

WG2.DOC                  XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                  Page 4
16     Chile introduced a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 11) relating to natural 
       disasters in the Antarctic and the dangers these presented to people working in, or 
       visiting, the area. The paper proposed that a list of hazardous and potentially 
       dangerous areas be compiled and that this information be disseminated to assist in 
       reducing the risk to visitors.

17     Several delegations welcomed the paper and noted that it raised important 
       issues of human health and safety. It was also noted that a full list of hazardous areas 
       would be difficult and costly to compile. Several Parties noted that it may be 
       productive to identify hazardous areas in the vicinity of stations as a first priority and 
       to ensure people visiting those areas were aware of the potential hazards. It was 
       suggested that this should be considered within national education and training 
       programmes. SCAR and COMNAP concurred with this suggestion from a scientific 
       and operational point of view.

18     Chile also referred to an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 69) which 
       reported on Chilean Naval activities in assisting shipping in Antarctic waters.

19     ASOC submitted an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 66) which reported 
       on an expedition carried out by one of its members in 1996/97. The paper noted that 
       environmental management and understanding of the Protocol in general had improved 
       amongst Antarctic operators. The paper queried some waste management activities 
       permitted under the Protocol, and noted that the proliferation of stations and the 
       increasing commercialisation of the Antarctic was a matter for concern.

20     WMO submitted an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 49) on WMO 
       networks in support of Antarctic operations and research. The paper made several 
       observations on the meteorological reporting system being used in the Antarctic.

21     The Meeting welcomed the implementation of the Antarctic Master Directory 
       (AMD) as outlined in the SCAR/COMNAP Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 31). 
       The Directory provides information on the types of Antarctic data held in each country

WG2.DOC                            XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 5
and how it can be accessed. The first 200 metadata (ie data about data) entries had 
been made and Parties were urged to supply more details of data holdings to ICAIR, as 
the AMD host, as soon as possible. The Directory is publicly accessible via a World 
Wide Web interface. The Meeting endorsed the efforts of SCAR and COMNAP and 
noted that this initiative would significantly enhance the value of scientific data being 
collected in Antarctica.

22   The United Kingdom presented an Information Paper (XXI ATCM INF/124) 
on its data management initiatives which supports and complements the 
SCAR/COMNAP Antarctic Master Directory project.

23   Information in the SCAR/COMNAP system will be in the public domain. 
However, control of access to the data it references is the responsibility of national 
scientists and operators.

24   Additional Information Papers were submitted by Chile; (XXI ATCM/INF 18) 
Multidisciplinary Geographic Information System for Fildes Peninsula, King George 
Island, Antarctica, (XXI ATCM/INF 19) Information System of Scientific Antarctic 
Data (SIDCA). Argentina submitted an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 129) 
Conditions of the Ice on the Weddell Sea during the 1996/1997 Summer Season.

Item 12 Science Issues

25   Chile tabled a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 12 rev. 1) calling for the 
establishment of a programme to assess and prevent damage to wildlife and the 
environment being caused by marine debris, particularly plastic, being discarded from 
ships into the seas around Antarctica. The Meeting welcomed the paper and noted 
that paragraphs 33 and 34 of the Statement by the CCAMLR Observer (XXI 
ATCM/INF 77) indicated that there has been an increase in the amount of marine 
debris in the Southern Ocean and that the CCAMLR Secretariat had been asked to 
prepare materials for an education initiative to reverse this trend. The Meeting noted

WG2.DOC                    XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 6
the seriousness of this issue and requested that CCAMLR, IAATO and other interested 
Parties report on progress in assessing and dealing with the marine debris problem at 
the next ATCM.

26    The Meeting welcomed the overview of international scientific programmes 
introduced by SCAR (XXI ATCM/INF 32, XXI ATCM/INF 33). The new 
programmes on sea ice were considered to be of great importance in improving the 
data for global climate models. New initiatives on palaeoclimatic research on marine 
sediments would complement the ice core data whilst an investigation of the 
atmospheric environment over the last 200 years would provide very fine resolution of 
recent climate trends. The integration of all the SCAR global change programmes into 
the general framework of IGBP was especially noted.

SCAR highlighted some key developments including improved prediction capability for 
enhanced UV-B radiation, the remarkable new opportunities for geospace research 
offered by the installation of high frequency radars by the United Kingdom, Japan and 
South Africa (with future ones promised by France and Australia), the increased 
accuracy of measurement of the size of the Earth provided by gravity measurements, 
the production of the complete gazetteer of 37,000 names for the whole continent, the 
development of improved health care by pre-deployment screening and telemedicine, 
and the organisation of a new group to look at the evolution of Antarctic organisms.

27    SCAR tabled a paper (XXI ATCM/INF 34) on biological diversity. The Meeting considered this a useful summary of present activities and one delegation 
urged SCAR to communicate it formally to the Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biodiversity.

28    WMO presented an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 44 rev. 1) on 
Antarctic stratospheric ozone. The paper noted that it was likely to be five years or 
more before any significant trend in the year-to-year weakening of the springtime 
ozone hole may emerge. The paper also noted that ozone was a green house gas and

WG2.DOC                  XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                 Page 7
its three-dimensional distribution was an important input for models which predict 
global warming.

29       IOC introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 45) reporting on the 
6th Session of the IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean and the Southern 
Ocean Forum.

30       The Meeting welcomed two papers submitted by France and Italy (XXI 
ATCM/INF 16, XXI ATCM/INF 25) about the construction and operation of the new 
“Concordia” station, and the European Programme for Ice Coring in Antarctica 
(EPICA). Several delegations commented favourably on the collaborative research 
being carried out under the EPICA programme.

31       Russia submitted a paper (XXI ATCM/INF 79) on glaciological and 
geophysical research at Vostok Station. Several delegations noted that the 
palaeoclimatic reconstructions, which were being carried out using ice core samples 
from Vostok Station and were planned to be performed in the course of the EPICA 
project, were a priority in current research in Antarctica. Russia reported that one of 
the future goals of their research was the study of the subglacial Lake Vostok. 
Seismological studies conducted in the last two seasons at Vostok Station by the 
Russian Antarctic Expedition had generated considerable interest in the project from 
the European polar community. An important new factor in Antarctic research was the 
interest expressed by NASA in the possible testing of space technologies and devices 
for future studies of the ice cover of Europa, one of the moons of the planet Jupiter. 
The Russian delegation advised that there would be no penetration of the Lake until 
the project had been fully assessed by the international scientific community and 
subjected to full environmental assessment.

32       IAATO introduced an Information Paper (XXI ATCM/INF 125) on Antarctic 
tourism as a resource for science and welcomed future cooperation and dialogue with 
regard to science projects. Some delegations expressed doubts on the usefulness of 
tourist ships for scientific projects.

WG2.DOC                                          XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting           Page 8
33  Additional Information Papers were submitted by New Zealand (XXI 
ATCM/INF 4) Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in Southwest 
Ross Sea, Antarctica - Update of Activities, (XXI ATCM/INF 22) New Joint 
Scientific and Related Initiatives Between New Zealand and South Africa, Chile (XXI 
ATCM/INF 8) Medio Siglo de Ciencia Antarctica, France (XXI ATCM/INF 14) Le 
Programme European de Forage Glacier au Dome C, France and Italy (XXI 
ATCM/INF 16) Concordia, Republic of Korea (XXI ATCM/INF 26) International 
Collaborations on Scientific Activities on King George Island, Australia (XXI 
ATCM/INF 50) Major Initiatives in Australian Antarctic Science, 1994-97, (XXI 
ATCM/INF 52) 50th Anniversary of Australian National Antarctic Research 
Expeditions, Bulgaria (XXI ATCM/INF 59) Bulgarian Antarctic Research - Life 
Sciences, Norway (XXI ATCM/INF 96) Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition 
(NARE) 1996/97, Uruguay (XXI ATCM/INF 107) Uses of a Krill Diet for the 
Treatment of Atherosclerosis: Six Studies, Russia and IAATO (XXI ATCM/INF 
109) Report on the Ecological Research Program within the Time Frame of Co-
operation between Russian Antarctic Expedition and Quark Expeditions, and IOC 
(XXI ATCM/INF 45) Report on the 6th Session of the IOC Regional Committee for 
the Southern Ocean and the 1st Southern Ocean Forum.

Item 13 Education and Training Issues

34  At ATCM XX two reports (XX ATCM/INF 70 and 53) were tabled by SCAR 
and IUCN containing the recommendations of a workshop on environmental education 
and training which SCAR and IUCN had held in 1993. Based on a number of these 
recommendations, the United Kingdom presented a Working Paper (XXI ATCM/WP 
14) to the Meeting which contained proposals for improving education and training in 
Antarctica.

The Meeting welcomed the United Kingdom proposal that information on Antarctica 
and the Antarctic Treaty System should be more widely available to the public and 
visitors to the region.  A number of Parties considered that such material would

XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting    Page 9
necessarily be focused on the specific requirements of each nation. The Meeting 
agreed that there could be considerable value in developing a short document which 
would explain the nature, operation and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System, 
and which could be endorsed by all the Parties. Such a document would describe, and 
provide examples of, the accomplishments of the Antarctic Treaty System, and could 
be included with the information provided by each Party to its nationals. Australia 
offered to draft such a document, consult with interested Parties during the 
intersessional period via e-mail, and bring forward a draft to ATCM XXII for 
consideration. The Meeting accepted Australia's offer to coordinate this work. 
Parties interested in participating in this work were asked to provide the name and e-
mail address of their contact to the coordinator: Rex Moncur (E-mail: 
rex_mon@antdiv.gov.au).

35    The Meeting also welcomed the United Kingdom proposal that there should be 
a survey of the educational and training programmes developed by national Antarctic 
programmes and tour operators for people visiting or working in Antarctica. This 
proposal was supported by several delegations. COMNAP considered that it was 
important for national operators to share information so that they could learn from one 
another. Therefore COMNAP, in association with IAATO, offered to collect 
information on the various education and training schemes which have been developed 
by national Antarctic programmes and by Antarctic tour operators and to report back 
the results of the survey to ATCM XXII for examination. The Meeting accepted the 
offer.

36    A number of delegations questioned whether it would be possible or useful to 
try to develop agreed guidelines for education and training programmes. Several 
delegations considered it could be useful to develop a simple checklist of issues which 
could be used as a guideline for educational and training programmes.

37    Chile offered to host a workshop to discuss education and training for people 
going to Antarctica, and suggested that it could be held in conjunction with the 
SCAR/COMNAP meeting in Chile during July 1998. New Zealand offered to assist

WG2.DOC                                 XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                   Page 10
Chile in the organisation of this workshop. The Meeting thanked Chile for its offer 
and agreed that the workshop should examine in detail the results of the 
COMNAP/IAATO survey of education and training programmes, and provide an 
opportunity for those responsible for, and active in, such programmes to meet and 
exchange information and ideas.

38    New Zealand informed the Meeting that it was currently drafting a 
“Laypersons Guide to the Protocol” and that this document would probably be tabled 
for consideration at ATCM XXII.

39    Several delegations supported the IUCN proposal (XXI ATCM/INF 64) to 
undertake a survey of education courses on Antarctica offered by secondary schools, 
colleges, technical schools, and universities.  One delegation indicated that it would be 
a major and costly undertaking for it to provide the information requested.  Another 
delegation suggested that the LEARNZ programme operated by New Zealand was an 
excellent example of a secondary school educational initiative dealing with Antarctica.

40    Additional Information Papers were submitted by Belgium (XXI ATCM/INF 1) 
100th Anniversary of the Antarctic Expedition of Captain A de Gerlache (Belgium), 
1897 - 1899, and Chile (XXI ATCM/INF 9) Divulgacion de los Valores Educacionales 
de la Antartica.

WG2.DOC                                      XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting           Page 11
ANNEX A

Resolution (1997)

Standard Form for Advance Notification and Post-Visit Reporting on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties;

Recalling Resolution 3 (1995) which agreed that there would be an advantage in standardised reporting of information on tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica;

Noting that Attachment A to Recommendation 1 (1994) outlines the requirements for advance notice of tourism and non-governmental activities, and that Resolution 3 (1995) outlines requirements for post-activity reports;

Recalling that Parties agreed at ATCM XX to trial a standard form for advance notification and post-visit Reporting during the 1996/97 Antarctic season.

Recommend;

A standard form be used for Advance Notifications and Post-Visit Reporting on tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in order to obtain consistent information that will facilitate analysis of the scope, frequency and intensity of tourism and non-governmental activities.

WG2.DOC                  XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                  Page 12
ANNEX B

Trial Report Form

WG2.DOC                              XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting                     Page 13
