ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC
INTEREST No 15 "CIERVA POINT", DANCO COAST,
ANTARCTIC PENINSULA




Agenda item 6f                  Submitted by Argentina

XXI ATCM/WP29 Rev 1
May, 1997
English
Original: Spanish
DRAFT MEASURE

Revised Description and Management Plan for Sites of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for
approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;

For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below:

(i)     the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to
        Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific
        research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest to be deleted;

(ii)    the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific
        Interest, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted
        in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of
        scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned is:

SSSI No. 15 Cierva Point, Danco Coast,
Antarctic Peninsula.
Management Plan
for Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 15

CIERVA POINT, DANCO COAST, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

1. Description of values to be protected

This area was originally designated as SSSI No. 15 in ATCM Recommendation XIII-8,
after a proposal by Argentina, as an important example of well developed maritime
vegetation and having breeding colonies of at least five bird species.

This area has a great scientific value due to the presence of important bird colonies
(gentoo penguin, brown skua, blue-eyed shag, snow petrel, Dominican gull), an abundant
development of plant cover, and a diverse flora that includes the two Antarctic flowering
plant species and some liverworts and an associated invertebrate fauna. Its littoral area
possesses abundant tidal pools inhabited by large number of marine invertebrates. Long-
term research programs on terrestrial ecology and natural variability could be endangered
by accidental interference, destruction of vegetation and soil, pollution of rock pools and
perturbation of breeding birds.

2. Aims and objectives

Management of Cierva Point aims to:
• Avoid major changes in the structure and composition of communities of flora and
fauna.
• Protect long-term research programs on terrestrial ecology and natural variability
established in the Area.
• Prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the area
• Utilize the Area as a monitoring site to assess direct and indirect effects of the
neighbouring station.

3. Management Activities

The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the area:
• A marker board will be placed at the principal access point illustrating the location
boundaries and stating entry restrictions.
• Access to the Area and paths will be marked.
• Priority pedestrian routes within the Area will be established for transit to sample sites.
• Collection of samples will be limited to the minimum required for approved scientific
research.
- Visits shall be made as necessary to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.

4. Period of Designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Cierva Point in relation with the Antarctic Peninsula. Map 2 shows the location of Cierva Point and adjacent islands in relation to Danco Coast. Map 3 shows the area surrounding Primavera Station in detail to indicate access to the Protected Area.

6. Description of the Area

i. Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area

Cierva Point (lat. 64° 10' S, lon. 60° 57' W) is in the north-west of the Antarctic Peninsula, on the south coast of Cierva Cove, at the north end of Hughes Bay. The site comprises Cierva Point, encompassing the land west on imaginary line drawn from the southeast of the north side of the Point, through the summit of a flat hill of 540 m high, to the southeast of the south side of the Point. Also included are Apéndice/Rivera/Sterneck Island, and José Hernández/Bofill/Midas Island and López/Moss Island, which lie mainly between José Hernández/Bofill/Midas Island and Cierva Point. Although the intertidal zone of each of these areas is included in the Area, the subtidal marine environment is not included.

Base Primavera (Argentina) an all its associated installations and areas of disturbance are excluded from the area.

The plant cover of lichen, moss and grass-dominated communities is very extensive. The dominant plant communities are lichen-dominated fellfield, Polytrichum-Chorisodontiun moss turf and Deschampsia-Colobantus subformation. Areas of more than a hundred square meters of the ground are covered by moss turves, with a peat depth of about 80 cm. This type of habitat allows the establishment of many bird colonies, including gentoo penguins, chinstrap penguins, blue-eyed shags, brown skuas, Wilson's storm petrels, sheathbills and kelp gulls.

ii. Restricted zones within the Area

None
iii. Location of structures within the Area

There are not vehicular routes, structures or refuges within the Area. Primavera Station 
(Argentina) located at the north west of the cape, is open in summers. It is composed of 
eight huts, and a place delimited for helicopter landings.

iv. Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

None

7. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by appropriate 
national authorities.
Condition for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
• It is issued to continue study of terrestrial ecology and natural variability of the area or 
for a compelling scientific purposed that cannot be met elsewhere.
• The actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system in the Area.
• Any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
• The actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan.
• The Permit, or authorised copy, must be carried within the Site of Special Scientific 
Interest.
• A report or reports are supplied to the authority that issued the Permit.

i. Access to and movements within the Area

There is only one access to the Area for helicopters. Helicopters may only land in the 
specified area ESE of the station. The aircraft route to be used is limited to a north 
approach and departure. Marine access is allowed to any point for any of the islands. 
Access will be by permit issued by a component authority and will only be allowed for 
activities which are in accordance with this management plan. Tourism any kind of 
recreational activities are not be permitted. Movement within the site should be by 
designated pedestrian routes. No vehicle access is permitted.

ii. Activities which are or may be conducted within the Area including restrictions on 
time and place
• Scientific study and monitoring of the terrestrial ecosystem and natural variability in the 
area and compelling scientific research which cannot be conducted elsewhere and 
which will not interfere with ongoing long-term research programs or jeopardize the 
structure or dynamics of the ecosystem of the Area.
• Essential management activities, including monitoring.

iii. Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except for 
essential scientific or management activities, as specified in a Permit.

iv. Location of field camps
Parties should not normally camp in the Area. If it is essential for safety reasons, tents 
should be erected having regard to causing the least damage to vegetation and disturbance 
to fauna.

v. Restriction on material and organism which may be brought into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area. 
No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be 
taken into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other 
chemicals, which may be introduced for compelling scientific purpose specified in the 
permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for 
which the Permit was Granted.

As far as possible the use of chemical should be clearly documented for the benefit of later 
researchers.

Fuel, food and other material are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential 
purposed connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such 
material introduced are to be removed when no longer required. Permanent depots are not 
permitted.

vi. Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna
This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful 
interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for 
Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

vii. Collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit holder
Biological specimens and samples may be collected and/or removed from the Area only 
according to a permit. Debris of human origin should be removed and reported to the 
authority that issued the permit. Dead biological specimens may be removed for 
pathological analysis.

viii. Disposal of waste
All non-human wastes shall be removed from the Area to Primavera station. Human waste 
may be deposited in the sea.

ix. Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
management plan continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the area to carry out biological and ecological studies and 
monitoring, and site inspection activities, including the collection of small amounts of plant 
material and small numbers of animals for scientific purposes, to erect or maintain notice 
boards and protective measures.

All scientific structures and instrumentation, including research markers, installed in the 
Area must be authorised in a permit and clearly identified by country, name of investigator
and year of installation. Research markers and structures must be removed at or before the 
expiry of the Permit. If specific scientific projects cannot be concluded within the 
permitted time, applications must be made for an extension to leave the items in situ.

x. Requirements for reports
The principal permit holder for each issued permit shall submit a report of activities 
conducted in the Area. This report shall be submitted to the authority named in the Permit 
as soon as practicable. Such reports should be stored indefinitely and made accessible to 
interested Parties, SCAR, CCAMLR, and COMNAP if requested, to provide the 
documentation of human activities within the Area necessary for good management.
60° S
70° W                      60° W                  50° W                      60° S

                      SOUTH 
                      SHETLAND ISLANDS

                      Cierva Point

ANTARCTIC 
PENINSULA

                      WEDDELL 
                      SEA

Km 100 50 0 100 200 Km
ESCALA GRAFICA
Proyección Estereográfica Polar

70° S                      70° W                  60° W                  50° W                      70° S
61°00'W

DANCO
COAST

HUGHES
BAY

CIERVA
COVE

Moss Is.

Cierva Point

J. Hernández
(Midas) Is.

Protected
Area

Primavera St.

540 M Hill

Apéndice
(Sterneck) Is.

BRIALMONT
COVE

Spring Point

64°15'S

0         5Km
LEVANTAMIENTO TOPOGRAFICO
BASE PRIMAVERA
Grupo de Ecología Terrestre
Instituto Antártico Argentino

                      64° 09' 00"
                      
                      60° 57'50"

Estrecho de Gerlache

0      100     200 m
