ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED
AREA (SPA) NO.25 AND FOR HISTORIC SITES
NO. 16 AND 17 (CONTAINING THE HISTORIC
"TERRA NOVA" HUT OF CAPTAIN R F SCOTT AND ITS
PRECINCTS) CAPE EVANS, ROSS ISLAND (77 degrees
38' 10" S, 166 degrees 25' 04" E)


Agenda item 6f                                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/WP4 Rev 2
May, 1997
Original: English
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 25
for Historic Sites No. 16 and 17

(containing the historic "Terra Nova" hut of Captain R F Scott and its precincts)
CAPE EVANS, ROSS ISLAND
(77 degrees 38' 10" S, 166 degrees 25' 04" E)

1     Description of Values to be Protected

This area was originally listed as Historic Sites 16 and 17 in Recommendation VII-9.
The Terra Nova hut (Historic Site No. 16) is the largest of the historic huts in the Ross
Sea region. It was built in January 1911 by the British Antarctic "Terra Nova"
Expedition of 1910-1913 which was led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott, RN. It was 
subsequently used as a base by the Ross Sea party of Sir Ernest Shackleton's Imperial
Trans Antarctic Expedition of 1914-1917.

Another major feature of this area is the Cross on Wind Vane Hill (Historic site No.17)
which was erected in the memory of three members of Shackleton's Ross Sea party who
died in 1916. In addition to this, there are also the anchors of the ship "Aurora" from
the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, an instrument shelter, several supply dumps
and dog kennels, and numerous artefacts distributed around the site.

The Cape Evans site is one of the principal sites of early human activity in Antarctica.
It is an important symbol of the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration, and as such, has
considerable historical and cultural significance. Some of the earliest advances in the
study of earth sciences, meteorology, flora and fauna are associated with the Terra Nova
Expedition based at this site. The history of these activities and the contribution they
have made to the understanding and awareness of Antarctica, give this Area significant
scientific value.

2     Aims and Objectives

The aim of the management plan is to provide protection for the Area and its features so
that its values can be preserved. The objectives of the Plan are to:

•     avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;

•     maintain the historic values of the area through planned restoration and
      conservation work;

•     allow management activities which support the protection of the values and
      features of the Area;

•     prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area, its features and artefacts by
      means of managed access to the Terra Nova hut.

0130371.03
2

3   Management Activities

· A regular programme of restoration and preservation work shall be undertaken on the 
  Terra Nova hut and associated artefacts in the Area;

· Visits shall be made as necessary for management purposes;

· National Antarctic Programmes operating in, or those with an interest in, the region 
  shall consult together with a view to ensuring the above provisions are implemented.

4   Period of Designation

    Designated under Measure XX-XX for an indefinite period.

5   Maps

    Map A: Cape Evans regional map. This map shows the boundaries of the proposed 
    Antarctic Specially Protected Area with significant topographic features, approaches, 
    field camp sites and helicopter landing sites. It also shows the approximate location of 
    significant historical items within the area. Inset: Ross island showing sites of nearby 
    protected areas and stations.

    Map B: Cape Evans site map. This map shows the approximate location of specific 
    historic artefacts and sites within the Area.

6   Description of the Area

6(i)   Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Cape Evans is a small, triangular shaped, ice free area in the south west of Ross Island, 
10 kilometres to the south of Cape Royds and 22 kilometres to the north of Hut Point 
Peninsula on Ross Island. The ice free area is composed of till-covered basalt bedrock. 
The designated Area is located on the north western coast of Cape Evans adjacent to 
Home Beach and centred on Scott's Terra Nova Hut. The boundaries of the proposed 
ASPA are:

·    South: a line extending east from a point at 77° 38' 15.47", 166° 25' 9.48" - 20 
     metres south of the Cross on Wind Vane Hill;

·    South/west: a line from the reference point above extended to follow the crest of 
     the small ridge descending in a north westerly direction to the shoreline at 77° 
     38' 11.50" - 166° 24' 49.47";

·    North/west: by the shoreline of Home Beach;

·    North/east: by the line of the outlet stream from Skua Lake to Home Beach at 
     77° 38' 4.89" - 166° 25' 13.46";

0130371.03
3

·      East: by the line extending south from the western edge of Skua Lake at 77° 38′ 
       5.96″ - 166° 25′ 35.74″ - to intersect the southern boundary at 77° 38′ 15.48″ - 
       166° 25′ 35.68″.

A major feature of the Area is Scott’s Terra Nova Hut located on the north western 
coast of Cape Evans at Home Beach. The hut is surrounded by many historic relics and 
include the anchors from the Aurora, dog skeletons, instrument shelters, dog line, 
meteorological screen, fuel dump, magnetic hut, coal, stores, rubbish dumps and flag 
pole. A memorial cross to three members of Shackleton’s Ross Sea party of 1914-17 
stands on Wind Vane Hill. All these features are included within the boundaries of the 
Area.

Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest on Cape Evans and Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis 
adeliae) from the rookery at Cape Royds may occasionally transit the Area. Weddell 
seals have also been seen hauled up on Home Beach.

6(ii)   Restricted Zones within the Area

None.

6(iii)  Structures Within the Area

All structures located within the Area are of historic origin, although a temporary, 
modern protective enclosure around the magnetic hut remains in place.

6(iv)  Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SSSI No 1 Cape Royds is 10 kilometres north of Cape Evans; SSSI No 2 Arrival 
Heights, Hut Peninsula is 22 kilometres south of Cape Evans; and SSSI No 11 Tramway 
Ridge is approximately 20 kilometres east of Cape Evans. All sites are located on Ross 
Island.

7       Permit Conditions

Entry to the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit.

Permits shall be issued only by appropriate national authorities and may contain both 
general and specific conditions. A Permit may be issued by a national authority to 
cover a number of visits in a season. Parties operating in the Ross Sea Area shall 
consult together and with groups and organisations interested in visiting the site to 
ensure that visitor numbers are not exceeded.

0130371.03
4

General conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the site may include:

- activities related to preservation, maintenance, research and/or monitoring purposes;
- management activities in support of the objectives of the Plan;
- activities related to tourism, educational or recreational activities providing they do not conflict with the objectives of this plan.

7(i)    Access to and Movement within the Area

Control of movement within the Area is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable features within the Area. The maximum number in the Area at any time (including those within the hut) is              40 people.

Control of numbers within the hut is necessary to prevent damage caused by crowding around the many vulnerable features within the hut. The maximum number within the hut at any time (including guides) is              12 people.

Avoidance of cumulative impacts on the interior of the hut requires an annual limit on visitor numbers. The effects of the current visitor level (approximately 1,000 per calendar year (1995)) suggest that an increase of more than 100 percent could cause significant adverse impacts.

Annual maximum number of visitors                                                    2,000 people.

These limits have been set based on current visitor levels and on the best advice available from conservation advisory agencies (which include conservators, archaeologists, historians, museologists and other heritage protection professionals). The limits are based on the proposition that any significant increase in the current level of visitor numbers would be detrimental to the values to be protected. An ongoing monitoring programme of the effects of visitors is in place. This will provide the basis for future reviews.

Helicopter landings are prohibited within the Area as they have the potential to damage the site by blowing scoria and ice particles and to accelerate the abrasion of the hut and surrounding artefacts. Landings may be made at the existing designated landing sites (see Maps 1 and 2). One site is approximately 150 metres to the north of the hut outside the Area. Another designated site is located adjacent to the field shelters erected approximately 200 metres beyond the south western boundary of the Area.

Vehicles are prohibited within the Area. Landings from the sea by boat may be made by visitors directly in front of the hut at Home Beach.

0130371.03
5

7(ii)  Activities which may be conducted within the area

Activities which may be conducted within the area include:
    •   visits for restoration, preservation and/or protection purposes
    •   educational and/or recreational visits including tourism
    •   scientific activity which does not detract from the values of the Area

7(iii)  Installation, Modification and Removal of Structures

No new structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for conservation activities or scientific activities that do not detract from the values of 
the Area as specified in 7(ii). No historic structure, relic or artefact shall be removed 
from the Area, except for the purposes of restoration and/or preservation and then only 
in accordance with a Permit.

7(iv)  Location of field camps

Use of the historic hut for living purposes is not permitted.

Camping is prohibited in the Area under any circumstances. An existing field camp site 
is located approximately 300 metres beyond the south western boundary of the area (see 
Map 2). Two Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand Antarctic Institute) field shelters 
are located at this site and should be used by all parties intending to camp in this area. 
The helicopter pad has been relocated away from the immediate vicinity of Scott’s Hut 
inside the Area, to a point immediately outside the Area near the north east boundary. 
To the north east of Scott’s hut is the site of the Greenpeace year round World Park 
Base which was removed in 1991-92. The plaque which marked this site was removed 
in January 1996.

7(v)  Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area

No living animals or plant material shall be introduced into the Area.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be 
taken into the Area.

Chemicals which may be introduced for management purposes shall be removed from 
the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity specified in the plan.

Fuel, food or other materials are not to be left in depots in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the protection and conservation of the historic

0130371.03
6

structures or associated relics. All such materials are to be removed when no longer 
required.

Smoking, or the use of any naked flame including lanterns, is not permitted in the hut 
under any circumstances.

7(vi)   Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

This activity is prohibited except in accordance with a permit. Where animal taking or 
harmful interference is involved, this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance 
with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in 
Antarctica.

7(vii)  Collection or removal of anything not introduced by visitors

Material may be collected and removed from the Area only for restoration, preservation 
or protection reasons and only in accordance with the management activities detailed as 
necessary to protect the values of the area in a Permit. Visitors must remove objects, 
substances, and waste introduced by them during their time in the Area. Samples from 
or specimens of fauna, flora and soil may be removed for scientific purposes only in 
accordance with an appropriate permit.

7(viii) Disposal of Waste

All human waste and grey water shall be removed from the Area. Waste generated by 
work parties shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix)  Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
management plan continue to be met:

1   The permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Area;

2   Provision of information for visitors;

3   Development of skills and resources, particularly those related to conservation 
    and preservation techniques, to assist with the protection of the Area’s values.

0130371.03
•
 
 •
 
 7
 
7(x)     Requirements for Reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submit to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow an evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should wherever possible deposit originals or copies of such reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both for review of the Management Plan and in organising the use of the site.

 
   
 
   
 
0130371.03
Map A - Cape Evans, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: regional map

Inset: Ross Island showing sites of nearby 
protected areas and stations
          10 km

ROSS SEA

New College 
Valley
Cape 
Royds
Cape 
Evans
Hut Point
Arrival Heights
Scott Base
McMurdo Station

ROSS ISLAND

Ross Ice Shelf

North 
Bay

77°38'00" S

Home Beach
Skua Lake
Scott's Hut
Wind Vane Hill
Backdoor Bay
West Beach
Cape Evans

South Bay

0         metres         250
Contour interval: 5 m

Estimated position of coastline
Protected area boundary
Historic structures
Helicopter pad

Source: NZ Dept. of Survey and Land 
Information Plan 37/107 Cape Evans 
orthophoto, scale 1:5000.
Note: positions of features approximate
Map B - Cape Evans, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: site map

166°25'00"E                  166°25'20"E                  166°25'40"E

77°38'05"S
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                     McMURDO
                                     SOUND
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
77°38'10"S                   North
                                     Bay
                                     
                                 H
                                     
                                     
                                     
                        Home Beach                          
                        Site of Aurora anchor              Flag Pole
                        Experimental rock hut/Rubbish dump
                        Seal skeletons                   Dog skeleton
                        Aurora anchor
                        HUT                              Site of Pony line
                                                         Coal
                        Coal                             Dogline
                        Site of garage                   Dog skeleton
                        Fuel Dump                        Site of Dog Hospital
                        Fuel Post                        Instrument Shelter
                        Meteorological 
                        Screen                           FUEL DUMP
                                                         MAGNETIC HUT
                        Site of Ice Caves
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
77°38'15"S                   CROSS                          WIND VANE HILL
                                                         Instrument Shelter
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
0      metres      50
Contour interval: 5 m

                  Estimated position of coastline
                  Protected area boundary
                  Historic structures
                  Helicopter pad

Source: NZ Dept. of Survey and Land
Information Plan 37/107 Cape Evans
orthophoto, scale 1:5000.

Note: positions of features approximate
