ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                           
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
                           
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE       
                           
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       
                           

                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
UNDERSTANDING OF EIA PROCESSES
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
Agenda item 6b                         Submitted by New Zealand
                           
XXI ATCM/WP36
May, 1997
Original: English
UNDERSTANDING OF EIA PROCESSES

Agenda Item 6 b

Submitted by New Zealand

BACKGROUND

1. In March 1997, New Zealand circulated a Discussion Paper on EIA Processes. This was essentially a list of questions about the way in which Parties approached the implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment pursuant to the Protocol.

2. Our paper posed questions about the processes and approaches adopted by Parties at the Preliminary Stage, for Initial and Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations, and in relation to the integration of EIAs from different "levels" and sources. A number of the questions posed could clearly apply across the full range of EIA "levels".

3. New Zealand expresses appreciation to Argentina, Australia, Chile, Japan, Norway, Peru, South Africa, Sweden, United States, United Kingdom, Canada, ASOC and IUCN for their contributions to intersessional discussion of this issue.

4. The New Zealand questions are reproduced here, and followed by a brief overview of the responses received and some suggestions on the way forward, drawn from the responses received. Some Parties kindly provided extensive documentation, and it is impossible to do justice to the depth of information provided here. We draw attention to the papers tabled at this meeting by other Parties which also relate to EIA Processes.

5. THE NEW ZEALAND QUESTIONS

(i) Annex I of the Protocol offers some guidance on the process and mandatory components of a CEE. Much less assistance is proffered in the case of IEEs, and nothing in the case of the Preliminary Stage.

(ii) Accordingly (and drawing upon our own experience and difficulties in New Zealand) there may be particular interest and value in exchanging information on national practice at the IEE and Preliminary stage [Preliminary Assessment (PA) or Preliminary Environmental Assessment (PEE) in the terminology of some Parties].

(iii) A further area where we believe an exchange of experience would be most valuable is in relation to the integration of EIA across a range of activities, which may be separately addressed in PA/PEEs, IEEs and/or CEEs.

(iv) This document therefore asks a series of questions about how we each actually approach the EIA process. It is obviously not a comprehensive listing of all the issues which could be 
1
raised in relation to EIA process. However, we hope that it will not only encourage you to 
pass on your national experience, but suggest other questions or issues that warrant discussion.

6. PRELIMINARY STAGE

i) Whether consideration at the preliminary stage is in fact a separate formal process carried 
out by the responsible state.

ii) If it is a formal process, what the process actually entails, what legal obligations or 
administrative guidelines have been elaborated and what documentation must be completed 
by the proponent of the activity?

iii) What level of detail does such preliminary consideration entail? (ie direct, indirect, 
cumulative impact; time horizon over which activity is considered; whether effects on values 
are included)

iv) Whether activities are examined (and judgements made) on an individual basis or 
alongside other known activities (ie in an overall programmic context).

v) Whether judgements on these activities take into consideration other Parties' activities.

vi) The activities to which it applies - science, logistics, tourism?

vii) Who is responsible for evaluating this Preliminary Stage/PA - the operational 
agency/national institute, another agency of state (eg Foreign Ministry, Environmental 
Ministry, EPA), or an independent body established for the purpose?

viii) Whether there is any monitoring, or other 'quality control' in place to test (a) judgments 
made in any Preliminary stage evaluations and/or (b) decisions made on those evaluations by 
the responsible authority.

ix) How far in advance of the expected commencement of the activity is Preliminary stage 
evaluation initiated?

x) How far in advance of the expected commencement of the activity must Preliminary stage 
evaluation be completed?

7. INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (IEE)

i) Given the limited guidance offered by the Protocol itself, what are the specific requirements 
of IEE under your system?

ii) Who are the participants in the IEE process? Are only the proponent and responsible 
review authority involved, or are other groups involved (eg specialists). Is there any public 
notification or public participation in the process?

2
iii) Are other Parties advised of the proposed activity, or invited to make submissions on the evaluation? Is the IEE circulated to Parties which may be affected by the proposed activity (eg because the Party conducts activities in the same area)? If they are, what are the mechanisms for contact and timelines for response?

iv) To what degree are other activities - both under this particular Party's control and under other Parties' control - considered in IEEs?

v) How is such 'external' information obtained? Are the existing requirements (and mechanisms) for annual exchange of information proving adequate for these purposes?

vi) How far in advance of the expected commencement of activity is the IEE initiated?

vii) How far in advance of the expected commencement of the activity must the IEE be completed?

8. COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (CEE)

i) What follow-up procedures are employed once a Final CEE has been completed and the activity is underway?

ii) Is the CEE seen as a static document describing the situation at the onset of a major activity, or as a "living document" which is developed and reassessed throughout the duration of the activity?

iii) How accessible is the CEE (and any subsidiary or subsequent development) to those (a) carrying out the activity and (b) to the wider community of interest?

9. INTEGRATION OF ASSESSMENTS

i) The degree to which the entire range of national Antarctic activities (for which there may be separate PEEs, IEEs, CEEs, Reviews/Audits and monitoring programmes) are integrated and assessed.

ii) Does such integration occur (a) only across activities planned by the National Antarctic Programme, (b) only with activities in particular areas, or (c) across the entire range of activities conducted by or from your state?

iii) Are EIA processes for proposed activities all running to the same timelines?

iv) How far before the commencement of the Antarctic season is the full scope of your state's activities finally known?

v) What is your level of knowledge of other Parties' proposed activities in your area(s) of activity prior to their occurrence?

3
vi) Does (or could) the Exchange of Information mechanism meet your needs for prior EIA exchange?

10. THE PICTURE FROM RESPONSES

(i) Preliminary Stage: Although some Parties consider all proposed activities at the IEE level, the majority employ a Preliminary Stage or PEE. For many this is a formal obligation undertaken by the proponent and assessed by an agency (usually the Antarctic operational agency). For these Parties, some guidelines, codes, manuals and forms have generally been developed. The level of detail required and the participants in the process vary, but appears to extend across Direct, Secondary and Cumulative impact, and to involve the proponents and specialists in the Antarctic operational agency. Some activities (ongoing activities) are exempted from examination at this stage. Generally, judgements are made at the level of individual activities, although for national scientific and logistic activities there is often some programmic integration. Tourist activities do not appear to be considered at the Preliminary Stage. There is limited consideration of activities planned by other Parties in the area of operation. Preliminary Stage examination appears to run to the same timeline as examination of proposed activities for logistic and scientific feasibility, ie some 3 to 18 months prior to the commencement of the activity. A substantive issue noted by several Parties as a difficulty was the question of establishing the "break-point" between Preliminary Stage / PEE and IEE.

(ii) Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE): At the level of IEE, many Parties had specific requirements enshrined in their domestic implementing legislation. In some cases these requirements went beyond that required in Annex I to the Protocol. Assessment of IEEs is generally by specialised committees, often established within the national Antarctic agency, but frequently involving other agencies. Many Parties had public notification processes in relation to IEEs. In relation to the exchange of information between Parties, it was suggested by several Parties that although the completed IEE documents were received, it was less common to be aware of, or see, documents under development. To that extent it was therefore difficult to build consideration of other Parties' proposed activities into one's own EIA planning. The question of transparency of process was raised as important. For particular IEEs it had proved useful to establish bilateral links, and to hold informal workshops. The AEON initiative was also a helpful development.

(iii) Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE): Responses here were divided between those Parties which had produced them and those who had yet to. Plainly, more detailed responses were available from the former. The concept of CEE as a "living document" was seen as positive by many Parties. However, a qualification on this was expressed: that there should not be endless and unstructured changes from the Final CEE - not only to avoid possible degradation of the original evaluation, but in order to ensure some predictability for those carrying out the activity, and to constrain costs.

(iv) Integration of Assessments: Hitherto, integration across PEEs, IEEs, CEEs has not been done (although programmic evaluations have been done). Several Parties identified their wish to move from an individual to a programme-based assessment, a development made easier through new technologies such as GIS. However, integration of EIA across those activities conducted by national Antarctic programmes appears to be common already. Parties differed
in their approach to timelines for differing activities. Whilst activities pursuant to the national 
science programmes were usually running to the same timelines, external activities (including 
tourism) were not. Some suggested that EIA for all activities should run to the same timeline, 
some pointed to the differing nature of the activities and said synchrony was not helpful. 
Knowledge of other Parties' proposed activities in one's area of interest was limited, and thus 
these activities could not be built into domestic EIA processes. We were advised of a regional 
arrangement (RAPAL) which allowed exchange on proposed activities. The majority of Parties 
felt that more (and more timely) information through the annual Exchange of Information 
would be helpful. Other mechanisms which could facilitate greater knowledge of other Parties' 
activities were said to be AEON, COMNAP and SCALOP linkages.

11. SUGGESTED WAYS FORWARD

(i) The development of guidelines, drawing upon the experience of actual EIA case-history. 
Some have suggested that models of "best practice" might be extracted from this case-history 
at Preliminary Stage, IEE and CEE level.

(ii) The convening of an EIA Workshop on methodologies and procedures for EIA.

(iii) Examination of the merits of translating some EIAs into the four official Antarctic Treaty 
languages.

(iv) Maintenance of a comprehensive current listing of EIAs, audits/reviews and associated 
guidance documents and its annual circulation to Parties. This could be done by the host Party 
for each ATCM.

(v) Encouraging Parties to provide details of the procedures they use to identify the nature and 
significance of potential environmental impacts, so that others may benefit from this 
experience.

                                                                                             5
