ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


PROPOSALS FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING IN
ANTARCTICA

Agenda item 13               Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/WP14
April, 1997
Original: English
26-MAR-1997  12:24  FROM  FCO SAAD     0171 270 2086        TO         9006444948507   P. 02  

PROPOSALS FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING IN ANTARCTICA

1.    Background

In April 1993 SCAR and IUCN held a workshop in Gorizia, Italy on environmental 
education and training in relation to the implementation of the Environmental Protocol.
This was the first time that there had been any detailed examination of this important 
topic. The proceedings of the workshop were published by SCAR and IUCN in 1996 
as Opportunities for Antarctic Environmental Education and Training (Eds. Dingwall 
and Walton, 1996).

The key recommendations made by the report which are of relevance to the ATCM 
are:

-   The need to produce a lay guide to the Environmental Protocol in several 
    languages;

-   The elaboration of a comprehensive training programme to assist in the 
    effective implementation of the Protocol;

-   The need for easy public access to information about Antarctica and the 
    Antarctic Treaty System.

The recommendations from the SCAR/IUCN workshop were discussed in general at 
the XX ATCM, but no substantive follow-up action was agreed. To move the debate 
forward the UK offered to consult with interested Parties, and work with SCAR and 
IUCN, to make substantive proposals on education and training for discussion at the 
ATCM XXI. Four such proposals are outlined below.

2.    Substantive Proposals

Education and training in Antarctica requires the serious consideration of the ATCM. 
This is because education and training are central to the implementation of the 
Environmental Protocol. Having well-informed and trained personnel reduces 
environmental impacts and risks, and helps to ensure compliance.

It is suggested that education and training are discussed by Working Group II of the 
ATCM. The Group should be given the task of developing a long-term action plan for 
education and training. This plan might include the following elements:

i)     Provision of information to the general public about Antarctica;

ii)    Provision of information to those visiting, or working in, Antarctica;

iii)   Comparative appraisal of current education and training techniques used by 
       Antarctic operators;
`26-MAR-1997 12:26 FROM FCO SAAD          TO       900644948507   P. 01
                   0171 270 2086                                    

iv)  Agreed guidelines for education and training for those visiting, or working in,
     Antarctica.

2.1  Provision of information to the general public about Antarctica

There is a severe shortage of high quality, relevant and up-to-date information about
Antarctica, particularly the Antarctic Treaty System, which is easy to access and
understand. The lack of information means many members of the public still have a
serious misconception about what is currently happening in Antarctica. Indeed many
consider that there is widespread and highly significant environmental damage
occurring because of human activities on the continent, and are unaware of the far
greater impact of ozone depletion and climate change. Thus there is an urgent need to
get the message across about how the ATCPs are acting to ensure the protection of
the Antarctic environment. The best way of doing this is for the ATCPs to produce a
public information pack.

Proposal:      The ATCPs to collaborate in the production of a public
               information pack on Antarctica.

2.2  Provision of information to those visiting, or working in, Antarctica

In the past the ATCM has simply adopted and promulgated its regulations within
formal Treaty publications, particularly the Final Reports of ATCMs. These
publications are not widely available or easy for the non-specialist to understand. This
means that in practice little of what is agreed at an ATCM filters down to people
visiting, or working in, Antarctica.

Obvious regulations which should be given a wide distribution by the Consultative
Parties are the Environmental Protocol and Recommendation XVIII-1 "The Visitors
Guide to the Antarctic". Indeed, IAATO has already produced a high quality leaflet
laying out Recommendation XVIII-1 which it has provided to its member companies
for distribution to their clients. At the ATCM XX it was recognized that there was
considerable value in a lay guide to the Environmental Protocol. This is because the
Protocol is a legal, highly technical document which is difficult for non-lawyers to
understand. It is understood that New Zealand intends to draft a "Layperson's Guide to
the Protocol" which will probably be tabled for consideration by Parties at the ATCM
XXII.

Proposal:      The ATCPs to collaborate in the production of an information
               pack for people intending to visit, or work in, Antarctica.

2.3  Comparative appraisal of training techniques for people visiting, or working in,
     Antarctica

Most, if not all, national operators have developed some form of training programme
for personnel travelling to Antarctica. The 1997 Norwegian Antarctic Treaty

TOTAL P. 01`
26-MAR-1997  12:25  FROM  FCO SAAD       TO      9006449498507  P.03
                                      0171 270 2086

Inspection Team recognised that much effort is now spent on the training of new 
personnel in environmental matters prior to them going to Antarctica and during their 
tour of duty. Likewise, tour operators have developed schemes for training staff and 
educating tourists. Unfortunately, the ATCPs have very little information on how the 
Antarctic community as a whole is undertaking training. There has been no 
comparative appraisal of the types of training schemes available or their effectiveness.

Proposal:      Working Group II of the ATCM, with the assistance of 
               COMNAP and IAATO, undertake a survey of the education and 
               training schemes used by national Antarctic programmes and 
               Antarctic tour operators.

2.4    Guidelines for education and training for people visiting, or working in, 
       Antarctica

Although it is clear that there are common training practices between different 
operators, there is no general guidance from the ATCM as to what an education and 
training programme should include. As a long-term goal, the ATCM should establish 
guidelines for education and training for those visiting, or working in, Antarctica. This 
would provide advice on, for example, the provision of relevant literature, general 
predeployment briefings and "hands-on" training. Such guidelines could only be 
produced once the international survey of training schemes had been completed by 
Working Group II.

Proposal:      In the longer term, the ATCM should develop guidelines for the 
               education and training of people visiting, or working in, 
               Antarctica.

3.     Conclusion

At ATCM XX several delegations recognised the importance of retaining education 
and training as an agenda item. However, for this topic to progress beyond a simple 
exchange of information it requires the ATCM to adopt a long-term action plan. This 
paper has outlined substantive proposals (see above) which might be included in this 
plan.

TOTAL P.03
