ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
TRAITE SUR L'AN[T]AR[T]IQUE              
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


              
COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL: MARITIME INSURANCE


              
              
              
              
              
Agenda item 6a                     Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/WP37
May, 1997
Original: English
Agenda Item 6(a)
Compliance with the Protocol: Maritime Insurance
(United Kingdom)

1. Ensuring compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, or more 
particularly the domestic legislation implementing the Protocol, will not be easy. The chief 
means of transport to and within Antarctica is by ships. It is not clear to what extent 
maritime insurers are aware of the Protocol or its implementing legislation, although the 
Association of Protection and Indemnity Clubs (which provide insurance against third-party 
liability) have recently inquired about the liability discussions. It is possible that some 
vessels operating in Antarctica are not adequately covered by insurance or their insurers are 
not fully aware of the provisions of the Protocol and implementing legislation. If so, it may 
be that they would tighten their terms and conditions for insurance cover to reflect the 
requirements of the Protocol and implementing legislation.

2. The attached draft resolution requests the Government of Norway, as host of the next 
ATCM, to inform the main maritime insurance markets, and the Association of Protection 
and Indemnity Clubs, of the Protocol and implementing legislation and to seek information 
from them as to whether there will be modifications to terms and conditions of insurance to 
reflect the requirements of the Protocol.
The Representatives,

Noting that the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is imminent;

Conscious of the need to employ all available means to ensure compliance by operators with the provisions of the Protocol;

Recognising the role which maritime insurers could play in ensuring such compliance;

Recommend that Norway, as host of the XXII ATCM, should:

1. Inform the main maritime insurance markets and the Association of Protection and Indemnity Clubs (the "insurers") of the imminent entry into force of the Protocol.

2. Supply the insurers with the text of the Protocol, including its Annexes, and national legislation, including regulations and guidance, implementing the Protocol; and for this purpose requests the Governments of those States which have ratified the Protocol to provide such materials to the Government of Norway within three months.

3. Seek information from the insurers as to their normal terms and conditions applicable to vessels sailing in waters south of 60° South and whether these will be modified on the entry into force of the Protocol.

4. Inform the insurers, in general terms, of the progress so far made in developing a liability annex.

5. Report to the XXII ATCM on the results of its contacts with the insurers.
