ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




                          NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE ANTARCTIC




Agenda item 11              Submitted by Chile

XXI ATCM/WP11
April, 1997
Original: Spanish
XXI ATCM/WP

NATURAL DISASTERS IN THE ANTARCTIC
(Item 11 on the Agenda)
(Tabled by Chile)

United Nations Resolutions 42/196 and 44/236 designated the 1990s as a decade in which the international community should promote international co-operation in the reduction of natural disasters.

The main objective of the international decade consists in reducing the loss of lives, material damage and economic disturbance caused by these disasters by means of concerted international action.

This action shall include the following elements:

a) The formulation of appropriate directives and strategies for the application of existing scientific and technological knowledge.

b) The promotion of scientific and technical activities directed towards the elimination of critical gaps in knowledge, with a view to reducing the loss of lives and property.

c) To disseminate existing technical information in addition to any that might be obtained in the future, concerning means for assessing, forecasting and mitigating the effects of natural disasters.

d) The formulation of means for assessing, forecasting, preventing and mitigating the effects of natural disasters by means of technical assistance and technology transfer programmes.

Likewise, at the World Summit on Social Development (Manila 1994), it was requested that by the year 2000 governments establish, where they do not yet exist, comprehensive contingency and management plans in the event of a disaster.

One of the most important results of the World Conference on the Reduction of Natural Disasters (Yokohama, Japan, 1994) was the willingness of participants to create a disaster prevention culture.

Responsibility for the implementation of strategies and action plans for the prevention of natural disasters in the Antarctic rests with governments.

The Antarctic is exposed to natural disasters such as volcanic eruptions, floods, avalanches and others. Hazardous sites also exist such as crevasses in the ice, unstable ice cliffs and other natural conditions which may affect the safety of people and their installations.
An example of the above were the volcanic eruptions on Deception Island (South Shetland Islands), which destroyed bases belonging to Argentina, Chile and the United Kingdom, and recently the death of a Norwegian expedition member who set up camp in a danger zone full of crevasses in the interior of Antarctica.

Environmental degradation must also be borne in mind. Climatic change and rising sea levels are serious threats which may affect the Antarctic.

Pursuant to the aforementioned, the Chilean delegation hereby proposes that:

- A list of hazardous areas and potential natural disasters in Antarctica be drawn up.

- Information be disseminated regarding potential natural disaster areas as well as sites which may be considered dangerous.

- Prevention, reduction and preparation measures be proposed, in addition to recommendations for expedition members and tourists.

- A medium and long-term strategy be developed, as well as contingency plans for unforeseen situations, and activities relating to warnings, assessment, the spread of information, management and aid in the event of disasters.

- SCAR scientific members and COMNAP/SCALOP technical personnel be urged to develop new knowledge and techniques for reducing loss of life and property in the Antarctic.
