ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF RESEARCH
ACTIVITIES





Agenda item 6b                  Submitted by Italy

XXI ATCM/WP23
April, 1997
Original: English
0039630484893

XXI ATCM
Christchurch, New Zealand

Working Paper presented by ITALY

JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF RESEARCH ACTIVITIES

An increasing number of joint international research programmes are being carried out, as suggested by Article 3 of the Antarctic Treaty. These programmes, however, are often developed through meetings of researchers from different countries, having different national regulations as far as the environment and ethics are concerned. Most of the international agreements, ratified or not, do not take into account environmental impact caused by joint research activities.

When implementing joint research programmes, the authorities involved should jointly evaluate the environmental impact, especially as to the possible cumulative effects (Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Art. 3 (2.c)) caused by the overlapping of research activities not necessarily known by the guest state authority. The latter might therefore issue an evaluation on the basis of insufficient documentation. The coordination needed is stated at Art. 8 (4) of the Protocol.

For instance, in the case of the release of permits for biological researches requiring the sampling of flora and fauna, in the absence of an advance exchange of information, it could be hard to define the total number of specimens needed for the joint activity. Generally, a nation operating in a given Antarctic area only receives requests from its own researchers for a number of specimens treated in a restricted field, while a foreign researcher is authorized from his own country. This does not permit a correct environmental safeguard due to the lack of a global vision of the impact caused by joint activities.

Our suggestion for the solution of the abovementioned problems is to enhance the exchange of information (through email) among the Environmental Officers of the countries interested in joint research, in order to make decisions or joint plans on the following points:

-   evaluation of the cumulative impacts, both as to the duration of the research and the possible presence of other research activities at the same site;

-   possible request of permits for the sampling of flora and/or fauna, and for the access to protected areas;

-   monitoring systems to analyse the possible effects of the activity on the Antarctic ecosystem and exchange of the related data;

-   planning and management of the wastes deriving from the joint activity.
