ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'AN[T]ARTIQUE        
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ   

DRAFT DECISION (FRANCE/NEW ZEALAND)
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL
REGULATIONS OF ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE
MEETINGS

Agenda item 7                  Submitted by France/New Zealand

XXI ATCM/WP24
April, 1997
Original: English
Draft Decision
(France/New Zealand)
Proposed Amendments to the Internal Regulations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings

The representatives,

Recalling the guidelines relating to circulation and distribution of documents before 
Meetings, adopted by the Parties during the XIXth Consultative Meeting and the 
amendments regarding the circulation of documents after Meetings presented during the 
XXth Consultative Meeting,

Hereby resolve to adopt the guidelines, which met with a positive response during the 
XXth Consultative Meeting during which they were confirmed and adopted, as an official 
amendment to the internal regulations of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 
thereby reaffirming the commitment made by the Parties to improve the conduct of 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and to provide for improved working methods for 
these Meetings,

Hereby resolve to adopt the new articles proposed below, thereby confirming the 
guidelines already adopted by the Parties, and to amend accordingly the internal 
regulations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.

The new articles listed below are to be inserted after Article 37:

Circulation and distribution of documents before and after Meetings

38. The contracting Parties authorised to participate in Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings shall comply with the provisions relating to the submission and distribution of 
documents set forth in the guidelines relating to the circulation and distribution of 
documents before Meetings, adopted by the Parties during the XIXth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting and subsequently amended during the XXth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting with respect to the circulation of documents after Meetings. This 
article shall apply also to persons invited as observers or experts (in accordance with 
Articles 2 and 41).

39. All working documents drawn up by consultative Parties and observers covered by 
Article 2, and information documents for which a representative of a consultative Party 
requests a translation, must be received by the host government at least 45 days before the 
commencement of the Meeting.

40. The host government must, in turn, forward the translated documents, through 
diplomatic channels, at least 30 days before the Meeting. As a general rule, it is suggested 
that information documents for which a consultative Party requests a translation should not 
exceed 30 pages.

41. Information documents for which a translation has not been requested must be 
supplied to the host government at least 30 days before the commencement of the Meeting 
so that the host government may distribute them. These documents shall include the 
documents of non-consultative Parties in accordance with paragraph a of Article 29 
("Non-consultative Parties may submit to the Secretariat documents to be distributed to the 
Meeting as information documents ... These documents shall address issues which are 

1
on the agenda of the Meeting") and those of experts in accordance with paragraph a of 
Article 44 (this number to be changed) ("Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda 
item, submit to the Secretariat documents to be distributed to the Meeting as information 
documents.")

Distribution of Documents

42. Working and information documents for which the representative of a consultative 
Party has requested a translation and which are received less than 45 days before the 
Meeting shall, to the extent possible, be distributed by the host government before the 
Meeting in the original language and, wherever feasible, translated. If the documents 
cannot be translated and distributed before the Meeting, the translation shall be made 
available during the Meeting.

43. Where a revised version of a document which is drawn up after its initial submission is 
submitted to a host government for translation, the revised text must clearly indicate the 
changes which have been made therein.

44. Where working or information documents are produced during the Consultative 
Meeting itself, the former shall be translated and distributed to the Meeting while the latter 
shall only be distributed.

45. Consultative Parties may request the translation of any information document before 
or after the Meeting.

46. No working or information document submitted to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting may be used as the basis for debate if it has not been translated into the four 
official languages.

Circulation of documents after Meetings

47. The host government must, within three months following the end of the Consultative 
Meeting which it has hosted or, if this is not possible, as soon as possible, forward the 
following through diplomatic channels:

    - the final report of the Meeting in the official languages
    - a full list of the working and information documents officially distributed at the 
      Meeting.

48. The host government must supply, on request, to any Party to the Antarctic Treaty, 
copies of the documents referred to in the above article.

Articles 38 to 45 must be renumbered accordingly.

2
