ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
FURTHER INITIATIVES IN IMPLEMENTATION
METHODOLOGY


Agenda item 6b                  Submitted by New Zealand/South Africa

XXI ATCM/WP13
April, 1997
Original: English
                                                  
13
04/04  '97 FRI 15:30 FAX +64 3 3580211         ANTARCTICA NEW ZEALAND     →→→ APU MFAT         002
 +64 3 3580211

Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
Further Initiatives in Implementation Methodology

New Zealand/South Africa
(Agenda Item 6(b))

1. Introduction

South Africa and New Zealand have completed Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluations (CEE) for major activities in Antarctica. South Africa for a new base,
SANAE IV, (XVIII ATCM/Info 54) and New Zealand for the Cape Roberts Drilling
Project (XVIII ATCM/Info 21, XX ATCM/WP 1). The CEEs were produced to
comply with the requirements for prior environmental impact assessment under the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Activities addressed in the CEEs have now commenced. The construction of the new
South African Base SANAE IV is nearing completion and the drilling phase of the Cape
Roberts Project is planned to commence in October 1997. Project managers have been
tasked with the implementation of CEE requirements aimed at minimising
environmental impacts. While the Protocol sets out in some detail what should be
included in a CEE and the procedures for circulation and amendment (Annex 1, Article
3), there is little guidance on appropriate methodology. In particular, guidance is
required on procedures for adequately dealing with changes in circumstances after the
completion of a final CEE, requirements for review of implementation and reporting.

New Zealand and South Africa have worked together to develop practical solutions to
these implementation issues. Both states reported to the XX ATCM on progress with
implementation, including reporting on changes made to the requirements set out in the
final CEE documents. The report process followed was set out in a joint paper from
South Africa and New Zealand tabled at the XIX ATCM (refer attached - XIX
ATCM/Info 63). Another important feature of both CEEs was the call for an
independent review of the implementation of environmental requirements.

2. Further Implementation Steps - the value of independent review

A CEE represents the highest level of environmental assessment of Antarctic activities
under the Protocol. To date these evaluations have covered large, generally multi-year,
activities. The completion of the CEE does not however end the process for effective
environmental impact assessment nor does it guarantee the integration of environmental
requirements into overall project management. Independent environmental review of
activities, that are the subject of a CEE, can be a useful method of assessing on going
compliance as well as promoting transparency and rigour.

South Africa and New Zealand have recognised the value of independent review as both
a tool for assessing compliance with CEE requirements and as a motivation for
continuing improvement in overall environmental performance.

The New Zealand Review of SANAE IV

The South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) invited the Environmental
Manager from Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand's Antarctic Institute) to visit the
new SANAE IV base at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, in January 1997. The
purpose of the visit was to carry out an independent review of operations at the site, to
report on compliance with the CEE and provide recommendations for improvements or
additions to environmental management practice where appropriate.
The visit occurred over six days while construction of the base was still under way.
Over 90 personnel were present at the site, accommodated in the construction base. An
extensive inspection of the area was carried out and numerous discussions held with on
site personnel including the Environmental Officer. A draft report on the visit was
made available to SANAP in February 1997 and included 35 recommendations relating
to suggestions for improvements to environmental practices. The final report is
expected to be made available publicly.

Review Plans for the Cape Roberts Project

The recommendation of the Cape Roberts Project Final CEE was that managers
consider inviting an independent observer to witness and report on activities associated
with this "high profile international project".

In December 1995, New Zealand's independent Environmental Assessment and
Review Panel visited Cape Roberts and carried out a brief inspection of the site as part
of its examination of New Zealand's Antarctic activities. The Panel's report was
submitted to the Minister of Foreign Affairs & Trade, who is responsible for New
Zealand's Protocol implementing legislation. Following commencement of drilling in-
October 1997, an independent observer will visit Cape Roberts, and the drill site, and
carry out a full environmental review of activities. The aim of the review will be to
assess compliance with CEE requirements and associated environmental procedures.

3. Conclusions

As managers of two projects covered by CEEs, South Africa and New Zealand have
recognised the value and importance of integrating independent environmental review
into the CEE process. An element of transparency has been introduced into the EIA
process at this highest level of assessment under the Protocol which should result in
improved environmental practice and a useful exchange of practical environmental
initiatives between the two countries.

Parties are encouraged to consider the value of including both the requirement for an
independent review of CEE implementation, and the process for CEE follow-up put
forward in XIX ATCM Information Paper 63, in their own procedures for Antarctic
environmental impact assessment. The follow-up process includes:

•   Review of the actual activity against the CEE;
•   Reporting on the CEEs implementation in the Exchange of Information;
•   Notification of any changes from the original CEE and how these are covered;
•   Reporting to the ATCM on the outcome of this process.

These initiatives demonstrate two possible steps forward in the development of practical
guidelines for environmental evaluation procedures under the Protocol. They could
also be usefully considered by the Committee for Environmental Protection, once it is
established.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)
Follow up Procedures

New Zealand/South Africa
(Information Paper No. 63, XIX ATCM)

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides guidance on the production of CEEs (Annex 1, Article 3). It is less clear on the course of action that should be taken when changes occur after the final CEE is produced, other than monitoring requirements (Annex 1, Articles 5 and 6).

New Zealand and South Africa each presented a final CEE to ATCM XVIII. We are now implementing the activities covered by these CEEs. In the implementation process changes have occurred to the way the activity was described in the CEE.

Two issues in particular have arisen:

1 How does the implementation match the procedure outlined in the CEE?
2 What action should be taken if there is a change in procedure from that outlined in the CEE?

The approach we are taking to these issues is:

1 Review of the actual activity against the CEE

2 Reporting on the CEE implementation in the Exchange of Information, eg - activities completed in the year, any changes from the CEE.

3 Any changes from the original CEE are being treated in the same way as the original activity for which the CEE was prepared was treated - ie:
   - if the effect is likely to be less than minor or transitory it will be dealt with according to the programme's preliminary environmental evaluation procedures.
   - if the effect is likely to be "minor or transitory" an IEE will be prepared.
   - another CEE would be required only if there was a major change in the activity compared to the CEE.
   - reporting on these evaluations as required under the Protocol

4 Report to ATCM XX on the outcome of this approach
04/04  '97 FRI 15:31 FAX +64 3 3580211        ANTARCTICA NEW ZEALAND   →→→ APU MFAT           003
 +64 3 3580211

Draft Resolution
(New Zealand/South Africa)

Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE):
Implementation Methodology

The Representatives,

Recalling Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that further guidance is required on appropriate methodology for implementation and follow-up of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations prepared under Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recommend that:

1. Consultative Parties are encouraged to include the requirement for an independent review of CEE implementation into their own procedures for Antarctic environmental impact assessment under the Protocol.

2. Consultative Parties are encouraged to adopt the following process for CEE follow-up:

    (a) Review of the actual activity against the CEE;

    (b) Reporting on the CEE implementation in the Exchange of Information;

    (c) Notification of any changes from the original CEE and how these are covered; 
        i.e., any changes to be treated in the same way as the original activity (for 
        which the CEE was prepared) was treated;

    (d) Reporting to the ATCM on the outcome of this process.
