ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS (ATCMs): CORRECTED
VERSION


Agenda item 7                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/WP1
April, 1997
Original: English
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE 
MEETINGS (ATCMs): CORRECTED VERSION

Agenda Item 7
(New Zealand)

At ATCM XX, Australia submitted a paper (ATCM XX/INF 32) noting a number of 
errors in the Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings as set down 
in the current edition of the Antarctic Treaty Handbook. As a result New Zealand was 
asked, as Host of ATCM XXI, to circulate a corrected version of the Rules of Procedure 
- taking account of the inaccuracies noted in the Australian paper and the amendments 
agreed at both the Venice and Seoul ATCMs. (Paragraph 64 of the Final Report of 
ATCM XX refers). It was agreed that the Rules of Procedure would be appended to the 
Final Report of ATCM XXI.

2       In preparing a corrected version, the definitive 1987 version of the Rules of 
Procedure produced at ATCM XIV in Rio de Janeiro (AntXIV/Inf2) was used. 
Amendments to the Rules of Procedure were agreed at ATCM XVII to reflect the move 
to annual meetings and these have also been incorporated in the corrected version as per 
XVII ATCM/WP 24/Rev.2. These two documents have formed the basis for the 
corrected English language version.

3       An English language version of the updated Rules of Procedure is attached. The 
changes which have been made are as follows:

Rule 3    Inclusion of ‘host’ before ‘Government’ in the second sentence.

         Inclusion of ‘and observers’ in the final sentence.

Rule 24  Insertion of new Rule 24 as per Decision 1 (1995)

Rule 25  Inclusion of ‘and non-Consultative Parties’ in final sentence.

Rule 31  Insertion of Rule 31 as per the 1987 version of the Rules of Procedure 
         which had been omitted from the Handbook.

Rule 38  Inclusion of ‘in Antarctica’ after ‘scientific or technical interest’.

Parties are welcome to advise of any other corrections to these Rules which may be 
required.

4       Not all of these corrections were necessary in the French, Russian and Spanish 
versions of the Rules of Procedure. In preparing these versions, however, it was noted

0191571.01
2

that the quality of the translations had deteriorated over time with, in some cases, 
original errors compounded by further amendments. This was noted in particular with 
the Russian translation.

5      As a result, it was not felt appropriate to circulate these versions as "corrected". 
It might be useful for Parties to consider the value of having the French, Russian and 
Spanish versions updated through a retranslation. This would enable Parties to review 
the current versions and, where appropriate, recommend changes to reflect current usage 
or more appropriate language.

6      There is also the possibility that a a further amendment to the Rules of Procedure 
concerning pre-sessional document circulation will be proposed at ATCM XXI.

7      Parties may also consider it appropriate to assign this task to the 
interpretation/translation service providing these functions to ATCM XXI.

0191571.01
CORRECTED RULES OF PROCEDURE (1997)

1       Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty shall be 
known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. Contracting parties entitled to 
participate in those Meetings shall be referred to as "Consultative Parties"; other 
Contracting Parties which may have been invited to attend those Meetings shall be 
referred to as "non-Consultative Parties".

2       The Representatives of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living resources and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
are invited to attend those Meetings in accordance with Rule 30, shall be referred to as 
"observers".

Representation

3       Each Consultative Party shall be represented by a delegation 
composed of a Representative and such Alternate Representatives, Advisers and other 
persons as each state may deem necessary. Each non-Consultative Party which has been 
invited to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be represented by a delegation composed 
of a Representative and such other persons as it may deem necessary within such 
numerical limit as may from time to time be determined by the Host Government in 
consultation with the Consultative Parties. The Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
shall be represented by their Chairman and President respectively or other persons 
appointed to this end. The names of members of delegations and of the observers shall 
be communicated to the host government prior to the opening of the meeting.

4       The order of precedence of the delegations shall be in accordance with 
the alphabet in the language of the host government, all delegations of non-Consultative 
Parties following after those of Consultative Parties, and all delegations of observers 
following after non-Consultative Parties.

Officers

5       A representative of the host government shall be the Temporary 
Chairman of the Meeting and shall preside until the Meeting elects a Chairman.

6       At is inaugural session, a Chairman from one of the Consultative 
Parties shall be elected. The other representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as 
Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence. The Chairman normally shall 
preside at all plenary sessions. If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the Vice-
Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of precedence as established by Rule 4, 
shall preside during each session.

0139264.01
2

Secretariat

7        The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting on the proposal of the 
Chairman. The Secretary shall be responsible for providing secretarial services, and 
shall carry out such other tasks as the Meeting may require or direct.

Sessions

8        The opening plenary session shall be held in public, other sessions 
shall be held in private, unless the Meeting shall determine otherwise.

Committees and Working Groups

9        The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may establish such committees as 
it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions, defining their terms of 
reference.

10        The committees shall operate under the Rules of Procedure of the 
Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

11        Working groups may be established by the Meeting or its committees.

Conduct of Business

12        A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds of the representatives of 
Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting.

13        The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his office in accordance 
with customary practice. He shall see the observance of the rules of procedure and the 
maintenance of proper order. The Chairman, in the exercise of his functions, remains 
under the authority of the Meeting.

14        Subject to Rule 27, no representative may address the Meeting without 
having previously obtained the permission of the Chairman and the Chairman shall call 
upon speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to speak. The Chairman 
may call a speaker to order if his remarks are not relevant to the subject under 
discussion.

15        During the discussion of any matter, a representative of a Consultative 
Party may rise to a point of order and the point of order shall be decided immediately by 
the Chairman in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. A representative of a 
Consultative Party may appeal against the ruling of the Chairman. The appeal shall be 
put to a vote immediately, and the Chairman's ruling shall stand unless over-ruled by a 
majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties present and voting.  A

0139264.01
representative of a Consultative Party rising to a point of order shall not speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.

16        The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted to each speaker, and the number of the times he may speak on any subject. When the debate is thus limited and a representative has spoken his allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to order without delay.

17        During the discussion of any matter, a representative of a Consultative Party may move the adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. In addition to the proposer of the motion, representatives of two Consultative Parties may speak in favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this rule.

18        A representative of a Consultative Party may at any time move the closure of the debate in the item under discussion, whether or not any other representative has signified his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the closure of the debate shall be accorded only to representatives of two Consultative Parties opposing the closure, after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. If the Meeting is in favour of the closure, the Chairman shall declare the closure of the debate. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this rule. (This rule shall not apply to debate in committees).

19        During the discussion of any matter, a representative of a Consultative Party may move the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting. Such motions shall not be debated, but shall be put to the vote immediately. The Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker moving the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting.

20        Subject to Rule 15, the following motions shall have precedence in the following order over all other proposals or motions before the Meeting:

      a)    to suspend the Meeting
      b)    to adjourn the Meeting
      c)    to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion
      d)    for the closure of the debate on the item under discussion

21        Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the representatives of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each of whom shall have one vote.

Languages

22        English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages of the Meeting.

0139264.01
23         Any representative may speak in a language other than the official 
languages. However, in such cases he shall provide for interpretation into one of the 
official languages.

Measures, Decisions, and Resolutions and Final Report

24         Without prejudice to Rule 21, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions, 
as referred to in Decision 1 (1995), shall be adopted by the Representatives of all 
Consultative Parties present and will thereafter be subject to the provisions of Decision 
1 (1995).

25         The final report shall also contain a brief account of the proceedings of 
the Meeting. It will be approved by a majority of the representatives of Consultative 
Parties present and shall be transmitted by the Secretary of the Meeting to governments 
of all Consultative and non-Consultative Parties which have been invited to take part in 
the Meeting, for their consideration.

Non-Consultative Parties

26         Representatives of non-Consultative Parties, if invited to attend a 
Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

a)    all plenary sessions of the Meeting, and;
b)    all formal Committees or Working Groups, comprising all 
Consultative Parties, unless a representative of a CP requests 
otherwise in any particular case.

27         The relevant Chairman may invite a representative of a non-
Consultative Party to address the Meeting, Committee or Working group which he is 
attending, unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise. The 
Chairman shall at any time give priority to representatives of Consultative Parties who 
signify their desire to speak and may in inviting representatives of non-Consultative 
Parties to address the Meeting limit the time to be allotted to each speaker and the 
number of times he may speak on any subject.

28         Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to participate in the taking of 
decisions.

29         a)    Non-Consultative  Parties  may  submit  documents  to  the 
Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents. Such documents 
shall be relevant to matters under consideration at the Meeting.

0139264.01
5

b) Unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise 
such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which they were 
submitted.

Antarctic Treaty System Observers

30         The observers referred to in Rule 2 shall attend the Meetings for the 
           specific purpose of reporting on:

           a)  in the case of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
               Marine Living Resources, developments in its area of competence.

           b)  in the case of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research:

               i)   the general proceedings of SCAR;
              ii)   matters within the competence of SCAR under the Convention 
                    for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals;
             iii)   such publications and reports as may have been published or 
                    prepared in accordance with Recommendations IV-19 and VI-9 
                    respectively.

31         Representatives of the observers may be present at:

           a)  the plenary sessions of the Meeting at which the respective 
               Report is considered;

           b)  formal committees or working groups, comprising all Contracting 
               Parties at which the respective Report is considered, unless a 
               Chairman may allot a time limit for such interventions.

32         Following the presentation of the pertinent Report, the relevant 
Chairman may invite the observer to address the Meeting at which it is being considered 
once again unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests otherwise. The 
Chairman may allot a time limit for such interventions.

33         Observers are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

34         Observers may submit their Report and/or documents relevant to 
matters contained therein to the Secretariat, for distribution to the Meeting as working 
papers.

0139264.01
6

Agenda for Consultative Meetings

35      At the end of each Consultative Meeting the host Government of that 
Meeting shall prepare a preliminary agenda for the next Consultative Meeting. If 
approved by the Meeting, the preliminary agenda for the next Meeting shall be annexed 
to the final report of the Meeting.

36      Any Contracting party may propose supplementary items for the 
preliminary agenda by informing the host Government for the forthcoming Consultative 
Meeting no later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting, each proposal shall 
be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum. The host Government shall draw the 
attention of all Contracting Parties to this Rule no later than 210 days before the 
Meeting.

37      The host Government shall prepare a provisional agenda for the 
Consultative Meeting. The provisional agenda shall contain:

a) all items on the preliminary agenda decided in accordance with 
Rule 35; and

b) all items the inclusion of which has been requested by a 
Contracting Party pursuant to Rule 36.

Not later than 120 days before the Meeting, the host Government shall transmit to all 
the Contracting Parties the provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda 
and any other papers related thereto.

Experts from International Organisations

38      At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide 
which international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica 
shall be invited to designate an expert to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to 
assist it in its substantive work.

39      Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an invitation be 
extended to other international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in 
Antarctica to assist the Meeting in its substantive work; each such proposal shall be 
submitted to the host Government for that Meeting not later than 180 days before the 
beginning of the Meeting and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the 
basis for the proposal.

40      The host Government shall transmit these proposals to all Contracting 
parties in accordance with the procedure in Rule 37. Any Consultative Party which 
wishes to object to a proposal shall do so not less than 90 days before the Meeting.

0139264.01
7

41       Unless such an objection has been received, the host Government shall 
extend invitations to international organisations identified in accordance with Rules 38 
and 39 and shall request each international organisation to communicate the name of the 
designated expert to the host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting. All such 
experts may attend the Meeting during consideration of all items, except for those items 
relating to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System which are identified by the 
previous Meeting or upon adoption of the agenda.

42       The relevant Chairman, with the agreement of all the Consultative 
Parties, may invite an expert to address the meeting he is attending. The Chairman shall 
at any time give priority to representatives of Consultative Parties or non-Consultative 
Parties or observers referred to in Rule 30 who signify their desire to speak, and may in 
inviting an expert to address the Meeting limit the time to be allotted to him and the 
number of times he may speak on any subject.

43       Experts are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

44       a) Experts may, in respect of the relevant agenda item, submit 
documents to the Secretariat for distribution to the Meeting as information documents.

      b) Unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests 
otherwise, such documents shall be available only in the language or languages in which 
they were submitted.

Amendments

45       These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a two-thirds majority of 
the representatives of Consultative parties participating in the Meeting. This Rule shall 
not apply to rules 24, 26, 28, 33, 38-41, and 43, amendments of which shall require the 
approval of the representatives of all Consultative Parties present at the Meeting.

0139264.01
