ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


INSPECTIONS OF SHIPS BY PORT STATES (AGENDA
ITEM ACCORDING TO THE FINAL REPORT (96) OF THE
XXTH ATCM)

Agenda item 6e                  Submitted by Germany

XXI ATCM/WP16
April, 1997
Original: English
ANTARKTIC TREATY
XXI Consultative Meeting

Working Paper

INSPECTIONS OF SHIPS BY PORT STATES

(Agenda Item according to the Final Report (96) of the XXth ATCM)

(Submitted by Germany)
The question of controlling ships in gateway ports to the Antarctic was discussed at the 
XIXth ATCM in Seoul and the XXth ATCM in Utrecht. The Netherlands submitted a working 
paper (XXth ATCM/WP 9). Due to the numerous questions still to be resolved it was decided 
to continue the discussion at the XXIst ATCM in Christchurch.

Germany submits the following view for consideration:

I.  Port state controls, which complement but are secondary to the ship inspections and con-
trols carried out by the flag State, are an important instrument for ensuring that a ship 
meets the technical or other requirements contained in international conventions. The 
requirements regarding port state controls are laid down in the relevant international mari-
time conventions, in particular
    * the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS 74/78), Chapter I 
      Regulation 19;
    * the International Convention on Load Lines of 1966, Art. 21;
    * the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
      (MARPOL 73/78), Art. 5 (2);
    * the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeep-
      ing for Seafarers, Art. X.

The following control system is laid down by these conventions:

1. The flag State, as the state principally responsible for meeting the convention 
requirements, inspects the ship and issues it with a certificate drawn up in accordance 
with the standard international specimen certifying the orderly condition of the ship.

2. The certificate issued by one Party is recognized by all other Parties.

3. In a port state a ship is subject to controls carried out by the authorities of the port 
state. These controls mainly concern the certificates (in particular the validity, obser-
vance of inspection intervals). Only if there are still so-called "clear grounds" for 
believing that the ship has deficiencies can the ship be inspected in more detail and 
detained by the port state, if necessary until the serious deficiencies have been recti-
fied.
- 2 -

The control procedures are standardized internationally by the recommendations of the IMO (Resolution A.787 (19) of 23 November 1995) and regionally by various agreements concerning regional cooperation on port state controls. For Europe these are the so-called Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control of 1982, as well as Directive 95/21/EC of 19 June 1995. Further regional port state agreements are the Acuerdo de Viña del Mar of 1992 (Latin America), the Tokyo Memorandum of Understanding of 1993 (Asia-Pacific states) and the Caribbean Memorandum of Understanding of 1996 (Caribbean).

II. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annex IV are not suited to being made the subject of port state controls such as those described above.

     States Parties shall ensure that all ships entitled to fly their flag and any other ship engaged in or supporting their Antarctic operations fulfil the technical requirements for ships (Art. 9 and 10), as well as the special regulations on conduct (Art. 3 to 6). There is no internationally uniform and recognized certificate on the fulfilment of technical requirements. Nor is there a uniform international document certifying the fulfilment of conduct obligations (such as, for example, the MARPOL Oil Record Book in accordance with Annex I, Appendix III of MARPOL). The use of garbage and sewage record books is merely an option which the flag States may prescribe after considering their usefulness (Annex IV Art. 5 (6), Art. 6 (2)). The crucial factor is that the Protocol on Environmental Protection does not contain regulations on port state controls as does, for example, Art. 5 (2) of MARPOL.

     Therefore it must be concluded that the States Parties were content with control by the flag States and the states engaged in operations in the Antarctic. Supplementary agreements (for example resolutions by the States Parties on the standardized implementation of these controls) are certainly possible in this connection. However, port state controls must be ruled out due to the absence of a legal basis.

III. Nevertheless, it must be kept in mind that the MARPOL Convention is fully subject to port state controls. As MARPOL lists the Antarctic area as a special area in Annexes I, II and IV, port state controls (e.g. by way of inspections of the Oil Record Book or the Cargo Record Book) may be used to ascertain whether the special requirements laid down by MARPOL regarding navigation of the Antarctic area are being observed. Such controls
- 3 -

can only be carried out by port states which are States Parties to the MARPOL Convention and its Annexes. This is currently not the case for all States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

Furthermore, it must be pointed out that the International Safety Management (ISM) Code laid down in the new Chapter IX of the SOLAS Convention will enter into force internationally
- on 1 July 1998 for passenger ships, tankers and bulk carriers, and
- on 1 July 2002 for all other cargo ships and mobile offshore units
(SOLAS amendments adopted on 24 May 1994).

Within the framework of the ISM Code the shipping company must develop a system of safety management measures which must be certified by the flag State, both with regard to the company (Document of Compliance) and with regard to the individual ship (Safety Management Certificate). Where a ship is deployed in the Antarctic the safety system must of course guarantee that all relevant legal provisions, i.e. including the special provisions contained in the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annex IV, are observed.

In accordance with Regulation 4 of Chapter XI and Regulation 19 of Chapter I of SOLAS control of the ISM Code is subject to port state controls. This could provide a basis for special controls. There are still no implementation provisions or guidelines for the port state controls under the ISM Code (such as, for example, IMO Resolution A 787 (19) of 29 November 1995), but they are currently being drawn up in the competent international bodies.

IV. To sum up, Germany takes the view that special port state controls cannot be agreed to within the context of the regulations of Annex IV on the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The valid flag State controls should be applied. The possibilities for port state controls offered by the MARPOL and SOLAS Conventions (Chapter IX) should be exhausted.
