TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
SIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                SEXTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                            ШЕСТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
SIXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TOKYO                                                       TOKYO

Item 8                                                      ANT/20*
                                                            21 October 1970
                                                            Original : Spanish

Rules of Conduct for Tourists on board the "Rio Tunuyan"
(To be observed during their visit to Argentine stations in the
Antarctic)

The Argentine Republic is one of the first signatory members
of the Antarctic Treaty whose provisions apply to the area south of
60° South Latitude. This Treaty assures freedom of scientific research
in that area, on which subject preceding consultative meetings have
adopted certain provisions with relation, in particular, to the
protection of fauna and flora, in order to facilitate the task of
scientific researchers working in the area.

The special conditions under which scientific personnel must
endeavor to complete their tasks and the exiguity of their abodes,
has caused the Argentine Republic to apply from this season the
following rules of conduct. It is particularly necessary to take into
consideration the fact that the arrival of tourists is an event which

* This document was first presented under the indication ANT/MISC.3
which has been replaced by the indication ANT/20
- 2 -

not only interrupts the normal work schedule but also causes anxiety
not only for the personnel of the station or base in question, but
also for the people responsible for the organisation of the voyage.

It is in consideration of the above that the present rules of
conduct have been established to help tourists better understand
the region while, at the same time, serving as a necessary instrument
in the application of legal Argentine provisions.

Tourists must therefore respect, in particular, the following
rules:

1.  They may only visit such sites as have been designated by the
responsible parties.  The existance of crevasses and their consequent
danger fully justifies these precautions.

2.  Provisions regulating the protection of flora and fauna in the
Antarctic prohibit disturbing, destroying or damaging in any way
whatsoever both animals and plants. It therefore follows that it is
forbidden to remove any specimen whatsoever, either animal or plant,
including eggs.

3.  Tourists must avoid approaching, and consequently disturbing,
bird or seal congregations, either on foot or by car.

4.  It is strictly forbidden to bring into these areas arms or
explosives of any kind whatsoever, including so-called "sporting arms."

5.  It is strictly forbidden to bring in any plant whatsoever, or
animal species, including domestic animals.  The objective of these
prohibitions being to protect the ambient environment from any
contamination that could perturb the flora or fauna of the area.
- 3 -

6. It is also forbidden to throw away anything whatsoever on the
ice, or sea. This prohibition is motivated by the same reason as
in paragraph (5) above.

7. The organiser or person responsible for the tourist voyage is
alone authorised to conduct tourists in the area; he will also be
held responsible should tourists approach any facilities whatsoever
in the area.

8. Only a base or station chief can authorise visits to a facility,
in which case tourists must respect all orders concerning access to
the authorised site and what they may or may not do therein.

9. Under no circumstances may tourists enter bases, stations, shelters,
construction sites, etc. which have been abandoned. They are
authorised to use such facilities only in cases of extreme emergency
when their lives may be in danger or when suffering from physical
disability, on condition that the sites used are left in exactly
the same state as they were found.

10. It is strictly forbidden to damage or deface with graffiti or
any other marks, no matter what their signification, the normal
state of any facility whether it be abandoned or not, as well as
historical sites which preserve the memory of human effort and
sacrifice in the search for better understanding of the Antarctic.

The above rules of conduct in no way restrict the rights of
tourists and are intended solely to facilitate co-existence in an area
where scientific research is of particular importance. The harsh
- 4 -

living conditions in the Antarctic require that measures be taken to 
protect the fauna and flora, in as much as exterior factors combine 
to impede their development and propagation.

Buenos Aires
Summer Season, 1970-71
