TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                TRATADO ANTARTICO
SIXIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         SEXTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                        ШЕСТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
SIXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
Item 19                                  TOKYO
                                         ANT/29
                                         29 October 1970
                                         Original : English

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF THE SIXTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1.  In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty, representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentine, Australia,
Belgium, Chile, The French Republic, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, The
Republic of South Africa, The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, The
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and The United States
of America) met in Tokyo on 19 October 1970 for the purpose of discussing
and recommending to their Governments measures in furtherance of the
principles and purposes of the Treaty.

2.  His Excellency Ambassador Akira Matsui, Representative of Japan,
was appointed by the Japanese Government to act as Temporary Chairman
of the Meeting pending election of a Chairman.

3.  The Meeting was formally opened by His Excellency Mr. Michita Sakata,
Minister of Eduction of Japan.

4.  Ambassador Matsui was then elected Chairman of the Meeting and
Ambassador Hiroshi Yokota of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs was
appointed as Secretary-Generai.

5.  Opening statements were made by the Leaders of all the Delegations.
- 2 -

6. The Meeting then adopted the following Agenda:

(1) Opening of the Meeting

(2) Election of Officers

(3) Opening Statements

(4) Adoption of Agenda

(5) Examination of a Draft Convention for the Regulation of
Antarctic Pelagic Sealing

(6) Antarctic Meteorology, with particular reference to WMO Document
No. 17.823/T/AA/TP (July 23, 1969) including, inter alia, its
Appendix B

(7) Telecommunications

(8) Review of Progress in Implementing the "Agreed Measures for
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora"

(9) Historic Monuments

(10) The Effects of Man and his Activities upon the Antarctic
Environment

(11) Experiments using Radio-Isotopes

(12) The Effects of Antarctic Tourism on the Scientific Programmes
and on the Environment of the Antarctic Treaty Area

(i) Exchange of Information

(ii) Effects on the Scientific Activities of the Contracting
Parties

(iii) Effects on the Antarctic Environment

(13) Review of the Purposes of "Specially Protect?d Areas"

(14) Proposed New "Speically Protected Areas" (Chilean MFA Note 468
of April 20, 1970)
- 3 -

(15) Advance Notification of the Launching of Scientific Research 
Rockets in the Antarctic Treaty Area

(16) Exchange of Information on Ocean Research Vessels

(17) Any Other Business

(18) Date and Place of the Next Consultative Meeting

(19) Adoption of the Final Report of the Meeting

7. The Meeting considered all the items on the Agenda in Plenary Session,
appointing two Working Groups to assist it in reaching conclusions particu-
larly with respect to Items 6, 7 and 9 of the Agenda. These Working Groups
in each case comprised Representatives of all Delegations wishing to 
participate. The Working Group on Items 6 and 7 was chaired by Lt. Commander
Jorge F. Busico of Argentina, while that on Item 9 was presided by
Professor Takesi Nagata, Representative of Japan.

8. The Opening and Closing Plenary Sessions were held in public but
all other Sessions were held in private.

9. The Meeting agreed unanimously to the adoption of the Recommendations,
which are set forth at the end of the present Final Report.

10. As regards Item 5 on the Agenda, the Meeting decided unanimously
to consider it outside the framework of the Antarctic Treaty. Sub-
sequently, an informal meeting, separate from the present Consultative
Meeting, was established by Representatives of interested Governments
to consider the problems under Item 5. Professor Alfred van der Essen
of Belgium was elected Chairman of this informal meeting, which met
several times concurrently with the Consultative Meeting for an unoffiicial
exchange of views on a draft Convention for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals. As a result of the exchange of views, a new draft 
Convention was drawn up. A consensus was reached at the meeting that 
the Representatives would transmit the draft Convention to their 
governments for consideration as a working paper.

11. The Meeting considered that on the occasion of the exchanges of 
information under the provisions of Article XII of the Agreed Measures 
on the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora or under any amendment 
to that Article by a subsequent Recommendation, it would be desirable 
that Consultative Parties which have no information to report should 
indicate this formally.

12. The Meeting also considered that in the annual exchange of 
information under paragraph 5 of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, 
Recommendation I-VII or any other Recommendations approved by the 
Consultative Meetings, references to areas situated outside the Treaty 
area do not affect any rights or claims which Consultative Parties 
may have in such areas.

13. In commemoration of the Sixth Consultative Meeting, the Meeting 
adopted on 31 October 1970 a message to be sent to the stations in 
the Antarctic of all the Consultative Parties. The Meeting also adopted 
on 22 October 1970 another message to the SYOWA Station which had sent 
a congratulatory message to the Sixth Consultative Meeting. These 
messages adopted by the Meeting are attached hereto as Annexes I and II 
respectively.

14. The Final Report of the Sixth Consultative Meeting was unanimously 
adopted on 31 October 1970.

15. Closing statements were made on 31 October 1970 by or on behalf 
of the Heads of all the Delegations. The Chairman then declared that 
the Meeting was closed.
