TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
SIXIÈME  RÉUNION  CONSULTATIVE          SEXTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                          ШЕСТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
SIXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

TOKYO

Symbol : ANT/6
Date : 19 Oct. 1970
Original : English

Draft Recommendation submitted by the United States

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION:
OCEAN RESEARCH VESSELS

Research vessels frequently enter the Antarctic Treaty area for the purpose of conducting scientific research which contributes to the better understanding of the Antarctic and its adjacent oceans south of 600 South Latitude. Information concerning these cruises is not routinely exchanged among the Treaty nations. There appears to be a lack of clarity in the existing provisions of Recommendation I-6, and some interpretations restrict such exchange of information to those vessels which may carry out research activities only as an adjunct to their primary support function of activities on the Continent.

Oceanographic research is a very important aspect of the scientific exploration of Antarctica, and those marine research programs of national and international organizations--for example, the "Cooperative Investigation of the Southern Oceans" conducted by UNESCO's Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission--which cross over 600 South Latitude should be coordinated and correlated with the other programs conducted under the aegis of the Antarctic Treaty activities.

At
. 2 -

At the moment there is no uniform exchange of 
information of such activities, and this agenda item
will afford an opportunity to discuss this matter,
considering specifically that the following information
be exchanged:

a. Name and research capabilities of the vessel.

b. The scientific programs being pursued on all
cruises south of 60oS.

c. The names of the officers in charge of such
vessels.

d. The names and professional affiliations of
personnel engaged in scientific activities.

e. The intended tracks and schedules of these
vessels; and the communications information
required to make contact with these vessels.

Although such information has been exchanged in
some cases within the framework of Article VII (5), it
has been exchanged on a voluntary basis.  The U.S.
Government believes that such important information
should be exchanged on a compulsory basis for all States.


Embassy of the United States,
Tokyo
August 13, 1970

(Source:  PM/3/No.43)
