TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
SIXIÈME    RÉUNION   CONSULTATIVE                       SEXTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                            ШЕСТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
SIXTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TOKYO

ANT/16
19 October 1970

Original : English

United Kingdom Conditions for visits of tourists to British
Antarctic Survey stations at Argentine Islands, Deception Island and
Hope Bay, 1968-69.

(These conditions have been extracted from a letter dated
12 November 1968 from the British Embassy in Washington to
Mr. Lars-Eric Lindblad of Lindblad Travel Inc. New York)

"The British Government gives you permission to organize visits by
groups of tourists to British stations in the Antarctic as indicated in the
itinerary contained in your letter under reference, subject to the following
conditions.

Whilst the British Antarctic Survey is prepared to accept
visits to their stations it is however, naturally apprehensive about the
presence of large numbers of tourists at these stations, which are
small and devoted to scientific operations  which must not be interrupted.

It would assist the Survey in making sure your tourists get an adequate
view of the station's operations if the following conditions can be
met:-

(i) The British Antarotic Survey lays particular importance on
    the condition that Station Commanders should be informed by the
- 2 -

Captain of the Childean Naval vessel "Aquiles" (or by 
the tour organiser) by radio at least two days before her arrival 
and should inform the Station Commander of the number of 
tourists who wish to visit the station. The Call Signs are:

Deception Island ZHF 22, and Argentine Islands ZHF 44. First 
call to both stations should be at 0100 G.M.T. on 4067 Kc/s; the 
subsequent schedules to be arranged during this contact. The 
Survey has noted that prior contact with their station at the 
Argentine Islands was not made by last season's cruise aboard 
the "Navarino".

(ii) The tour organiser and the tourists should follow the 
instructions of the Station Commanders in respect of access 
to quarters and interference with the scientific work, the use 
of station equipment and materials and, in the interests of 
safety, the movement of visitors in the neighbourhood of the 
stations.

(iii) The tour organisers should agree to restrict the number 
of tourists who visit the station at any one time in consultation 
with the Station Commander. It will probably not be practicable 
to show round more than about twelve people at a time.

(iv) The tour organisers, in the spirit of paragraph 3 of 
Recommandation IV-27 of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, should undertake to comply with these conditions and 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, particularly in 
connexion with the "Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora".
- 3 -

(v) The tour organisers should ensure that tourists do not enter 
the Specially Protected Areas listed in Recommendations 
IV-1 to IV-15 of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.

(vi) Ships visiting the Argentine Islands station should not enter 
Meek Channel, where they would pass close to the magnetic 
observatory on the north shore of Galindez Island and cause 
disturbance to the instruments.  The approach should be 
made from the west, or the ship should lie in Penola Strait while 
parties are sent ashore by motor boat through Meek Channel.

(vii) In the event that the cruise ship "Aquiles" visits Hope 
Bay, the tour organisers should ensure that the buildings of 
the British Station, which were closed down in 1964 and which 
are now maintained as refuges in case of emergency, are 
not entered by tourists.
