Item 8

ANT/ITS/3
21 October 1970.

Original : Spanish

RULES OF BEHAVIOR WHICH ALL TOURISTS ON BOARD
THE "RIO TUNUYAN" SHOULD OBSERVE WHILE VISITING THE ARGENTINE
STATIONS IN ANTARCTICA

The Republic of Argentina is one of the original signatory nations to the
(terms of the) Antarctic Treaty which are infource south of 60o latitude.
The legal instruments (of the Treaty) establish freedom of scientific
investigation in this region, in which connection previous Consultative
Meetings have adopted various rules concerning particulars of
conservation of the Antarctic's flora and fauna, and, further, to
facilitate the work of scientists in the region.

The special conditions under which these scientists carry on
their work, and the limited space in which they live, have caused
the Republic of Argentina to reach a decision to apply, this
season, the rules of conduct which will appear hereafter. It should
be noted especially that the tourists' arrival, besides being an event
which will interrupt the scientists' working routine, is also cause
for concern for personel residing at the particular base or station
which will be visited, as well as for those persons responsible for
the tour.
- 2 -

Such considerations make the present rules of behavior 
necessary in order to facilitate the purposes of the tourists, 
and in order to carry out the legal responsibilities of Argentina. 
Therefore, the tourists especially should take into account the 
following points:

1: They should travel only to those places designated by the 
responsible authorities. The presence of cracks in the ice and 
the danger of falling into these make this precaution advisable in 
any cirmstances.

2:.The rules of conservation of flora and fauna in the Antarctic 
prohibit disturbing, destroying, or causing any damage, to any of 
the animals or plants. It is also prohibited to collect any kind of 
specimens of plant or animal life, including eggs.

3: The tourists should not approach, whether on foot or in vehicles, 
the colonies of birds or seals, nor should they otherwise disturb 
these animals.

4: It is strictly prohibited to introduce into the area any sort 
of weapons or explosives, including so-called sporting weapons.

5: It is strictly prohibited to introduce any kind of plants or 
animals, including domestic ones, the purpose of this prohibition 
being to avoid envirornmental contamination which would disturb the 
flora and fauna of the region.
- 3 -

6: It is prohibited, further, to discard on the ground, on the ice,
or in the sea, any kind of garbage. The reasons for this are the same
as those pointed out in No. 5.

7: The organizer of the trip, or those persons responsible for the
expedition, will be the only ones who may authorize the tourists'
movements in the area; they will also be responsible for the
tourists approaching any of the bases or equipment in the area.

8: The chief of a base or station will be the only person who may
authorize the tourist visiting such places, and will indicate such
areas that the tourists may enter as well as what activity
may be allowed therein.

9: Without exception, the tourists may not enter bases, laboratories,
refuges, construction sites, and so forth, which are uninhabited,
The tourists may make use of such installations only in cases of
sudden emergency involving danger to their lives, and should take
care to leave the installation in the same condition as it was before
their entry.

10: It is strictly prohibited to damage, or deface by any kind
of writing (or marks) whatsoever, the normal condition of any structure
of any installation, even if that installation be abandoned, as well
as brass plaques located on or in historical monuments and
perpetuate the memory of great events and specific on behalf of our
better knowledge of the Antarctic.
- 4 -

The present directions indicating forms of behavior do not
aim to restrict the tourists' enjoyment.  The rules are made
to promote harmony in a region where scientific investigation
has outstanding significance.

The severe climatic conditions encountered by life forms
in the Antarctic make it necessary to protect fauna and the
rudimentary flora of the region, most significantly because
external factors work against its development as well as its
propagation.
Buenos Aires, Summer Season, 1970-71
