TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                             XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                ДOГOBOP OБ AHTAPKТИКE
                                                             XIV KOHCУЛЬТАТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE

                                                             RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                             1987

ATCM/XIV/INF/41
AUSTRALIA

AGENDA ITEM 9

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

COMMONWEALTH ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
LEGISLATION AND DECISION/ACTION GUIDELINES
FOR AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS

(SUBMITTED BY THE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION)

This paper may be made publicly
available at the end of ACTM  XIV
- 1 -

This paper outlines the legislative requirements for
Environmental impact assessment at the Commonwealth  level
in Australia. Part one of the paper outlines the operation
of the relevant Act.  Part two, describes the decision/
action guidelines adopted by the Australian Antarctic
Division to implement the objectives of that Act.

The purpose of the environmental impact assessment legis-
lation and the decision/action guidelines is to  ensure
that in making decisions about activities to be undertaken
in Antarctica, and in carrying  out those activities ,
adequate consideration is given to the  environmental
consequences. The check list provides  a structured
approach  and an indication  of the most significant
factors  to consider.

The assessment guidelines are applied to all proposals for
activities in Antarctica at the decision making  Stage.
The following description of the Australian environmental
impact assessment legislation and the decision/action
guidelines might be of assistance to delegations  in
consideration of environmental impact assessment  under
Agenda Item 9 : Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment.

Commonwealth Environmental Impact Assessment Legislation

The Commonwealth Government's Environment Protection (Impact
of Proposals) Act was enacted in 1974. The Act seeks to
ensure that environmental  matters are examined and taken
into account in the Commonwealth's decision making process.
The Act only applies to proposals in which there is  some
involvement by the Commonwealth Government. Generally these
fall into one or more of the following categories:

. activities and projects carried out by Commonwealth
departments and authorities  as well as developments on
Commonwealth land;
- 2 -

. Grants to State Governments for programs such as road 
building .

. proposals which require Commonwealth approval to export 
primary products, and

. proposals involving foreign investments, particularly 
in mining and manufacturing, real state development and 
tourist developments;

Not all proposals are subject to assessment as the Act is 
not concerned with proposals which are not environmentally 
important. When applied, the level of assessment varies with 
the environmental importance of the proposal.

The Act provides for four levels of environmental 
assessment :

(1) initial evaluation of the proposal

(2) preparation of a Public Environment Report (PER)

(3) preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement(EIS)

(4) Examination by a Commission of Inquiry

The initial evaluation of the proposal involves the proponent 
of the proposal to lodge a "notice of intentions", which provides 
information on the proposal sufficient to enable decision 
on whether  or not a  PER, EIS or in cases of contentious 
projects, a public enquiry is required. A PER is usually 
required where it is considered that the public should be 
made  aware of the environmental impacts of a proposal 
and of the measures which will be taken to protect the 
environment, but where the impacts are expected to be 
few  or  focused  on a small number of specific 
issues. Conversely an  EIS  is required by the Act when 
a proposal is likely to have important environmental 
effects. The EIS describes the proposal and the existing 
environment, examining the likely effects of the proposal
- 3 -

on the environment, alternatives to and within the proposal 
and their effects. An EIS will also describe proposed safe-
guards and environmental monitoring arrangements.

Both PER and EIS under Commonwealth legislation are subject 
to a period of public review and comment.  Following review,
an EIS is redrafted to take into account the views expressed
during the review process.  PERs are not subject to a re-
drafting process.  The final EIS is then submitted to the 
Commonwealth Department administering the legislation 
(currently the Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment,
Tourism and Territories).  The EIS is evaluated and 
recommendations are made to the Commonwealth department

Apart from the provisions of the Act, Administrative 
Procedures, have been developed to detail the arrangement 
for administering the Act. The Procedures include details 
on the types of Commonwealth activities to which the Act 
applies, the contents of a PER or EIS, the arrangements for 
public involvement in the assessment process and the 
provisions for recommending environmental conditions that 
may be  applied to approvals.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS

DECISION/ACTION GUIDELINES


Antarctic Division
Department of Science and Technology
September 1984
DIRECTOR'S INTRODUCTION

Australia is, in a very real sense, the custodian of the Australian
Antarctic Territory and the Territory of Heard Island and the McDonald
Islands. The limited activities that have occurred in these Territories
have not substantially changed their nature. Unlike any other region on
earth we have in the Antarctic very extensive areas in a near pristine
state.

The environments of these Territories, and their dependent ecosystems,
have a multitude of values, each of which has the potential to be
realised for the benefit of humankind through some appropriate use,
providing we have not thoughtlessly destroyed that potential by
ill-considered actions. Almost any activity that we undertake in the
Antarctic can affect values that might otherwise have provided future
benefit. Actions as apparently insignificant as discarding a spent
battery can render a locality unsuitable for some scientific work.
Bulldozing a four-wheel-drive track across a valley floor can destroy the
wilderness character of a whole region, to say nothing of the effects on
water quality, vegetation and soil organisms from dust and run-off.

In all of our decisions and actions we should recognise that the
environment and ecosystems of the Antarctic region are very special.
They also have intrinsic values which can be safeguarded only if they are
allowed to continue in their pristine and unaltered state. From this
point of view our philosopy in the Antarctic can only be one of aiming
for zero impact - no destruction of environmental values, no interference
with natural processes, and no trace remaining of our passing.

This is not to say that we ought not to conduct any activities in
Antarctica. In order to be good custodians of the Territories we need to
study and administer them. But we do need to recognise that there are
two levels of decision-making. There is the overall decision to maintain
a presence and conduct science in Antarctica. This decision encompasses
other decisions to have Antarctic stations and their associated
activities and infrastructure, and as a result there are certain types of
activities that we must do in Antarctica. In regard to those, we are
obliged to ensure that the effects of our presence are the minimum
possible.

On another level there are particular actions that we might do to meet
our objectives, but having considered the extent of the environmental
consequences, we might equally decide not to do, or we might decide to
modify our proposal, or find a totally different and less impacting way
of achieving our objectives.

These guidelines are intended as an aid in the management of the AAT, but
it needs to be remembered that they are general in their approach and
cannot cover every aspect of every action. They are a starting point
from which to exercise initiative in forseeing the effects of particular
decisions and actions. I expect them to be consulted whenever there is a
proposal to undertake an activity in Antarctica.

J E Bleasel
Acting Director Antarctic Division
4 September 1984
USE OF THE GUIDELINES

The checklist is intended not only as an aid to informed decision-making but also as a guide to the thorough preparation of proposals for action and the carrying out of actions in Australia's Antarctic Territories.

Each column deals with a particular decision or activity.  To assess proposals properly it is necessary to formulate a number of questions and then consult the checklist to find the factors that need to be considered in answering the questions.  Typically the most important questions that need to be asked are:

-   whether to (do the action)
    -   at all
    -   in the form proposed
    -   in the place proposed
    -   to the extent proposed

-   is there an alternative that is more suitable or has less environmental impact

-   how to (do the action)
    -   according to obligatory conditions
    -   according to useful guidelines
    -   in a manner that will result in minimal environmental impact.

These guidelines do not provide all of the answers.  They are a summary statement of the factors that need to be taken into account.
Consideration of the factors may involve only thoughtful reflection, or it may involve consultation with relevant experts or even investigation of some factors.  In many situations it will be necessary to document the factors involved, either to aid in decision-making or to record the conditions and guidelines attaching to an activity.  In the event of undertakings with significant environmental effects regard should be had to the requirements of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act.

The footnotes to the checklist contain explanatory notes on general or specific impacts.  Because of the condensed nature of the checklist presentation of much necessary information is contained in the notes. They should be consulted whenever the checklist is used.  It should also be noted that the impacts indicated by dots on the checklist are only those most likely to result in significant impacts in the general situation.  In most cases some argument can be made for checking all impact types, and therefore careful consideration needs to be given to all points in the initial stages.

The checklist also contains indications of the level at which approval is necessary for types of actions.  Because of the broad scope of activities dealt with under any one heading this can only be indicative.  It is important to ensure that activities having the potential to impact the environment have the necessary approval.
NOTES TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES MATRIX

1   Necessity

Consider whether the action is warranted:
    -   at all
    -   to the degree proposed
    -   given the environmental consequences.

Justification may take many forms, and the consideration of necessity is not meant to stifle initiative or good management.  Too often though, we have to say that "It seemed like a good idea at the time" or "The men needed something to maintain their enthusiasm - I didn't think it mattered".  In an area as untouched and sensitive as Antarctica we need to be careful to limit our impacts to those that are unavoidable.

2   Alternatives

Frequently there will be another way of accomplishing the same objective, but with fewer impacts - possibly a less permanent effect more suited to the sometimes temporary nature of the objective, or there might be another site where the impact is less significant.

3   Visual Impact

In an unspoilt region like Antarctica the visual impact of man-made structures can be extreme.  While this might not be particularly significant in the immediate vicinity of stations, regard needs to be had to visual impacts in all parts of Antarctica.  In a previously untouched area visual impacts can be highly significant and can detract from scenic, wilderness and other values.

The main components of visual impact to consider are naturalness, context, skyline and colour.  Obtrusive structures or features are generally to be avoided.  This is not to say that structures on which human survival depends should be so camouflaged that they are difficult to locate.

It should be remembered that features other than buildings can have unwanted and unnecessary visual impacts.  For example roads and tracks are visible from vantage points and aircraft.  They should not be constructed to a higher standard, or with greater impact, than is necessary to serve the purpose.  The construction of cuttings on the skyline should be avoided.

4   Dust

In the extreme dryness of Antarctica large quantities of dust are easily generated by earthworks and vehicle movements.  This is exacerbated by the presence of large quantities of very fine glacial rock "flour" in moraine material.

Whereas in other parts of the world dust from these activities is seldom more than a nuisance to humans and a temporary unsightly layer on foliage, in Antarctica the generation of dust can have serious adverse environmental consequences.
In particular, Antarctic plant communities (moss beds, lichens) can be 
degraded or destroyed by dust fallout.  Some types of dust, eg cement 
dust, have more extreme effects than others.

Dust pollution of Antarctic water bodies can have serious effects on both 
the water quality and the aquatic fauna and flora (which are usually 
microscopic).  This comes about in a number of ways including:

.   the addition of nutrient matter to the water, promoting algal growth;
.   changes in the pH (acidity/alkalinity) of the water;
.   trapping of sunlight by suspended dust particles leading to increased 
water temperature;
.   molecular lattices in clay particles providing refuges for bacteria 
that are not then accessible to water treatment.

It may be necessary to suspend certain activities when wind carries dust 
toward sensitive areas.

5  Effect on Areas of Biological, Geological or Other Importance

Frequently the importance of an area will not be at all obvious.  The 
rock outcrop that is perfectly placed to be broken up for road fill may 
be the best occurrence of a particular geological feature.  The boring 
looking piece of shore ideally situated for a jetty pier may be a 
long-term biological study site visited only once every five years.  
Before undertaking any project that substantially modifies the nature or 
use of any part of the environment you should seek advice on this aspect.

6  Loss of Wilderness Value

An area is a wilderness if it contains no obvious signs of human 
presence.  There are also dimensional qualities to wilderness, though 
these are less easy to define particularly in Antarctica.  A rough 
standard might be that a person should be able to travel for two days by 
non-mechanised transport without seeing intrusive signs of human 
presence.  (While this rough standard may be more applicable in mainland 
Australia it serves to illustrate the concept).

Obviously the key to wilderness value is the unspoilt nature of the 
environment and the lack of intrusive signs of human presence, though the 
character of the indications of human presence has a bearing on the 
extent of the effect.  A building on the skyline would be likely to 
degrade wilderness values far more than a cane route marker.  A bulldozed 
track in an ice-free valley has a far more deleterious effect than ski 
tracks on snow, yet both are obvious signs of human presence.  From these 
examples it should be clear that the degree of detraction from wilderness 
values is somewhat subjective, yet nevertheless something about which 
there could be broad agreement.

Serious consideration is required before conducting any action that will 
result in intrusive and long-lasting signs of human presence in any area 
that is relatively untouched.

7 (a)  It is an offence under the Antarctic Treaty (Environment 
Protection) Act to:
.   fly an aircraft in such a manner as to disturb a
concentration of birds (more than 20) or seals (more than
10);

.   land or drive an aircraft, or drive a vehicle, within
200 metres of a concentration of birds or seals;

.   detonate an explosive or discharge a firearm within
300 metres of a concentration of birds or seals;

.   while on foot, disturb a concentration of birds or seals
during any period while they are breeding;

.   cause or permit a dog to run free.

7.8.9 Disturbance to Wildlife

Actions which will lead to distrubance to wildlife are to be avoided.
Because of the peculiar tameness of Antarctic wildlife it is easy to
assume that human activities will not cause stress or other harmful
reactions.  This is an unwarranted assumption, and the reverse is more
often the case.  This is particularly true during the breeding season and
it may be necessary for the OIC to place certain areas off limits during
this time.  It needs to be borne in mind that deleterious effects on
breeding success will not be evident for some time, and may take several
seasons to become obvious, by which time they may be serious or even
irreversible.  Frequently expeditioners will become blasé about animal
populations which exist in close proximity to the stations, with a
resulting tendency to pay less attention to impacts on them.  This should
be guarded against.

The secondary effects of decisions and actions needs to be considered.
For example placing a field hut near a penguin colony may have only minor
effects in the year that it is used solely by a small number of
biologists.

If in following years it becomes a focus for recreational visits by
station personnel during the penguins' incubating period the effects may
be quite serious.

10 Undesirable Human Presence

Some developments are likely to have the effect of encouraging human
presence in an area, either as a focus for activity, eg field huts and
refuges as a goal for 'jollies', or by facilitating access.  In many
cases this may lead to undesirable pressures on aspects of the
environment, for example through increased wastes being generated in a
sensitive area, or through higher visitor numbers to animal populations
at breeding periods.

Ways to overcome or control such effects include:

.   installation of minimum possible facilities;

.   requirements to remove facilities as soon as their purpose is served;
and

.   controls on number of visitors and frequency of visits.
11 Changes to Drainage

Features which change drainage patterns are to be avoided. When it is 
not possible to avoid changes to drainage careful consideration needs to 
be given to the effects which will arise before a decision is made. 
Impacts may be on comparatively obvious aspects of the environment such 
as bird colonies, or may be less obvious, for example, changes to water 
levels and flow rates with consequent effects on water quality through 
increased erosion, or changes to vegetation through diversion of 
essential water away from the habitat.

12 Changes to Snow Accumulation

Even small additions or changes to the landscape can cause changes to 
snow accumulation patterns that will have significant impacts. For 
example a stack of fuel drums could cause snow to persist over moss beds 
or could change meltwater run-off patterns.

13 Disposal of Field Wastes

This applies particularly to the placing of human shelter.  The question 
of whether there is a need to remove all wastes from the local area needs 
to be considered and appropriate guidelines formulated and recorded where 
necessary.  Provision should be made to guard against the dispersal of 
wastes by wind or birds.

Because of the lack of weathering and breakdown agencies other than wind 
and frost action in the Antarctic environment the signs of human 
activity, whether they be food scraps and other waste or tracks of 
vehicles, tend to remain for far longer periods than in most other parts 
of the world.

Waste disposal considerations also apply to other processes, such as 
earthworks and construction, where there are unwanted materials to be 
disposed of.

When in doubt the principle should be to require the removal of wastes 
back to the regular waste disposal system.

14 Run-off of Wastes

Even small amounts of materials can have significant effects (for 
example, on water quality) when transported to other areas by run-off.

15 Exhaust Products in Pristine Environments

The Antarctic environment is practically free from the pollution products 
contained in the exhaust gases of internal combustion engines. 
(hydro-carbons, lead, particulate matter etc).  This is a situation which 
should be maintained both in order to avoid unnecessary change to the 
environment and to preserve the most extensive possible baseline for 
reference against the more polluted parts of the world.

The operation of engines in pristine areas should be limited to the 
greatest degree possible.  This includes avoiding the operation of 
helicopters or generators unnecessarily close to lakes (even when 
frozen), or upwind from them.  Regard should also be had to the fate of 
spilt oil and fuel.  Even small quantities can cause serious pollution in 
a previously uncontaminated environment.
16,17 Need for Rehabilitation - Is Permanent Installation Justified?

No activity should be undertaken without some thought as to the time period during which it needs to exist and the way in which the traces of the activity will be removed at the end of that period.

This is not to suggest that the environment can be restored to its former condition.  In almost all cases this will be unlikely and probably impossible.  Nevertheless efforts should be made to remove the effects of the activity.  This may be as simple as removing all traces of rubbish.  It may be as complex as demolishing and removing buildings, foundations and roads and "landscaping" the area.  Bear in mind that rehabilitation of earthworks may also be necessary during their lifetime in order to avoid environmental impacts.

Time taken for, and costs of, rehabilitation should be included in planning and budgeting.

Because of the need to create the minimum necessary impact and to rehabilitate on completion of use, earthworks and structures should, so far as possible, be built to the minimum standard necessary to ensure safe and effective functioning during their operational life.

18 Effect on Elements of the Science Program

Frequently the impact of activities on elements of the science program will not be obvious.  Areas where scientific projects are being carried out are not the subject of continuous scientific presence, in fact they may be visited only once every few years.

Destruction or pollution of study sites, or interference with animal populations can disrupt scientific programs or render their results valueless.

If in doubt check through the head of the Science Branch before making a decision.

19 Design Must be Adequate to Withstand Conditions

While taking into account the need to avoid building unnecessarily permanent structures regard should also be had to the need to construct facilities to withstand the prevailing conditions.  Failure of installations may result in more extensive and severe environmental impacts than would result from a slight additional requirement for rehabilitation.

Intensified Wind Effects

The construction of structures or earthworks may affect wind flow so as to have deleterious effects, either on elements of the environment or on adjacent structures with consequent environmental effects.

21 Need to Consider Effects of Associated Facilities

In deciding to carry out one activity regard must be had to the consequences of associated activities.  This needs to be thought through prior to commencement.  For example, jetties or other unloading facilities require parking and turning bays and involve sometimes heavy traffic movement.
22, 23 Must be Returned to Base or Australia

To the greatest extent possible waste material should be returned to the base.  Some types of material are required to be returned to Australia or dumped well out to sea (but check the requirements of the Sea Dumping Act).  Check on Antarctic Division policy on particular material.
Batteries are required to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area (South of 60°S) under an Antarctic Treaty agreement.

The following notes refer to specific activities

24  Including near-shore environment

25  Including access roads, parking and turning bays

27  Disposal of wastes from occupation

28  Wastes should/must be returned to base (This should be set down as a condition of construction and occupancy at the time of decision to construct).

29  Conditions on access could be imposed eg numbers, duration and time of year

30  A condition could be that they should not be on the skyline or highly visible (unless this is necessary for safety reasons).

31  Avoid constructing roads and tracks always in the same type of landform and habitat.

32  For permanent structures, installations etc.

33  Consider run-off of spilt oil and fuel.

34  Where possible

35  Note that vehicle bodies typically contain heavy metals which can cause serious environmental polution.

36  Ensure that apparently empty containers are actually empty.

37  Consider applying access restrictions to water catchment, immediate surrounds of lakes, and vicinity of pipelines.

38  Location of permanent disposal facilities at stations requires approval of ADOPT.

39  In the case of major undertakings.

40  In the case of additions to stations will the increased accomodation or other activity result in an overload to station systems (eg for waste disposal) with environmental consequences.

41  Where will water used to wash off equipment be disposed of?  What instructions will be given for disposal of excess or sub-standard mix?
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS: CHECKLIST


GUIDELINES
AND FACTORS
TO BE CONSIDERED
















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































