TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05 - 16 OCTOBER

ANT/XIV/INF/50
12 OCTOBER 1987
NORWAY

AGENDA ITEM 9
MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

ARCTIC EXPERIENCES

For circulation as a publicly
available information document
- 2 -

ARCTIC EXPERIENCES

Growing industrial and other human activity in the
Norwegian High Arctic have led to the need for environmental
impact assessments (EIA). Here we offer the results of
recent considerations of persons organizing such assessments.

The, so far, largest EIA for Svalbard (Spitsbergen)
was initiated last year with the project MUPS - Milj?konsekvenser
av petroleumvirksomhet p? Svalbard  (Environmental impact
from petroleum activity at Svalbard).  The project is financed
by the industry, which according to Norwegian regulations are
obliged to announce their planned activity to the authorities
and to cover the cost of having the potential impact of the
activity evaluated.

The managers of MUPS evaluated past experiences of
other EIAs before the content of MUPS was drawn up.  The
evaluation drew especially on experiences from the Canadian
Arctic.  From this it was concluded that EIAs frequently had
not given the end product that was needed.  The main reasons
for this were:

1) EIAs have tried to cover the whole ecosystem,
instead of concentrating on the most critical components.

2) It has been the scientists who have chosen which
projects to select.

3) There has been too little knowledge of which
activities the industry would want to carry out.

4) The content of the EIAs has been poorly related
to the needs of the subsequent decision making process.

5) Participating groups have not had a joint perspective
and goal.

6) The analytical concepts on which to base data
collection and interpretation have been lacking.

7) Ecological knowledge and methods have not been
used sufficiently, and

8) Industry have participated too little in planning
and execution of the EIA.
- 3 -

The project Beaufort Environmental Monitoring Program (BEMP) which started in 1984 has tried to avoid these errors. 
This used a theoretical model called Adaptive Environmental Assessment and Management, which has been developed as a 
tool for managing nature.  From this was developed the concept 
of Valued Ecosystem Component (VEC) described by Beaulands and 
Duinker (1983).  MUPs selected 14  VECs for Svalbard which 
included for example Svalbard reindeer, polar fox, polar bear, 
walruss,  and various types of birds, marine biological 
resources, and the items vegetation/soil, shoreline, protected 
areas, and outdoor recreation.

Impact hypothesis are then formulated for each VEC, 
to cover reactions to various types of the industrial activity, 
for example:  "Oil pollution in an area of polar bears will 
cause pain and death for affected bears".

Conceptual diagrams for the relationships within each 
hypothesis are drawn up, and knowledge available and needed 
to test the hypothesis is evaluated.  From this, priorities are 
made at three levels:

1) VECs that are considered most important are selected.
2) The most critical problems in relation to these VECs, 
based on planned activity, are selected.
3) Projects are selected which most likely will provide 
relevant data on the problem.

Both scientists and persons from industry and administra-
tion take part in the selection of the priorities.

Our experience with this approach is so far very 
positive.  We shall be happy to give more information on the 
work to interested delegates at this or subsequent meetings. 
You may also receive additional information through our national 
contact point.
