TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                             ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                                       XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                                       HOBOPO[?] OБ AHTAPKTHKE
                                                                                       XIV KOHCYЛЬTATHBHOE COBECAHHE

RIO DE JANEIRO
October 05-16
1987

ANT/XIV/INF 8

THEME 9: MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT:
ANALYSIS OF WASTE DISPOSAL PROCEDURE CODE
NORMS (ANNEXED TO RECOMMENDATION VIII-11)

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR ARGENTINEAN BASES
IN THE ANTARCTIC

Information Document Submitted by the Argentinean Delegation
- 1 -

QUANTITATIVE/QUALITATIVE ESTIMATE OF WASTE GENERATION IN
ARGENTINEAN ANTARCTIC BASES

The form given below must be sent to all Argentinean bases which
shall monthly fill in the answers to its queries:

Annex  I hereto shows the form's model.

The Argentinean Antarctic Bases shall report on:

1) - The Base

2) - The number of crew members

3) - The evaluation of the quantity of solid waste generated on
a weekly basis, including weight and estimated volume.

4) - The following classification of the wastes, estimating
percentages for each of the groups:

GROUP 1 - Biodegradable elements: for instance, food
refuse, paper and clean wood.

GROUP 2 - Organic non-biodegradable elements: for instance,
plastics, rubber, styrofoam, sponges, etc.

GROUP 3 - Highly contaminating elements: for instance:
engine oils, lubricants, diesel oil, battery
acids, metal mercury, organic solvents, as well
as all objects or materials either dirtied or
impregnated with these (oil filters, cans, paper,
cloth rags and so on).

GROUP 4 - Metal and inert elements: for instance: drums,
wires, plates, scraps of cement structures,
glass and bottle shards, etc.
Oil-soaked metal scraps, for example, should be
assigned to Group 3.
- 2 -

5) - Evaluation of the quantity of residual waters (sewage water)
produced per day.

6) - Whether or not the water is circulated for toilet use, if
salt water is used, or some other procedure.

7) - Evaluation of water production for daily consumption,
specifying the amount used for drinking and cooking.

This work is based on inspections carried out at
Argentinean bases, during January and February of 1986, by
C. VODOPIVEZ.

The proposed recommendations and instructions were drawn
up by C. VODOPIVEZ, with the collaboration of C. ZUNINO.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR ARGENTINEAN ANTARCTIC BASES

Water for drinking and consumption:

The preparation of water is a simple job, but a delicate
one which requires several precautions to avoid possible
contamination and harmful  effects to the health of crew members.

1. In choosing the chunks of ice and snow, reject those pieces
that have been exposed to:

- sewage water
- contamination by fuels and lubricants
- vehicle traffic
- proximity of animals
- possible contact with animal or human excrement, or which are
stained with strange or yellowish colours, black spots, etc.

2. Tools and utensils, such as saws, spades, sledges, should be
kept clean and should not be used for other purposes than the
preparation of water. Special attention should be given to
- 3 -

the cleanliness of clothing and gloves. Transportation vehicles 
also should be kept perfectly clean, avoiding contact of snow 
or ice with surfaces exposed to fuels, grease, lubricating oil, 
domestic refuse, etc.

3. Melters and storage tanks should be meticulously emptied and 
cleaned at regular intervals with water and bleach.

4. The fitness of drinking water at the various bases should be 
checked regularly, from a chemical and bacteriological 
standpoint.

5. It is recommended that drinking water be boiled before 
consumption.

Raw sewage:

    Can be processed as follows:

    - by undergoing purification in a treatment plant

    - by discharging at sea in open zones or in zones with high 
      consumption of water

    - by incinerating (solid waste).

Consideration should be given to the study and the 
possibility of utilizing, as a purification system, anaerobic 
bacterial fermentation.

    It is recommended, wherever possible, to use sea water in 
toilets rather than recirculating fresh water.

Solid wastes:

    Solid wastes may be classified in four basic groups:

GROUP 1:  Biodegradable wastes: food refuse, paper and clean wood
= 4 -

GROUP 2:  Organic non-biodegradable elements. For instance:
engine oils, lubricants, diesel oil, battery acids,
metal mercury, organic solvents, as well as all
objects or materials either dirtied or impregnated
with these (oil filters, cans, paper, rags and so on).

GROUP 3:  Highly contaminating wastes: acids, greases, oils,
fuels, mercury, radioactive materials, organic
solvents, chemical preparations, etc. and any elements
dirtied or impregnated with them: oil filters, rags,
papers, tin cans, etc.

GROUP 4:  Metallic and inert debris: scraps from metallic
structures, drums, vehicles, wires, bottles, glass
shards, scraps from metallic structures, bricks, etc.
Waste materials in GROUP 1 are those which have been:

- thrown into the sea in high circulation zones or in open waters

- used for feeding sea wolves

- incinerated and gathered in small trash containers until
removal from the Treaty zone.

A recipient for daily use is required, solely to hold
such waste material.

The wastes in GROUP 2 should be kept in a recipient for
daily use, and for their use only, and then be compacted and
crated for removal from the Treaty zone.

The waste in GROUP 3 should be set apart and hermetically
packaged for removal from the Treaty zone.

The wastes in GROUP 2 and 3 should be kept in separate
storage areas.

The wastes in GROUP 4 should be compacted as thoroughly
as possible, and may be:

- used for landfill, track building, etc.

- sunk at sea.

- buried in pits or crevices.

- gathered in trash containers meant for this purpose, until
being removed from the Treaty zone.
