TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                            RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                            1987

ANT/XIV/Inf/2
21 July 1987





RULES OF PROCEDURE

(1987)
REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE (1987)

1.      Meetings held pursuant to Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty shall be known as Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings. Contracting Parties entitled to participate in 
those Meeting shall be referred to as "Consultative Parties"; 
other Contracting Parties which may have been invited to 
attend those Meetings shall be referred to as "non-Consultative 
Parties".

2.      The representatives of the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, invited to 
attend those Meetings in accordance with Rule 30, shall be 
referred to as "observers".

Representation

3.      Each Consultative Party shall be represented 
by a delegation composed of a Representative and such 
Alternate Representatives, Advisers and other persons as each 
state may deem necessary. Each non-Consultative Party which 
has been invited to attend a Consultative Meeting shall be 
represented by a delegation composed of a Representative and 
such other persons as it may deem necessary, within such 
numerical limit as may from time to time be determined by 
the government in consultation with the Consultative Parties. 
The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research shall be represented by their Chairman and President
respectively or other persons appointed to this end. The 
names of members of delegations and of the observers shall 
be communicated to the host government prior to the opening 
of the Meeting.

4.       The order of precedence of the delegations 
shall be in accordance with the alphabet in the language of 
the host government, all delegations of non-Consultative 
Parties following after those of Consultative Parties, and 
all delegations of observers following after non-Consultative 
Parties.

Officers

5.       A representative of the host government shall 
be the Temporary Chairman of the Meeting and shall preside 
until the Meeting elects a Chairman.

6.       At its inaugural session, a Chairman from one 
of the Consultative Parties shall be elected.  The other 
representatives of Consultative Parties shall serve as 
Vice-Chairmen of the Meeting in order of precedence.  The 
Chairman normally shall preside at all plenary sessions.  
If he is absent from any session or part thereof, the 
Vice-Chairmen, rotating on the basis of the order of 
precedence as establised by Rule 4, shall preside during 
each such session.

Secretariat

7.       The Secretary shall be appointed by the Meeting
on the proposal of the Chairman.  The Secretary shall be 
responsible for providing secretarial services, and shall 
carry out such other tasks as the Meeting may require or 
direct.

Sessions

8.      The opening plenary session shall be held in 
public, other sessions shall be held in private, unless the 
Meeting shall determine otherwise.

Committees and Working Groups

9.      The Meeting, to facilitate its work, may 
establish such committees as it may deem necessary for the 
performance of its functions, defining their terms of 
reference.

10.    The committees shall operate under the Rules of 
Procedure of the Meeting, except where they are inapplicable.

11.    Working groups may be established by the 
Meeting or its committees.

Conduct of Business

12.    A quorum shall be constituted by two-thirds 
of the representatives of Consultative Parties participating 
in the Meeting.

13.    The Chairman shall exercise the powers of his
office in accordance with customary practice.  He shall see 
to the observance of the rules of procedure and  the 
maintenance of proper order.  The Chairman, in the exercise 
of his functions, remains under the authority of the 
Meeting.

14.      Subject to Rule 27, no representative may 
address the Meeting without having previously obtained the 
permission of the Chairman and the Chairman shall call upon 
speakers in the order in which they signify their desire to 
speak.  The Chairman may call a speaker to order if his 
remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.

15.      During the discussion of any matter, a 
representative of a Consultative Party may rise to a point 
of order and the point of order shall be decided immediately 
by the Chairman in accordance with the rules of procedure. 
A representative of a Consultative Party may appeal against 
the ruling of the Chairman.  The appeal shall be put to a 
vote immediately, and the Chairman's ruling shall stand 
unless over-ruled by a majority of the representatives of 
Consultative Parties present and voting.  A representative 
of a Consultative Party rising to a point of order shall not 
speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.

16.      The Meeting may limit the time to be allotted 
to each speaker, and the number of times he may speak on any 
subject.  When debate is thus limited and a representative 
has spoken his allotted time, the Chairman shall call him to 
order without delay.
17.  During the discussion of any matter, a 
representative of a Consultative Party may move the 
adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. 
In addition to the proposer of the motion, representatives 
of two Consultative Parties may speak in favour of, and two 
against, the motion, after which the motion shall be put 
to the vote immediately.  The Chairman may limit the time 
to be allowed to speakers under this rule.

18.  A representative of a Consultative Party may 
at any time move the closure of the debate on the item under 
discussion, whether or not any other representative has 
signified his wish to speak.  Permission to speak on the 
closure of the debate shall be accorded only to representatives 
of two Consultative Parties opposing the closure, after which 
the motion shall be put to the vote immediately.  If the 
Meeting is in favour of the closure, the Chairman shall declare 
the closure of the debate.  The Chairman may limit the time to 
be allowed to speakers under this rule.  (This rule shall not 
apply to debate in committees.)

19.  During the discussion of any matter, a 
representative of a Consultative Party may move the suspension 
or the adjournment of the Meeting.  Such motions shall not be 
debated, but shall be put to the vote immediately.  The 
Chairman may limit the time to be allowed to the speaker 
moving the suspension or adjournment of the Meeting.

20.  Subject to Rule 15, the following motions 
shall have precedence in the following order over all other 
proposals or motions before the Meeting:
(a) to suspend the Meeting;

(b) to adjourn the Meeting;

(c) to adjourn the debate on the item under discussion;

(d) for the closure of the debate on the item under discussion.

21.      Decisions of the Meeting on all matters of 
procedure shall be taken by a majority of the representatives 
of Consultative Parties participating in the Meeting, each of 
whom shall have one vote.

Languages

22.      English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be 
the official languages of the Meeting.

23.      Any representative may speak in a language 
other than the official languages.  However, in such cases 
he shall provide for interpretation into one of the official 
languages.

Recommendations and Final Report

24.      The recommendations formulated by the Meeting 
shal be approved by the representantives of all Consultative 
Parties present and shall be set forth in the final report.
25. The final report shall also contain a brief 
account of the proceedings of the Meeting.  It will be 
approved by a majority of the representatives of 
Consultative Parties present and shall be transmitted by the 
Secretary of the Meeting to governments of all Consultative 
and: non-Consultative Parties which have been invited to 
take part in the Meeting, for their consideration.

Non-Consultative Parties

26. Representatives of non-Consultative Parties, 
if invited to attend a Consultative Meeting, may be present at:

        (a) all plenary sessions of the Meeting, and;

        (b) all formal Committees or Working Groups, 
comprising all Consultative Parties, 
unless a representative of a Consultative 
Party requests otherwise in any particular 
case.

27. The relevant Chairman may invite a 
representative of a non-Consultative Party to address the 
Meeting, Committee or Working Group which he is attending, 
unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests 
otherwise.  The Chairman shall at any time give priority to 
representatives of Consultative Parties who signify their 
desire to speak, and may in inviting representatives of 
non-Consultative Parties to address the Meeting limit the time 
to be allotted to each speaker and the number of times he may 
speak on any subject.
28. Non-Consultative Parties are not entitled to 
participate in the taking of decisions.

29. (a) Non-Consultative Parties may submit 
documents to the Secretariat for 
distribution to the Meeting as information 
documents. Such documents shall be 
relevant to matters under consideration at 
the Meeting.

(b) Unless a representative of a Consultative 
Party requests otherwise such documents 
shall be available only in the language or 
languages in which they were submitted.

Antactic Treaty System Observers

30. The observers referred to in Rule 2 shall 
attend the Meetings for the specific purpose of reporting 
on:

(a) in the case of the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources, developments in its area of 
competence.

(b) in the case of the Scientific Committee 
on Antarctic Research:

(i) the general proceedings of SCAR;
(ii) matters within the competence of SCAR
under the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals;

(iii) such publications and reports as may
have been published or prepared in
accordance with Recommendations IV-19
and VI-9 respectively.

31. Representatives of the observers may be
present at:

        (a) the plenary sessions of the Meeting at
which the respective Report is considered;

        (b) formal committees or working groups,
comprising all Contracting Parties, at
which the respective Report is considered,
unless a representative of a Consultative
Party requests otherwise in any particular
case.

32. Following the presentation of the pertinent
Report, the relevant Chairman may invite the observer to
address the Meeting at which it is being considered once again,
unless a representative of a Consultative Party requests
otherwise. The Chairman may allot a time limit for such
intervention.

33. Observers are not entitled to participate in
the taking of decisions.
34.      Observers may submit their Report and/or documents relevant to matters contained therein to the Secretariat, for distribution to the Meeting as working papers.

Experts from International Organizations

35.      If all the Consultative Parties so agree, the host government of a Consultative Meeting shall extend an invitation to an international organization having a scientific and technical interest in Antarctica to designate an expert to attend that Meeting in order to assist it in the consideration of a particular item, in accordance with the organizational arrangements established for the consideration of that item. The name of such an expert shall be communicated to the host government prior to the opening of the Meeting.

36.      The relevant Chairman, with the agreement of all the Consultative Parties, may invite an expert to address the meeting he is attending. The Chairman shall at any time give priority to representatives of Consultative Parties or non-Consultative Parties or observers referred to in rule 30 who signify their desire to speak, and may in inviting an expert to address the meeting limit the time to be alloted to him and the number of times he may speak on any subject.

37.      Experts are not entitled to participate in the taking of decisions.

38.      (a) Experts may, in respect of the relevant
agenda item, submit documents to the
Secretariat for distribution to the
Meeting as information documents.

(b)  Unless a representative of a Consultative
Party requests otherwise, such documents
shall be available only in the language
or languages in which they were submitted.

Amendments

39.      These rules of procedure may be amended by a
two-thirds majority of the representatives of Consultative
Parties participating in the Meeting.  This rule shall not
apply to rules 24, 26, 28, 33, 35 and 37, amendments of
which shall require the approval of the representative of all
Consultative Parties present at the Meeting.
