TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                RIO DE JANEIRO         RIO DE JANEIRO
                                            1987                   XIV KОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                            ANT/XIV/Inf/4

                                                            5 October 1987


Information Document Submitted by
the United Kingdom Delegation     in
connection with agenda item    09:
Man's Impact    on the    Antarctic
Environment
XIV ATCM/Prep/008

INFORMATION DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY
THE UNITED KINGDOM DELEGATION
IN CONNECTION WITH AGENDA ITEM 08:
MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT.
DOC 2000B
Revised 110786/PF

CONSERVATION IN THE ANTARCTIC

Report of the
Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group
on
Long-Term Conservation in the Antarctic

Gland, Switzerland
15 May 1986


International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources

and

International Council of Scientific Unions
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
PREAMBLE

`If this document is to be of use its essential quality should be viewed as
catalytic.  Its aims are threefold.  First, to review conservation concerns in
the Antarctic in the recent past, the present, and the forseeable future.
Second, to identify gaps in knowledge of Antarctica and activities there and
in the legal and institutional measures governing them which should be
addressed.  Third, to suggest in outline form how to fill these gaps.

The document attempts to identify the full range of topics requiring
attention, but it is in no way definitive in its treatment of them.  It is
expected that other concerns will emerge as this document is discussed by the
Antarctic community and a variety of activities will take place, which will
permit a more comprehensive synthesis of conservation concerns and the options
for their treatment. It is hoped that further study and consultation will
permit identification of options for long term conservation within the
Antarctic. It is suggested that IUCN and SCAR undertake this task and produce
a draft document for consultation in 1987 and a final form in. 1988.  In the
interim, the views expressed and the recommendations made should not be taken
as official policy of either body.

iv
Membership of the Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on 
Long-Term Conservation in the Antarctic

Joint convenors:        J.R. Beddington              IUCN
                        W.N. Bonner                 SCAR

J.R. Beddington        IIED/IUCN Marine Resource Assessment Group
                       Imperial College of Science and Technology
                       48 Princes Gardens
                       London SW7
                       U.K.

W.S. Benninghoff       Department of Biology 045
                       The University of Michigan
                       Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
                       U.S.A.

W.N. Bonner           British Antarctic Survey,
                       National Environment Research Council
                       High Cross
                       Madingley Road
                       Cambridge CB3 OET, U.K.

P.R. Condy             Foundation for Research Development, CSIR
                       P.O. Box 395
                       Pretoria 0001
                       South Africa

P.R. Dingwall          Department of Lands and Survey
                       Private Bag
                       Wellington
                       New Zealand

Lee Kimball            IIED
                       1717 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.
                       Suite 302
                       Washington, D.C.  20036
                       U.S.A.

ii
Membership of the joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on Long-term Conservation in the Antarctic                        ii

Table of Contents                                                                                                       iii

Preamble                                                                                                                 iv

I    INTRODUCTION                                                                                                         1

II   ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES, THEIR IMPACTS AND INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK                                          7

     A.  Science and Logistics                                                                                            7
     B.  Marine Living Resources Exploitation                                                                            17
     C.  Mineral Resources Exploitation                                                                                  22
     D.  Tourism                                                                                                         28
     E.  Settlements                                                                                                     33

III  COMPREHENSIVE EFFECTS OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT                                              35

IV   DATA GAPS AND RESEARCH REQUIREMENTS                                                                                39

V    SUGGESTIONS TO ADVANCE ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION                                                                       43

     ANNEX I    Membership of the Antarctic Treaty SCAR National Membership

     ANNEX II   Acronyms                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                         iii
I. INTRODUCTION

Origins and Purpose of Document

There is a general need for conservation throughout the world, but some 
regions present special needs and special problems that must be met or solved 
individually.  The continent of Antarctica comprises a tenth of the land 
surface of the Earth and, uniquely, there is no generally recognised 
sovereignty over this huge area.  Similarly, the Antarctic seas, that area of 
the Southern Ocean bounded to the north by the Antarctic Convergence where 
cold, northerly-flowing water dips sharply under warmer water to the north of 
it, makes up about a tenth of the world's oceans.

The area of land and sea which together make up the Antarctic is the most 
inaccessible and, despite much recent research, still the least-known of all 
parts of the world.  Ashore, virtually all naturally-occurring life is 
confined to the approximately 1% of the continent that is not covered by 
permanent snow or ice.  The ecosystems supported in this area are 
characterised by discontinuity, harsh environmental conditions, low species 
diversity and slow growth rates.  They are fragile in the sense that they have 
small capacity to absorb change without being profoundly altered and hence are 
potentially likely to suffer impact.

At sea, the Antarctic marine ecosystem presents a contrast:  its vast extent 
(about 36 million km2) and continuity means that it possesses great 
buffering capacity and has the potential to absorb impact.  Environmental 
conditions in the sea are less extreme than on land and species diversity is 
far greater.  These factors should contribute towards stability and in general 
this is true, though in the past, selective exploitation of predators at the 
top of the food chain (seals and whales) has wrought substantial changes in 
the marine ecosystem.  Although in general potentially resilient, the 
Antarctic marine ecosystem has a weak link in that much of the energy of the 
system is conducted through a single species, Antarctic krill Euphausia 
superba, and is the principal food resource of the major predators.

The Antarctic is still much less affected by human activities than other parts 
of the world and conservation programmes can start nearer the natural baseline 
than they would elsewhere.  This is not to say that Antarctica is pristine. 
Uncontrolled exploitation of seals and whales has depleted most stocks, traces 
of industrial chlorinated hydrocarbons (e.g. DDT, PCB, DDE, dieldrin) have 
been detected both in ice samples from the interior and in animal tissues from 
coastal species while around base stations and along transport routes to and 
from them various environmental impacts have occurred.  Currently the greatest 
value of Antarctica is as a vast natural laboratory where research which may 
be of value elsewhere in interpeting the human environment can be peacefully 
pursued.  However, the level of human contact is steadily increasing through 
expansion of research and the recent growth of tourism.  There is also 
increasing interest in the exploitation of marine species and mineral 
resources.  In order to avoid a reoccurrence of uncontrolled exploitation and 
to ensure that the full range of options for human use of the Antarctic is 
available to forthcoming generations, an effective, long-term conservation is 
required.
-2-

The IUCN/SCAR working group report on long-term conservation in Antarctica is 
intended for wide distribution to those with a specalized interest in 
Antarctica, the media, and the general public.  It is directed in particular 
to the diplomatic and scientific representatives of the countries active in 
the Antarctic Treaty System (the 1959 Antarctic Treaty (AT); the 1972 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), the 1980 Convention 
on the Conservatiqn of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)), and also 
of the Scientific Committee cn Antarctic Research (SCAR), the representatives 
of other countries which take an interest in Antarctic matters, and the 
representative of United Nations agencies and other international 
organizations, governmental and non-governmental alike, which can contribute 
to Antarctic conservation. By addressing a popular subject in concrete 
descriptive and authoritative terms, the report attempts to highlight for 
scientists, conservationists and policymakers the needs and opportunities for 
long-term conservation in Antarctica.

Joint action by IUCN and SCAR towards a review of conservation policy in the 
Antarctic had its origins at the IUCN General Assembly in Christchurch, New 
Zealand, in 1982.  A proposal was put forward that there should be a meeting 
jointly organized by IUCN and SCAR on conservation problems in the Southern 
Ocean, including Antarctica, in an attempt to develop working relationships 
between the scientific community in Antarctica, represented by SCAR, and the 
conservation experts associated with IUCN.

Following a formal invitation from IUCN, SCAR agreed to co-sponsor a symposium 
on the Scientific Requirements for Antarctic Conservation.  This was convened 
at Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany, in April 1985.  The aim of the symposium 
was to review present ecological knowledge of the Antarctic continent, its 
surrounding waters and offshore islands, specifically in the context of 
conservation needs in the region.  With the recent growth of human activity in 
the area it was felt important to arrive at a consensus approach to 
conservation as a tool for deciscion makers in formulation and implementation 
of Antarctic conservation policies.

IUCN at its General Assembly in Madrid in 1984 had called for the preparation 
of a conservation strategy for the Antarctic, and this resolution was echoed 
by participants at the Bonn Symposium.  Acting on this recommendation IUCN and 
SCAR jointly set up the Working Group on Long-term Conservation of Antarctica.

This group, whose terms of reference are set out below, has met twice, in 
London, U.K., in February and in Gland, Switzerland, in May 1986.

Terms of Reference

The terms of reference of the group were agreed to be:

1.      To identify present and possible future environmental impacts in the 
        Antarctic and Southern Ocean.

2.      To review existing and proposed conservation measures and their 
        application in these areas.

3.      To identify gaps in our present knowledge of the Antarctic having 
        particular relevance to conservation, as well as gaps in the present 
        and proposed system of conservation measures, and to suggest options 
        for filling these gaps.

4.      To advise IUCN and SCAR accordingly.
- 3 -

These terms of reference are to be seen in the context of developing both an outline document and a workplan with a view to preparing the long term plan for Antarctic Conservation by the end of 1988.

Geographic Scope

The working group considered human activities in Antarctic and Southern Ocean areas as defined by the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR. It reviewed their effects on environmental protection and conservation at the present time and as they may be expected to expand in scale, type, and intensity in the forseeable future, bearing in mind potential regional and global aspects of activities carried out in the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR areas. Recommendations to improve environmental protection and conservation are directed to the relevant national or international forum charged with policy formulation, implementation, and/or enforcement.  Where the sub-Antarctic islands form an integral part of an effective long-term conservation plan in the Southern Ocean, the IUCN/SCAR working group assumes that conservation measures will be encompassed within national conservation plans by the responsible governments.

The Scale of the Continent and its Influence on the Earth's Environment

Antarctica is a continent. With its icecap it has an area of 14 million km2 (5.4 million sq. miles), making it the fifth largest continent.  It is larger than Australia (7.7 million km2) and Europe (10.5 million km2), but less than half the size of Africa (30.3 million km2). Surrounding it is the Southern Ocean, that part of it adjacent to the continent freezing over in winter. The frozen region ranges in area from approximately 2.6 million km2 in the summer months to approximately 18.8 million km2 in winter.

The vast icecap gives Antarctica an average elevation of 2,300 m above sea level, greater than any other continent (e.g. average elevations of North America and Australia are 720 m and 340 m respectively).  The highest point on the icecap is 4,100 m (13,450 ft) in Greater Antarctica. The highest mountain peak is the Vinson Massif at 5,140m (16,859 ft) in the Ellsworth Mountains of Ellsworth Land.  The icecap covers 99% of the continent, and in Wilkes Land reaches a world record ice thickness of 4,800 m (15,700ft) into what would otherwise be submerged basins. Some 90% of the world's fresh water is locked up in the icecap. If this, representing some 30,1 million km3 of water, were to melt, it is estimated that the world's oceans would rise by 50 - 60 metres.

The lowest natural temperature ever recorded on Earth was measured at the USSR's Vostok station in July 1983, when it fell to -89,6 0C.  Mean temperatures inland range from -40 0C to -70 0C in winter, and from -15 0C to -35 0C in summer.  Mean coastal temperatures are -15 0C to -30 0C in winter, and around 0 0C in summer.

Approximately 2000 to 2500 people, mainly scientists and technicians, live in Antarctica during the busy summer months.  They inhabit about 40 permanent or seasonally-open bases and many small, temporary field camps away from these. During the winter months, when normal traffic to and from Antarctica altogether ceases, the population drops to around 800 people at some 30 wintering stations.
- 4 -

The continent's permanent ice cover reflects back into space most (about 80%) 
of the incoming short wave radiation and much of the incoming longer-wave 
radiation.  Clouds reflect back more radiation, and additional quantities are 
absorbed by atmospheric gases.  Only for a brief period, in the summer months 
from November to January, does the ice surface receive more heat than it loses 
to space.

Thus Antarctica acts as a major global heat sink.  The process of heat 
re-distribution at the atmosphere-ocean boundary is still poorly understood. 
However, being the major global region of heat deficit, Antarctica plays an 
important role in global weather patterns and climate.  The upwelling of cold 
bottom water from Antarctica along the west coast of southern Africa as the 
Benguela Current, and the resulting existence of the Namib Desert there, is 
just one example of this influence.

Antarctica is Biologically Fragile

The fragility of an environment or ecosystem is usually taken as a measure of 
its ability to recover from human pressure, and/or the rate of such recovery. 
Some parts of the world, particularly where biological productivity is 
relatively high and steady for much of the annual cycle (e.g. sub-Tropical 
regions), are more easily able to recover than regions where biological 
productivity is low for most of the year.  Heat, light and growth medium (i.e. 
soil, water) are among the critical factors controlling biological growth. 
Where these are optimal permanently, or at least for much of the year, growth 
itself is favourably influenced.

Antarctica offers a substrate comprising some 99% ice (not water) and 1% rock 
surface (little if any soil).  Heat supply from the environment is negative 
for all but some two months of the year, and light is continuous in mid-summer 
and absent in mid-winter.  It is therefore not difficult to imagine, at least 
in biological terms, that the environment is nearly unsuitable for growth, let 
alone recovery of growth.  Nevertheless, organisms from the most primitive 
forms of life to higher vertebrates grow and survive there, mainly in the 
coastal regions and the Southern Ocean.  All have adapted to the short 
marginally favourable summer conditions on which population recruitment 
ultimately depends.  Once-off perturbations to biological populations during 
this period can and do have serious consequences on the ability of these to 
survive to the next season.  Repeated perturbations, even those recurring over 
a few seasons only, can easily lead to the disappearance of such populations 
if care is not taken.  Thus, in biological terms, Antarctica's environment is 
among the most fragile on earth.

The Antarctic Treaty and Antarctica

The Antarctic situation is unique in that an international treaty, namely the 
Antarctic Treaty, currently permits access to an entire continent for 
"...peaceful purpose only." (Article I).  Arcicles II and III of the Treaty 
concern the maintenance since the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957 
to 1958, of the freedom of scientific investigation which characterized the 
IGY, and the promotion of international cooperation in scientific 
investigation respectively.  Article V concerns the prohibition of nuclear
-5-

explosions and the disposal there of radioactive waste material.  Article VII
provides for inspections of the activities of one or more parties to the
Treaty by another party. In essence, the Antarctic Treaty imposes
unprecedented constraints on many activities undertaken elsewhere in the world
and even in space and especially promotes one of these, namely science.

As new activities have developed in Antarctica, the Antarctic Treaty System
has responded in a timely and flexible manner with additional policies and
legal authorities that avoid potential damage to conservation objectives in
Antarctica and/or anything disruptive to the peaceful purposes of ATS
regimes.  But the consensus decision-making process that operates within the
regimes to protect and preserve the positions both of states claiming national
sovereignty in Antarctica and those that do not recognize national claims can
complicate and delay effective action.  Divergent views on rights of claimant
and non-claimant states in Antarctica tend to deter new initiatives other than
those most necessary and pressing.  Moreover, the discrete nature of the
different institutions and legal authorities that have grown up on an ad hoc
basis to govern activities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean could benefit
from increased coordination.  Their relationship to evolving trends in policy
and legal authorities of a global nature should also be explored, for example,
with respect to the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention, UNEP guidelines and
principles, and IMO treaties and guidelines, as should their relationship to
increasing sophistication of ecosystem analysis and protected area concepts.
The Antarctic Treaty process in 1964 had the foresight to declare the whole of
Antarctica a "special conservation area" and to design special measures to
preserve this unique status.  There is no reason why today it cannot preserve
its position in the forefront of devising and applying improved concepts in
conservation, in order to guarantee the long-term value of Antarctica for
scientific and other purposes.
II ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES, THEIR IMPACTS AND INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK

A. Science and Logistics

1. Activities

a) Historical Activities

The first recorded contacts with Antarctica date from little over 200 years ago when James Cook's voyage of 1774-75 crossed the Antarctic Circle.  A period of marine exploitation based on fur and elephant sealing followed soon after the publication of Cook's report and continued to the beginning of the present century, when commercial attention turned to whaling.  The sealing era saw some useful scientific discovery, notably the voyage of Thaddeus von Bellingshausen, 1819-21 (who was the first to refer to krill), and those of Dumont d'Urville, Charles Wilkes and James Ross, all between 1837 and 1840.

There followed a lull in major scientific exploration until 1898 when Adrien de Gerlache explored the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula.  His was the first scientific party to winter in the Antarctic and to use tents and sledges ashore.  This ushered in the "Heroic Age" of Antarctic exploration and was quickly followed by the expeditions of Otto von Nordenskjold, Amundsen, Scott, Shackleton and Mawson.

In 1928 Hubert Wilkins introduced the aeroplane to Antarctica, but Richard Byrd (1928-30, 1933-35, 1939-41) was the first to exploit it fully. American effort peaked in Operation Highjump (1946-47), the largest expedition ever mounted in the Antarctic.

Most of these expeditions were largely concerned with geographical discovery.  Static scientific expeditions were less common.  W.S. Bruce's base at Laurie Island in the South Orkneys in 1902 was one of the first. The United Kingdom "Discovery" Investigations, which began work in 1925, was a marine biological study intended to establish a scientific basis for managing the whaling industry, an aim ahead of its time and one which was frustrated by the introduction of pelagic whaling in the same year, allowing the hunting of whales on the high seas outside national control.

The period during and immediately after the Second World War saw intense activity in the Antarctic, with networks of permanently manned stations being set up, notably in the Peninsula region by Argentina, Chile and the United Kingdom, Greater Antarctica by Australia in 1954, and the US Operations Deep freeze I and II which established McMurdo station on Ross Island in 1955-56 and Amundsen-Scott Station at the South Pole the following year.

1957-58 had been proposed as a cooperative polar year which developed under the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) as the International Geophysical Year (IGY).  The scientific cooperation during the IGY was so successful that in 1958 ICSU set up the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), to continue and coordinate the work.  The twelve nations involved were Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, UK, USA and USSR.  Out of the IGY also developed the Antarctic Treaty, which by freezing territorial claims in the Antarctic promoted freedom and cooperation in scientific investigations.
8

Fundamental to the Treaty is an exchange of information among the parties 
under Articles III and VII.  This formalised exchange provides details of 
ships, aircraft and other vehicles used in the Antarctic, research 
stations, personnel, programmes of work, scientific equipment, 
transportation facilities and communications equipment, and additional 
information.

The Treaty exchange of information is supplemented by an exchange organised 
by SCAR through appropriate national adhering bodies.  This gives fuller 
details of programmes at the level of the individual scientist and through 
scientific publications, is widely distributed throughout the Antarctic 
scientific community.

The exchange of information through the Treaty and through SCAR makes known 
the development of science and logistics in the Antarctic to the 
Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and SCAR members.  In 1985 the 
XIII Consultative Meeting agreed to make available the Antarctic Treaty 
exchanges to any interested individual.

Even so, it is not always easy to determine exact current levels of 
activity.  The exchange of information under the Treaty takes place through 
diplomatic channels, which may be subject to delay. Some difficulties of 
definition exist.  The point at which a transit hut becomes a summer 
station may not be clear, nor is it plain how long a visitor needs to spend 
in the Antarctic before becoming counted in the summer population.

b)  Current Activities

Research activities conducted in the Antarctic span almost the whole range 
of science, though the high cost of field work in such a remote and 
inhospitable region limits the science to those topics which can only or 
best be done there.  The geophysical configuration of Antarctica at one of 
the Earth's poles provides special research opportunities for physicists 
working on ionospherics or geomagnetism, for example, while the altitude 
of the polar ice cap and its very thin dry atmosphere facilitate astronomical 
observations.  The Antarctic provides essential data for the description 
and modelling of world weather systems and recent work on ozone 
concentrations above the Antarctic has revealed patterns of global 
significance.  Glaciologists find in Antarctica by far the largest mass of 
ice in the world whose mass-balance and dynamics are being actively 
investigated.  Ice-cores, which can be dated accurately, provide a 
chronological history of traces of chemical species, both naturally 
occurring and man-made, circulating in the atmosphere.  The relation of 
Antarctica to the other continents following the break up of the 
supercontinent Gondwanaland is a topic of main interest, while the 
geological structure of the continent is still being described.  The 
description of the Antarctic flora and fauna is proceeding and is yet to be 
completed.  Much biological research relates to the special problems 
associated with life at low temperatures and the establishment of 
communities in hostile environments.  Energy flows within the marine-based 
communities are of interest not only to the theoretical ecologist, but also 
to those wishing to manage marine resources.

For the austral winter of 1985 SCAR listed 34 stations in the Antarctic, 
operated by 13 nations and with a population of about 900.  There were 
besides this, eight stations to the north of 60°S, the limit of the 
Antarctic Treaty area.  In the succeeding summer of 1985-86 the number of
9

stations operating in the Antarctic increased to 45, populated by about 
2700 personnel.  Some 40 ships, besides fishing vessels and three cruise 
liners, were active.  At least 45 helicopters and 30 fixed wing aircraft 
were deployed in Antarctic operations.

c) Projected Activities

Research activity in the Antarctic can be expected to increase.  Although 
there is no evidence that the research budgets of the established operators 
are increasing in real terms (and for some it is known that the reverse is 
the case) there has in recent years been an influx of new operators into 
the Antarctic.  Probably in all cases political as well as scientific 
motives have been involved.  The requirement that substantial scientific 
research should be performed by states who wish to obtain consultative 
status in the Antarctic Treaty, or membership of SCAR, has motivated the 
establishment of many bases, although the criterion of operating a base 
ceased to exist in 1978.

Cooperative ventures can reduce the need for new bases.  The German 
Democratic Republic operates its field research programmes out of Soviet 
stations.  A cooperative Polar Sciences Network established by the European 
Science Foundation may facilitate entry of further European nations into 
Antarctic science through shared logistic facilities.  Stations abandoned 
by some nations may be refurbished and re-opened by others.  Under-utilized 
national bases may develop cooperative ventures with other countries.

Nevertheless, new nations will undoubtedly be entering the field of 
Antarctic research in the next decade or so and many will choose to conduct 
their operations from a static permanent base.  In practical terms new 
stations can be established only with ship support.  However, once 
established, some at least of the resupply of the base and much of the 
exchange of personnel can be accomplished by air.  This is a particularly 
attractive option for scientists, who by travelling by air can maximise 
their time in the field.  Because of this, the construction of some more 
airstrips suitable for operating intercontinental aircraft in the Antarctic 
can be expected with ice/snow runways, or as hard-earth strips, allowing 
communications by aircraft having conventional undercarriages.

Although remote sensing and automated equipment may take over many tasks at 
present done by scientists or technicians it is unlikely that numbers of 
personnel employed in the Antarctic will decline in the near future and the 
expectation must be that they will continue to increase.

Although some nations have announced a new definite interest in the 
Antarctic, it is not possible to quantify likely trends.  Much is likely to 
depend on changes in the general economic climate, including the 
development of world markets for fuel oil and minerals.  A "best estimate" 
might be for an increase in general logistic commitment of between 1% and 
5% per annum over the next decade.
10

2. Impacts

In response to a request from the twelfth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting SCAR examined the possible impact of scientific and logistic 
activities in the Antarctic ("Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment", 
SCAR, 1985). Science and its associated support are the main causes of 
environmental impact on land in the Antarctic today, with the much larger 
part of the impact arising from the support activities. Impacts may be 
caused deliberately -- as when a scientist collects specimens, or an area 
of ground is bulldozed to erect a building; incidentally -- as when the 
presence of food wastes at a station causes an increase in the population 
of scavenging birds; or accidentally -- as when a fuel tank ruptures or is 
overfilled.

Most of the environmental impact associated with science in the Antarctic 
results from its logistic support and research stations are always areas of 
impact (though much less so for those established on ice). Impacts at 
stations are concentrated in the area of greatest activity but there is a 
tendency to establish garbage heaps, dumps of obsolete equipment, fuel 
tanks, etc., at some distance from the main living and working quarters. 
In this way the impact associated with the station spreads away from its 
centre.

It is not possible to draw up an exhaustive list of all possible impacts. 
Table I (from "Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment", 1985) lists some 
of the more likely impacts, divided between the terrestrial (including 
inland waters), marine and atmospheric realms. There are, of course, 
important interfaces between these realms, that between the terrestrial and 
marine realms is of particular environmental significance.
11

Table 1. Environmental impacts (deliberate, incidental or accidental) in the 
Antarctic.  (Some very unlikely impacts and impacts of negligible 
severity have been ignored).

TERRESTRIAL 
(including inland waters)

Habitat destruction/modification
Destruction/removal/modification of biota, fossils, ventifacts, etc.
Modification of vital rates of biota (disturbance to production and/or growth)
Modification of distribution of biota
Introduction of alien biota
Pollution by:
    biocides and noxious substances
    nutrients (eutrophication)
    radionuclides
    inert materials
    electromagnetic radiation
    noise
Modification of thermal balance of environment
Aesthetic intrusion

MARINE

(a) Shoreline/Enclosed waters/Benthos
Habitat destruction/modification
Destruction/removal/modification of biota
Modification of vital rates of biota
Pollution by:
    biccides and noxious substances
    nutrients
    radionuclides
    inert materials (dumping)
    noise
    heat

(b) Open ocean
Destruction of biota
Catastrophic pollution

ATMOSPHERIC

Pollution by:
    sulphur oxides
    nitrogen oxides
    carbon monoxide
    carbon dioxide
    hydrocarbons
    radionuclides
    dusts
    microbiota
    electromagnetic radiation
12

Ozone: local excess at ground level, depletion in stratosphere.

Only in areas which owe their scientific interest to the fact that they are
pristine and unaffected by human activities (such as perhaps some dry
valleys or sterile ice caps) will the occurrence of trivial impacts be of
importance.  In most cases attention needs to be confined to potentially
significant impacts. There is no general way of determining whether or not
an impact will be significant, and each case needs to be examined
individually, but Table 2 (from "Man's Impact on the Antarctic
Environment", 1985) lists categories of activities which might reasonably
be expected to have significant impact.
13

Table 2. Categories of activity that might reasonably be expected to have a
significant impact on the Antarctic environment

Logistic/Support Activitites

1.  Establishment of bases, stations, airstrips, etc., or the extension of
existing facilities (by, say, more than 10%).

2.  Increases in personnel or personnel movements, aircraft flights, etc. (by
say, more than 10%).

3.  Major changes in amount (by say, more than 10%) or type of power
generation, or fuel consumption.

4.  Any operation affecting areas valued mainly for their sterile or pristine
nature, e.g., dry valleys, remote ice cap areas.

5.  Any operation involving the closing of a station which has been active for
several years.

Scientific Activities

1.  Interference with or modification of endangered or unique systems,
communities or populations.

2.  Operations which might adversely affect SPAs or SSSIs.

3.  Introduction of alien biota with the potential to multiply or disperse.

4.  Any operation affecting areas valued mainly for their sterile or pristine
nature, e.g. dry valleys, remote ice cap areas.

5.  Application of biologically active substances which have the potential to
spread so as to cause perceptible effects outside their area of
application.

6.  Operations which might perceptibly impede the recovery of any endangered,
threatened or depleted populations.

7.  Experiments deliberately designed to create adverse changes in populations
or communities (perturbation experiments) which extend over areas of more
than 100 sq metres or, possibly, even less, particularly if unique systems
are involved.

8.  Operations which will adversely affect populations for which long
time-series of data have been (or are being) collected to establish the
status of the population.

9.  Introduction of radionuclides into the environment where their subsequent
recovery and removal cannot reasonably be assured.

10. Drilling operations involving the use of drilling fluids other than water
and/or possible escape or vertical movement of subterranean fluids.

11. Marine seismic surveys involving the use of explosive charges.
-14-

3. Controls

Scientific and associated logistical activities are regulated by the 
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and subsequent recommendations agreed by 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs).  Article IX of the Treaty 
lists the preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica 
amongst the principles and objectives of the Treaty.

The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, 
introduced in 1964, provide the principal conservation measures.  The main 
operative articles provide for protection of native fauna and flora, including 
designation of Specially Protected Species, for measures to minimise harmful 
interference with normal living conditions of native mammals and birds, and to 
alleviate pollution of coastal waters, for designation of Specially Protected 
Areas, and for preventing the introduction of non-indigenous species, 
parasites and diseases.

Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) were designated to preserve unique or 
outstanding natural ecological systems of scientific interest.  Access to SPAs 
is restricted to scientific investigators, who may be permitted to enter for a 
compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, and which will 
not jeopardise the natural ecological system of the area.  By 1985, there were 
21 operative SPAs.

Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), were established by a 
recommendation at the seventh ATCM to prevent harmful disturbance to areas 
where scientific investigations are being conducted or planned, or in areas of 
exceptional scientific interest.  Thus, they safeguard research opportunities 
and prevent human interference with sites.  They are normally designated for a 
fixed period of time, extendable by review, and prohibition on access is not 
mandatory, as in the case of SPAs.  By 1985, there were 21 designated SSSIs.

SCAR has also invited proposals for marine SPAs and SSSIs.  While several 
proposals for the latter have been considered (and are recognised within 
SCAR), none has yet been approved by ATCMs due to concerns about interference 
with high seas freedoms.  Thus, there are no solely marine areas in Antarctica 
given special protection for scientific purposes, though some accepted SPAs 
and SSSIs incorporate more or less extensive areas of sea.

The existing network of areas designated for special protection is limited in 
its capacity to fulfill a wide range of management objectives because:

a) SPAs and SSSIs are limited both in number and in extent.

b) Being science-oriented, they focus on the vicinity of scientific 
stations, so are unevenly distributed throughout the continent.

c) They are incomplete in their ecological scope, with marked gaps in the 
representation of marine and inshore coastal environments, high 
mountains, inland aquatic ecosystems, and non-biological areas such as 
ice, rock, soil and landform sites.
-15-

There are also management deficiencies in the protected area system, which merit attention:

    a) There is no comprehensive application of the management planning
       process for elaborating policies, objectives and implementation
       programmes.

    b) There is no commitment to identification and selection of further
       protected areas according to biogeographical principles.

    c) There is no coordinated supervision of protected areas nor systematic
       surveillance and monitoring of research and other activities.

    d) The range of protected area categories is limited, therefore the scope
       of management objectives is restricted.  Emphasis is on designation of
       nature and scientific reserves, which are site-specific or
       species-oriented, with insufficient attention to protection of, for
       example, larger catchments or areas of high scenic or landscape value.

The thirteenth ATCM gave consideration to protection of additional areas as
Specially Managed Areas, a matter now under review by SCAR.  These would allow
a broader level of protection than the specific SPAs and SSSIs, as well as the
opportunity to protect abiotic and non-scientific values, and would provide
for a multiple-use approach to protected area management.  This matter has
been referred to SCAR for advice and is still under consideration.

There is a pressing need for further identification of sites meriting
protection, and for investigation of the ecological characteristics of already
designated sites.  A work recently published by SCAR, "Conservation Areas in
the Antarctic", (1985) should provide a stimulus for this work.

A code of conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities, drawn up
by SCAR, was incorporated into a recommendation (VIII-11) at the eighth ATCM.
The code includes recommendations and procedures for disposal of liquid and
solid wastes, provides safeguards against the introduction of alien species
and enjoins minimising disturbance of breeding colonies and concentrations of
birds and mammals.  It also includes guidelines for Antarctic operating
organisations planning major Antarctic projects, which recommend evaluation of
environmental impacts of proposed activities, and circulation of evaluations,
through SCAR, to all States engaged in Antarctic activities.

In many cases Treaty nations have introduced environmental protection controls
to their scientific programmes and associated logistic activities, in
accordance with, and in some cases exceeding, standards set out in the code.
Documentation may be provided on environmental procedures and training given
in environmental awareness.  Stations may be operated in accordance with a
"minimum impact code".  Zoning schemes may be used in station management for
delimiting specific sites and uses.

A recommendation (XII-3) from the twelfth ATCM deals with the impact of
science and its associated logistics on the environment.  It calls on
governments to determine such impacts before the activities and to undertake
detailed environmental impact assessments where deemed necessary.  It invited
SCAR to offer advice on the definition of categories of activity which might
-16-

have significant impact, and the relevant assessment procedures which should 
be followed. The response of SCAR ("Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment") was tabled in 1984 (see above, section II A.2) but the 
thirteenth ATCM in 1986 found it impossible to adopt an agreed recommendation 
on this matter and deferred it for further consideration by SCAR and at the 
next ATCM in 1987: Some nations, however, have well-developed EIA procedures 
which can be adapted and applied to the Antarctic.  For others, establishing 
these poses problems.

Definition of bases

Since some impacts are inevitable if scientific research is to be pursued in 
the Antarctic, it is necessary to restrict these impacts, both in magnitude 
and extent, as much as possible. Codes of conduct, such as those formulated 
under the Agreed Measures and other recommendations, serve to restrict the 
scale of impacts, but there is no current means of localising and containing 
impacts.

If, when a research station were established, a definite boundary of the 
station area were to be declared, within which all the impact associated wih 
logistic support would (so far as possible) be confined, the impact would be 
concentrated.  In this way a better respect for the environment beyond the 
limits of the base might be inculcated. Furthermore, since people might be 
expected to wish to protect the quality of their immediate surroundings, such 
a measure might be expected to lessen total impact.

Co-ordination of logistical support

It is recognised by Antarctic operators that co-ordination of logistic 
facilities can result in major economies of expenditure.  Equally, in many 
cases environmental impact can be lessened by sharing facilities.  Some 
arrangements already exist between operators.

Need for implementing control measures under national legislation.

Regulations to protect the environment are effective only if they are known to 
exist and are enforced. Responsibility for enforcing the Agreed Measures and 
similar extensions of the Antarctic Treaty lies with the appropriate Treaty 
party with respect to its own nationals.

It is, however, by no means clear to what extent this is done, since there is 
no system (other than the occasional inspections under the Treaty) for 
collecting information concerning national practice in enforcing rules, 
breaches of them or actions taken as a consequence.  There are no grounds for 
supposing that non-enforcement of the regulations is widespread, or that where 
particular regulations are not enforced, significant environmental impact 
results.  However, it is clearly in the interest of environmental protection 
generally that all parties active in the Antarctic should be aware of 
environmental regulations and that these are enforced.
-17-

B. Marine Living Resources Exploitation

1. Activities

    a) Historical Activities:

The history of human exploitation in the Antarctic in the 19th and 20th
centuries is well known. Instead of considering in any detail the
successive exploitation of seals and the great whales, this report
concentrates on the recent history, defined for this purpose as being
the last twenty years.

Whales: Over the last twenty years, whaling on all species in the
Southern Ocean except the minke whale has declined to nothing. The
process has been a mixture of resource management and politics. The
adoption of new management procedures of the IWC led to the protection
of blue whales, fin whales, sei whales and in certain areas, sperm
whales. The adoption of the ban on pelagic whaling by the IWC in 1977
brought about the cessation of whaling on all species except the minke
whale. The pause in whaling started in 1986 has been complicated by the
fact that two nations continue to whale within the Antarctic under the
objection procedure of the IWC. Catches are around 4-5,000 per annum
which are a few per cent of the estimated stock size.

Seals: Sustained commercial sealing in the Southern Ocean ended in
1964 when elephant sealing ceased in South Georgia following the
collapse of the whaling industry there. A reconnaissance visit by a
Norwegian sealer in 1963-64 to the Weddell Sea took fewer than a
thousand seals (mainly crabeaters) and was not repeated. Apart from
this the only recent takes of seal have been small scientific samples
and some as food for sledge dogs. Under the Agreed Measures when these
seals have been taken in the Antarctic Treaty area, reports are made to
the Treaty through SCAR.

Fin Fish: Fishing for fin fish started in 1969 and increased to a
peak of around 400,000 tonnes in the next season. It is clear that the
fin fish species in the two main areas of the Antarctic around South
Georgia and Iles Kerguelen were significantly depleted by early
harvests. Subsequent harvests have increased the pressure on the
resources. Around Iles Kerguelen the French authorities imposed a ban
on fishing for two seasons in 1978/79. Fishing around this area has now
recommenced and is currently at a level of 20,000 tonnes per annum.
Around South Georgia and in other areas close to the Antarctic
Peninsula, fin fish stocks have not been afforded the protection of a
cessation. Current catches in the whole of the South Atlantic area are
around 60,000 tonnes.

Krill: Fishing for krill started to develop substantially in the
early 1970's and increased to a peak of over 500,000 tonnes in 1981/82.
The fishery has declined somewhat subsequently for economic reasons and
current reported catches are around 130,000 tonnes.
-18-
b) Current Activities

Whales:  Stocks of whales, other than minke, are not subject to
exploitation and therefore might be expected to be increasing.  However,
there is no direct evidence to support this expectation with some
exceptions.  Right whales off South Africa have been assessed as
increasing..  All these whale stocks except minke whales are believed to
be well below their original abundance.

Seals:  Fur seals have been increasing in the Antarctic since around
1930.  Current stock size is around one million and there is a
substantial annual increase.  The status of elephant seals since
exploitation ceased is more uncertain.  Studies on colonies in the
Indian Ocean show declines.  This may be due to movement or a population
change in response to depletion of fish stocks.

Fin Fish:  The status of the marbled notothenia is of most concern.
This stock was depleted by fishing in the South Atlantic around South
Georgia and in the Indian Ocean around Iles Kerguelen.  Its status in
other areas is unknown.  It is not known if the stock is recovering.
Other fin fish stocks around Kerguelen are being harvested around their
estimated sustainable yield.  The status of other stocks in the South
Atlantic is unknown.

Krill:  Recent krill harvests are at a level that is unlikely to
affect the stocks.  Whether krill stocks are declining or increasing is
unknown.

c) Projected activities

Whaling:  It is far from clear whether whaling under the objection
procedure of the IWC will continue within the Antarctic.  The current
level of activity is small and clearly could, with sufficient economic
motivation, be expanded.  There is little information available on the
potential sustainable yield of the current whale stocks so a long term
continuation of harvesting or an increase in the level of harvest should
be viewed with concern.  The IWC has recently convened a meeting of its
Scientific Committee to examine plans for a comprehensive reassessment
of whaling.  It is possible that such a programme will permit some
continued assessment of the conservation problems of whaling.

Sealing:  It is possible that sealing could redevelop within the
Antarctic.  However there are some grounds for believing this to be
unlikely.  The ban on imports of certain seal products into the European
Economic Community has considerably reduced the demand for such
products.  This ban was introduced under pressure from conservation and
animal welfare groups seeking to stop the harp seal hunt.  Accordingly,
it seems eminently possible that any expansion of commercial sealing
into the Antarctic would be met with similar opposition and restriction
in demand.  In the case of fur seals and elephant seals there is some
basis for assessing sustainable yields and hence in theory the
scientific requirements for conservation are met.  The Convention for
the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) has interim annual catch
limits which are relatively small proportions of stock size.  In the
event sealing starts it is to be expected that those catch limits would
form a first defence against over-exploitation.  Such a defence however
requires an effective management authority.  The convention so far has
not been tested by economic pressure.
-19-

Fin fish:  Although fin fish stocks are at relatively small levels 
compared to their unexploited state, it is likely that fin fishing will 
continue within the Southern Ocean.  There are indications that other 
states are becoming interested in fishing in the area and the 
juxtaposition of the Southern Ocean fishing grounds in the South 
Atlantic with the rich fisheries around the Falklands/Malvinas Islands 
make the prospect of continued fishing more likely.  The main Antarctic 
season, November - February, fits well with that around the 
Falklands/Malvinas which starts around early March.  This factor, 
together with lower real fuel costs, makes a continuation and possible 
extension of fin fishing likely.  The above presupposes a viable set of 
fish stocks.  As indicated earlier, there is ground for concern over the 
state of the marbled notothenia throughout the Antarctic.  Given 
continued fin fishing for other species which are less depleted, there 
are major concerns over the continuing depletion of this species by the 
by-catch in the directed fishery for these other species.

Krill:  The future of a fishery for krill is both an open and an 
interesting question.  Recent declines in the reported level of catch by 
the USSR may reflect either demand-led marketing problems or processing 
difficulties.  A slight decrease in the Japanese catch almost certainly 
reflects marketing problems.  The current over-production of certain 
proteins in the world agricultural economy make it unlikely that there 
would be a considerable expansion of krill catches in the next decade. 
However, with lower real fuel costs such an expansion is by no means 
impossible.

Squid:  To date there has been no commercial fishing for squid within 
the Southern Ocean.  However, the last two years have seen an enormous 
increase in squid fisheries over the Patagonian shelf.  Here the main 
squid fishing season for the primary target species, the short-finned 
squid, is March - May.  This fits well with a potential fishery in the 
Southern Ocean during the Antarctic summer.  There are reports of an 
interest in exploratory fishing for squid in the Southern Ocean.  If 
this fishery were to develop commercially there would be considerable 
economic pressure as squid are a high value resource.  The build up of 
squid fishing around the Falklands/Malvinas since 1984 has been 
dramatic.  Such a build up is not inconceivable within the Southern 
Ocean, particularly in the South Atlantic, although the resources might 
be much smaller than further north.  The squid species likely to be 
targeted are the Todorodes species which form part of the diet of a 
number of predators in the area.

Fishing in General

The prospects for fisheries for fin fish, krill and squid are all likely 
to be connected to the fishing operations of distant water fleets 
elsewhere in the world.  This is particularly important in the area 
around the Falklands/Malvinas in the South Atlantic as there is no 
regulatory regime at present.  This provides the possibility of a 
classical depletion of the marine resources.  If this happens there is 
considerable potential for a switch in fishing effort to the waters in 
the Southern Ocean.
-20-

2. Impacts

Impacts are of two sorts (i) the effect of direct exploitation on the 
abundance of the species concerned and (ii) the effect of exploitation 
of a prey species on the abundance and health of its predators.

3. Controls

With the exception of the whales, which continued to be depleted under 
the management of the International Whaling Commission, all the 
depletion of fish and seals occurred prior to any international 
management agreement.  The current situation is that there are four 
conventions that cover the living marine resources:

(a) The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and 
the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) which are part of the Antarctic Treaty System.

(b) The International Whaling Convention (IWC) and the 1982 Law of the 
Sea Convention (not yet in force) which are not part of the Antarctic 
Treaty System but which are both applicable in the same region as CCAS 
and CCAMLR.

It is reasonable to enquire whether these conventions are adequate to 
cope with the conservation problems posed by the exploitation of the 
living marine resources.

IWC:  Whaling continues within the Antarctic at a relatively small 
level.  Currently the fleets of the USSR and Japan are operating under 
the objection procedure of the IWC.  Under this procedure there is no 
obligation to accept scientific advice on safe catch levels,  although 
both countries are voluntarily operating catch levels that are 
relatively small compared with estimates of stock size and conform to 
some earlier advice of the Scientific Committee. There is no system of 
independent inspection, but catch levels as well as statutory 
information on effort are reported to the IWC.

The IWC has not been concerned to a significant extent with small 
cetaceans in the Southern Ocean.

CCAS:  There is no commercial seal harvesting at present in the 
Antarctic.  As indicated above in the CCAS there are interim catch 
limits which are set at conservative levels.

CCAMLR:  In principle this convention covers all species not covered 
by the IWC and CCAS.  Hence it could be considered as applying to small 
cetaceans.  It is the first conservation agreement to incorpoate an 
ecosystem standard as a basis for conservation measures.  However, fin 
fishing has been the main conservation concern at the early meetings of 
CCAMLR.  The ban on directed fishing for marbled notothenia and the 
restrictions on by-catch are in theory reasonable measures.  In practice 
without a system of monitoring and inspection it is open to doubt that 
there will be much effect.

CCAMLR has discussed the matter of inspection and observation provided 
for under the convention, but to date no system has been implemented.
-21-

There is no restriction on fishing for other fin fish species in the area (except around Iles Kerguelen where the French have instituted efficient controls). With unrestricted fishing and the failure of the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR properly to assess potential yields, due to the lack of data, depletion of these other fin fish species seems likely. The main problems faced by CCAMLR in dealing with fin fish stocks is the lack of historical data (i.e. data obtained prior to the ratification of CCAMLR). Such data are needed for the assessment of the current status of the fin fish.  In the future, with proper data collection and analysis, this problem may become less acute.

There are no restrictions on krill fishing under CCAMLR and to date none have been formally discussed. The main conservation concern lies not with the potential over-exploitation of krill itself, but with the effect exploitation of krill will have on species dependent on krill for their livelihood. This was one of the central concerns of those involved with drafting the CCAMLR. They were concerned that the level of krill harvesting should be kept within bounds that ensured that species dependent on krill for their food supply were not threatened by an erosion of their food resources.  This is a real and proper concern. The baleen whales, several species of seals and numerous species of birds depend on krill. It is therefore quite conceivable that large scale krill harvesting could adversely affect these species.

CCAMLR contains a provision for protected areas where all exploitation is forbidden. There are some conceptual difficulties with the use of this device for a species like krill which moves substantial distances, although such a device could be an effective conservation tool for the fin fish and fragile benthic communities.

One possibility worthy of further study is the way in which protected areas might be used to protect the foraging areas of land based predators.
-22-

C.  Mineral Resources Exploitation

1.  Activities

a)  Historical Activities

Probably the first reports on mineral occurrences in Antarctica were brought 
back to civilisation by the Shackleton and Scott expeditions early this 
century.  These reports concerned coal discoveries in the Transantarctic 
Mountains.  Prior to but mainly since the International Geophysical Year 
(IGY), 1957-58, earth sciences investigations (particularly geological, 
geochemical and geophysical) have been carried out in and around Antarctica as 
part of the broad-based research programmes mounted by signatory nations of 
the Antarctic Treaty.  In the pursuit of knowledge about the ecological 
history of Antarctica these scientific investigations have led, often 
incidentally, to the knowledge that many metallic minerals are present in 
Antarctic rock.

In parallel with this, geophysical investigations onshore and offshore, often 
related to the refinement of Gondwanaland reconstructions (fitting together 
the continental plates into a single supercontinent), have led to the 
identificaton of sedimentary deposits.  Since oil and natural gas originate 
from the breakdown of marine organic matter originally trapped in a sediment, 
the occurrence of sediments of various ages in which these have been found 
elsewhere in the world, has been taken to imply the so far unproven existence 
of hydrocarbon reserves in Antarctica.

b)  Current Activities

Metallic minerals known to occur in and around Antarctica include iron, 
copper, nickel, chromium, molybdenum, cobalt, zinc, manganese, tin, gold and 
silver.  Non-metallic minerals known to occur include coal, graphite, mica, 
phosphate, beryl, rock crystal and white marble.  These occur especially in 
Precambrian rocks, in rocks of the Beacon Supergroup of Greater Antarctica and 
in Mesozoic and Cenozoic rocks of the Antarctic Peninsula.  The scientific 
literature on the known occurrences of these is extensive and publicly 
available.

A great deal has recently been written about the supposed petroleum and 
mineral "riches" of Antarctica, some of this even referring to "immense 
reserves" of iron, coal, nickel, chromium and gold and to "massive 
oilfields".  Yet only two minerals have been found in sufficiently rich 
concentrations to be considered deposits, namely iron in the Prince Charles 
Mountains and coal in the Transantarctic Mountains.  Neither of these is rich 
or accessible enough to be worth exploiting commercially at the present time.

Apart from some very restricted quarrying of aggregate for local construction 
there has been no mineral exploitation in Antarctica.  Presently, under a 
policy of voluntary restraint adopted by the Antarctic Treaty nations, no 
active petroleum or mineral resource exploration or exploitation is taking 
place while these nations pursue the terms of a minerals regime to govern and 
control development, when or if this commences.
-23-

Vigorous geological and geophysical research nevertheless continues.  The 
distinction between pure scientific research and the early phases of mineral 
exploration or science being conducted with ultimate commercial aims, is not 
easy. With respect to this it presently appears that many of the Treaty 
nations have adopted the approach that environmentally benign activities are 
permissible when carried out in a spirit of scientific enquiry and followed as 
soon as possible by the full publication of results.  In legal terms there is 
no prohibition through the Antarctic Treaty on commercially orientated 
science, the issue rather being whether the results of such research are being 
made freely available.  However, there are divergent interpretations as to 
whether the Antarctic Treaty obligation to share research results applies to 
offshore areas - e.g. to marine geophysical research on the continental 
shelf. Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty specifies that nothing in the 
Treaty is to prejudice high seas freedoms, marine scientific research outside 
national territories being one of these freedoms.

c) Projected Activities

As the number of nations active in Antarctica increases and their geological 
research programmes expand, and as scientific tehnlques and logistic 
capabilities advance, so knowledge of the type and distribution of metallic 
and non-metallic mineral occurrences is likely to increase.  In turn this is 
likely to improve, directly or indirectly, the accuracy of predictions on 
their potential as resources without there necessarily being any truly 
exploratory activities.

If and when logistically dedicated and commercially targeted exploration does 
occur, exploitation is not necessarily the automatic consequence it is 
commonly believed to be. Enormous obstacles face the resource exploiters, as 
indeed also those who explore for it.  The extensive, moving ice sheet poses 
the major problem to exploratory drilling, let alone mining operations on the 
continent. Offshore, ocean depths of 500m or more on the narrow continental 
shelf, sea ice and in particular icebergs pose the major obstacles to 
exploitation of hydrocarbon resources should these be discovered.  In addition 
to this, extremely hostile surface conditions onshore and offshore and the 
stormy Southern Ocean pose severe transportation problems with associated high 
costs, while isolation from major consumer centres in the Northern hemisphere 
makes access to markets quite costly. The existence of hydrocarbon deposits in 
more accessible areas and with less costly extraction problems makes 
hydrocarbon exploitation in Antarctica within the next few decades unlikely.

Most authorities conclude that of all minerals, offshore petroleum is the one 
most likely to be fully explored and commercially exploited first.  It has 
been predicted that oilfields might exist bordering the Ross, Amundsen, 
Bellingshausen and Weddell Seas in Lesser Antarctica, and off the Amery Ice 
Shelf in Greater Antarctica.  However, no direct information is available on 
the petroleum geology beneath Antarctic continental shelves, but there have 
been shows of gas reported in the early 1970's from the four Deep Sea Drilling 
Project (DSDP) sites in the Ross Sea, drilled by the "Glomar Challenger" in 
the 1972/73 summer.
-24-

It has also been generally accepted that these regions present the most severe 
environment on Earth to carry out petroleum exploration or exploitation.  Much 
research into the types of hazards that might be encountered would need to 
precede such activities.  Attempts have already been made to define some of 
these, such as climatic, oceanographic and glaciologic hazards.  At the same 
time the geological hazards that could actually lead to blowouts and spills 
have so far been largely ignored.  They include sea-bed instability, the 
presence of permafrost, and slumping (i.e. collapse of sediment layers) on 
steeper slopes.  Since much of the continental shelf in these regions is 
covered by a moving ice shelf flowing off the continent, keeping open access 
holes through this is itself a technology in need of development.

The gross limitations to metallic or non-metallic mineral resource exploration 
and exploitation in and around Antarctica could be gathered in under one or 
more of the headings "economical", "technological", and "political".  A complex 
interaction of domestic and international factors exists among these, making 
projections on what might be exploited, where and when, a difficult exercise.  
Although no hydrocarbon resources are yet known in Antarctica and the 
petroleum industry appears disinterested at present, except perhaps in 
prospecting to gain a better idea of what might exist, economic and political 
considerations may change this position over the next four decades.  By then, 
technological advancement may make commercial exploitation of offshore oil in 
Antarctica possible.  On the other hand, if economic prospects become 
attractive, adapting existing technologies for Antarctic conditions may 
require a shorter time.  Onshore exploitation of other minerals seems 
considerably less likely over the same time frame, though discovery of a high 
value strategic mineral there may lead to earlier action.

Ice, although not usually considered a mineral, is viewed in many quarters as 
an exploitable Antarctic resource for its fresh water.  Ice is set free from 
the continent in the form of icebergs calved from glacier tongues and the 
northern extremities of ice shelves.  Some estimates suggest that 
approximately 2,000 km3 of icebergs are calved each year which equals the 
world's annual consumption of fresh water.  There has been serious 
consideration of the possibility of moving icebergs to other parts of the 
world where fresh water is in short supply.  The actual distribution, movement 
and structure of icebergs is being studied, and ways of encapsulating them in 
giant plastic bags to separate their melt water from the surrounding ocean 
have been proposed.  Ways of assisting them to move in a required direction 
without actually towing or pushing them with a vessel, are also being 
considered.  Despite current scepticism, it may indeed be possible to achieve 
this in the future, although at present ice is not being exported as a 
freshwater resource.

2.  Impacts

a) Marine, terrestrial and atmospheric

One of the factors generally viewed as limiting to mineral exploration and 
exploitation is the relatively undisturbed condition of much of the Antarctic 
environment and the widely held desire to maintain this situation.  This 
desire, let alone the economic, political and technological limitations 
mentioned previously, imposes severe restraints on such activities.
-25-

The effects that mineral exploration and exploitation might have on the 
Antarctic onshore and offshore environments is also a subject that has 
received some attention. Both SCAR and IUCN have independently investigated 
and published on this topic.  The most detailed published analysis to date 
remains the EAMREA Report, produced by the SCAR Group of Specialists on the 
Environmental Impact Assessment of Mineral Resource Exploration and 
Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA) in 1979.  The 1981 and 1983 reports by the 
SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environmental Implications of Possible 
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation (AEIMEE), also address this subject in 
great detail. Together with a more recent SCAR publication in 1985 on "Man's 
Impact on the Antarctic Environment" and an IUCN publication in 1984 on 
"Conservation and Development of Antarctic Ecosystems", these adequately cover 
existing knowledge on this subject.

Since no serious mineral exploration or exploitation has taken place, the full 
impacts of these on the Antarctic environment remain to a greater or lesser 
extent conjectural.  Similarly, depending on locality, there is still 
insufficient knowledge and understanding of the structure, functioning and 
interdependence of the Antarctic ecosystems or the technology that might be 
used in exploitation.

Should exploitation occur, factors that would influence the nature and extent 
of the impacts would have to include (among others: the locality of the 
activity (e.g. offshore, interior, coastal), its scale, its method (e.g. 
drilling, tunnelling, open-cast), its servicing and infrastructure 
requirements and related installations (e.g. domestic facilities, water 
supply, power and fuel supply, transportation requirements, etc.), the amount 
and nature of dust and other debris produced, the extent to which on-site 
refinement takes place whether on or offshore, the duration of the activity, 
whether the activity is seasonal or all-year round, and in the case of 
offshore activity the extent to which this gives rise to onshore 
installations.  These would be expected to impact physically, chemically and 
biologically upon the marine and/or terrestrial environments as well as the 
atmospheric environment.

b) Local, regional and global

The kinds of impacts mentioned above would be expected to pollute and 
otherwise affect the environment at and close to the site of activity, and up 
to some distance away (e.g downstream or downwind).  These direct effects 
would in turn be expected to set in motion chains of events impacting 
indirectly on additional species and processes within ecosystems close to and 
far away from the activity. Activities in the interior of Antarctica would be 
expected to have less impact on the biological environment than coastal or 
offshore activities, but this would not necessarily hold for the physical and 
atmospheric environments.  Local weather, water, and ice flow patterns could 
be influenced.  The value of sites of exploration or exploitation to science 
might also be diminished.

The extent to which mineral exploration or exploitation would have a regional, 
as opposed to only a local impact on the environment would depend upon, among 
other factors: type, intensity and routing of transportation to and from the 
site, the density of sites, the position of sites with respect to prevailing 
directions of wind, water and ice flow, the volume and nature of gaseous
-26-

outputs, and the quantity of and disposal mechanisms for waste. Climatic,
water circulation and ice-flow patterns might be influenced on a regional
scale by a high regional density of exploitation.

Another important consideration that could have both local and regional impact
on the biological environment is the fact that most exploration and
exploitation activity would be expected to take place during the summer
months.  This period is the most biologically productive season.  Any impact
which might inhibit recruitment to biological populations, be they plant or
animal, marine or terrestrial, at this time of the year can be expected to
have a serious effect on their future stability.  Recurring impacts over
successive seasons could lead to local or regional disappearance.

It has been suggested that relatively minor atmospheric pollution being
locally produced or drifting in from outside the Antarctic could disturb the
delicate mass energy balance of the continent, leading to an increase or a
decrease in the ice sheet.  This in turn could have a significant effect on
sea level, climate, weather patterns, and oceanic circulation.

3. Controls

As has been mentioned, it is likely that economic if not also political
considerations will act as the ultimate determinants of when mineral resource
exploitation might take place in Antarctica.  Because interest in minerals
exploitation in Antarctic, particularly petroleum, was already expressed in
the 1970's, the Antarctic Treaty nations initiated in 1982 negotiations on the
development of an international legal instrument that would be in place to
control such activities if and when they commenced.  Negotiations concerned
with this minerals regime for Antarctica continue at present.

The regime seems likely to parallel the institutional arrangements of CCAMLR
in two ways:  (i) it will establish a Commission of members active in
minerals-related activities to determine the acceptablilty of potential
minerals activities in defined areas of Antarctica and to elaborate general
guidelines and procedures to govern them, and (ii) it will establish an
advisory committee in which all parties of the regime will be represented to
advise it on technical aspects affecting these decisions.  Unlike CCAMLR, the
minerals regime will set up, in addition, regional regulatory committees to
draft more detailed regulations, terms and conditions specific to the region
in question and to review applications to conduct minerals activities in these
areas, taking into account the expert views of the advisory committee.  The
details of the composition of these institutions, their relationship to each
other, and their decision making procedures are not yet fully agreed.

The minerals regime will not itself establish in detail the regulations,
terms, and conditions applicable to approved minerals activities.  It will
enumerate a series of environmental and other principles to which the decision
making bodies will give effect through more detailed guidelines and
regulations as the need arises; that is, once the decision is taken that
mineral activities may be acceptable in a defined area of Antarctica subject
to a regulatory committee.  Before these details can be elaborated and 
proposals for minerals activities considered,it will be necessary for the 
decision making and advisory bodies to have acquired enough information on 
mineral resources and applicable technologies, their potential impacts, and 
the hazards that may affect the conduct of minerals activities, in order to 
confidently make such decisions.

The applicable environmental principles, in their present stage of elaboration 
in the regime, seem reasonable. They include requirements for the 
determination of the acceptability of minerals activities, for environmental 
assessement, liability for damages, the application of adequate technology and 
safety standards, and the development of contingency plans.
-29-

Regular commercial tourist flights in the Antarctic Peninsula region commenced 
in 1983/4; now often including landings at the Teniente Rodolfo Marsh base on 
King George Island, South Shetland Islands.  Firm data are lacking, but 
activity here may be increasing, as Chilean Air Force Hercules C-130 aircraft, 
carrying passengers are making more regular flights, an American tour company 
operates a series of flights from Punta Arenas; and in February 1984 a Chilean 
airline flew over the region for passengers from a cruise liner.

Private expeditions to the Antarctic are organised for mountaineering, 
small-craft voyages, adventure and some research.  Major climbing expeditions 
began in 1957 during geological surveys conducted from Scott Base, and reached 
significant proportions with the American Antarctic Mountaineering Expedition 
to the Ellsworth Mountains in 1966/7. Climbing expeditions, are now common 
events. Visits by small private vessels are becoming more frequent and 
include, notably, those by David Lewis, including a solo circumnavigation 
voyage from 1972 to 1974 in the 10 m "Ice Bird", a 1978 voyage to the Ross Sea 
in the 17 m yawl "Solo", and in the 21 m schooner "Dick Smith Explorer" 
voyages to the coast of George V Land and Adelie Land in 1981/2 and to Greater 
Antarctica 1982 to 1984, including 10 months ice-bound in Prydz Bay.  These 
latter voyages, funded by the private Oceanic Research Foundation, involved 
exploration, research and historic site restoration. Several small French 
yachts have visited the Antarctic Peninsula recently for cruising, climbing, 
skiing and hang-gliding. In 1980/1 the Transglobe Expedition completed only 
the second crossing of the continent by motorised land vehicles, and in 1985/6 
the Footsteps of Scott Expedition retraced Scott's journey of 1911-12 to the 
South Pole, though losing its support ship "Southern Quest" in pack ice off 
Beaufort Island.  In the latter season, the 887-tonne converted tug 
"Greenpeace" was unsuccessful in attempting to enter the Ross Sea, to 
establish a base on Ross Island for raising public awareness about Antarctic 
conservation.

Goodwill and VIP visits, including royalty, government dignitaries, 
photographers, artists and media representatives, often involve repeated 
visits to places of special interest such as wildlife rookeries and historic 
sites. Two non-governmental international conferences have been convened in 
the Antarctic, on the Antarctic Treaty System; in 1982 at Teniente Marsh and 
in 1985 at a site near the Beardmore Glacier.

Station personnel are the most numerous Antarctic residents and visitors, and 
their off-duty activities include sight-seeing, skiing and climbing.

b) Projected Activities

The future of tourism in the Antarctic must remain somewhat speculative, but 
given present trends it is reasonable to expect some expansion of tourist 
activities.  However, this is likely to be limited because of the high costs 
and financial risks incurred by long distances and logistical complexity of 
travel in the Antarctic. Demand is also likely to be limited by expense, but 
numbers of tourists could escalate if large cruise liners began operating on a 
regular basis, or if there was significant growth of facilities such as 
hotels, perhaps associated with increased aircraft landings.
-30-

2. Impacts

To date, tourism has had minimal adverse impact on the Antarctic environment,
especially compared with that accompanying the construction and operation of
stations.  Moreover, the types of impact from tourists are essentially the
same as those from.scientists and support staff.

There are, however, potential problems inherent in tourist activities which
give cause for concern.

a)  Overcrowding and environmental disturbance

Although landings of cruise passengers are infrequent, they are localised and
repetitive and usually occur at sites which are vulnerable to disturbance.
For example, at the Cape Royds Adelie penguin rookery, a 50% reduction in the
breeding population over a six-year period was attributed to stress from
repeated visits by tourists and personnel of nearby scientific stations.  High
visitor numbers at the three historic huts on Ross Island, including 1,300 in
the four seasons from 1977/8 to 1980/1, have necessitated introduction of some
restrictions and supervision.

Experience reveals that most tourists have a serious concern for environmental
protection and that operators are acting responsibly in carrying lecturers,
limiting the size of landings, and providing adequate supervision.  But
systematic monitoring is required to give a better measure of impacts, to
determine acceptable carrying capacities at popular tourist destinations, and
to establish visitor programmes which avoid undesirable effects.

b)  Disruption of scientific programmes

Scientific stations are popular tourist destinations.  Such visits are often
welcomed by station personnel but, if excessive, they can be disruptive.  Of
particular concern are accidents requiring search and rescue operations, which
can be expensive and hazardous, and unacceptably demanding on the limited
available personnel, time, equipment and facilities.  There have been no fatal
accidents among cruise ships, but several cases of groundings, and stranding
of passengers.  The Air New Zealand disaster on Mount Erebus in which 257
people died, caused major disruption to scientific programmes at McMurdo Sound
and Scott Base in 1979/80, and in 1985/6 ten tourists and crew of a private
plane were killed in a crash at Nelson Island.

c)  Expansion of tourist facilities

Tourist overflights, cruises and private independent expeditions have no
requirement for permanent facilities - though they do rely on established
observation and communication networks for weather and navigation
information.  However, landings by tourist aircraft are becoming more frequent
in the Antarctic Peninsula area, particularly at Teniente Marsh where
passengers are accommodated in a hostel.  This could create a demand for
development of tourist accommodation and associated facilities on a grander
scale, thereby adding an entirely new dimension to Antarctic tourism.  There
have also been suggestions of using permanently moored ships as floating
hotels for airborne tourists.  Any future development of airstrips, bases, and
port facilities in the Antarctic should give consideration to the implications
for expansion of tourism.
-31-

Set against the impacts are the undoubted benefits of tourism for Antarctic 
conservation and science, though these are indirect and difficult to assess. 
Tourism provides opportunity for visitors to gain awareness and understanding 
of the global importance of Antarctica and this, in turn, engenders sympathy 
and support from the international community for its protection.  Experience 
has shown that private expeditions, when well-planned and safely conducted, 
can provide an outlet for the human desire for challenge and adventure.  They 
can also provide access for scientists to otherwise inaccessible areas, 
allowing innovative research which requires no permanent facilities or 
expensive logistical support.

3.  Controls

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties drafted the first recommendations on 
the effects of tourism in the Antarctic in 1966, and by 1975 tourism was 
formally recognised as a natural development in the Treaty area and one 
requiring regulation.

Controls and accepted practices for tourism and non-governmental expeditions 
have since been elaborated in a series of recommendations from Consultative 
Meetings.

In summary, these include procedures to be followed between governments in 
giving prior notification of expeditions and exchanging information; 
arrangements and conditions for granting approvals to visit scientific 
stations; accepted practices and relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty 
about which visitors should be made aware, and the requirement for tour 
operators to submit reports on their activities to the Treaty nations whose 
stations are visited.  There have also been recommendations on the designation 
of Areas of Special Tourist Interest, including one which would restrict all 
tourist landings to such designated areas.  This matter is still under 
consideration.

Several of the Consultative Parties have prepared their own policies and 
conditions governing tourist activities, based on recommendations from 
Consultative Meetings.  These give details of requirements and procedures for 
giving prior notification of visits to scientific stations; use of station 
facilities and rules of conduct; supervision and briefings; safety and 
self-sufficiency of expeditions; and restrictions on access to protected 
areas.  SCAR has produced a useful guide for visitors to the Antarctic which 
has been published by several states active in the Antarctic.

Significant gaps in information, especially with respect to small private 
expeditions, suggest the need for an improved and enforceable procedure for 
receiving reports from tour operators, and for exchanging this information 
among Treaty parties and to SCAR.  In 1985 the Consultative Parties agreed to 
add reports on tourist activities to the list of information to be included in 
annual exchanges.

Tour operators and organisers of non-governmental expeditions have generally 
complied with the requirements of the Treaty, but there are deficiencies and 
problems.  Recommendations of Consultative Meetings are not laws.  Thus, 
conditions regulating tourist activities are legally binding only when 
included in national legislation, and then apply only to citizens of that 
nation.  Otherwise, the conditions and policies are no more than informal 
guidelines encouraging responsible conduct of tourist operations.  The two 
cruise ships most frequently operating in Antarctic waters carry registrations 
from non-Treaty countries, so legal enforcement is out of the question.
-32-

There is no uniformity among national procedures for enforcing regulations and 
the only international procedure is that provided by the Antarctic Treaty 
inspection provisions.  Nor are there any penalties for non-compliance. 
Enforcement is complicated by differing views on the territorial status of 
Antarctica.  In order to enforce compliance on states bound by Antarctic 
Treaty measures, countries must rely on either nationality of the individual, 
nationality of vessel, or territorial jurisdiction (for claimant states). 
These issues are explained in Section V.  The few SPAs are the only places in 
Antarctica from which tourists are absolutely prohibited, if subject to 
Antarctic Teaty regulations.
-33-

E.      Settlements

1.      Activities

The concept of establishing family groups in Antarctica dates from the 1947-48
US Ronne Research Expedition, when two members of the expedition were
accompanied by their wives.  Their stay was only brief, but its sequel was the
birth of the first child conceived on the Antarctic continent.  More
definitive plans to establish a settlement in the Antarctic date from the late
1970's.  In January, 1978 a son was born to the wife of the station commander
at the Argentine research station Esperanza, in Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula.
At that time the couple had their three other children living with them at the
base.  The following season, 1978-79, the Argentines installed nine other
wives and 17 children at the base.  Since then families have lived in
individual houses and a school has been provided for the children.

In 1983-84 married quarters were established at the Chilean station Teniente
Rodolfo Marsh on King George Island, South Shetland Islands.  In 1984 six
families were living at the settlement and it was planned to increase the
number to 25.  In 1985 a commercial bank opened a branch at Marsh to serve the
residents and the visting tourists.

It is unclear how the establishment of settlements relates to Article IV para.
2 of the Antarctic Treaty.

Conditions at even the most attractive Antarctic locality are unlikely to
attract families with children to stay for extended periods, so the
establishment of permanent communities seems improbable.  It has been
suggested that, should mineral exploitation develop, settlements might become
more widespread.  Evidence from other harsh environments suggests that such
development would be small in scale, with most crews working in the field for
limited periods before returning to their families in their countries of
origin.

2.      Impacts

The impacts that arise from settlements are essentially the same as those
arising from other human occupation.  No special problems are presented.

3.      Controls

There are no controls on the establishment of settlements, nor any obligation
to report the numbers of families or facilities involved.
ANNEX I

Membership of the Antarctic Treaty

Consultative Parties                                  Non-consultative parties
Argentina                                            Bulgaria
Australia                                            Cuba
Belgium                                              Czechoslovakia
Brazil                                               Denmark
Chile                                                Finland
China                                                Hungary
France                                               German Democratic Republic
Germany, Federal Republic                            Italy
India                                                Netherlands
Japan                                                Papua New Guinea
New Zealand                                          Peru
Norway                                               Romania
Poland                                               Spain
South Africa                                         Sweden
USSR
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay

SCAR National Membership

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
France
German Democratic Republic
Germany, Federal Republic
India
Japan
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
South Africa
USSR
United Kingdom
United States of America
ANNEX II

ACRONYMS

AEIMEE         SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environmental
               Implications of Possible Mineral Exploration and Exploitation

AT             Antarctic Treaty

ATCM           Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

ATCP           Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party

ATS            Antarctic Treaty System

CCAMLR         Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
               Resources

CCAS           Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals

DSDP           Deep Sea Drilling Programme

EAMREA         SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Impact Assessment
               of Mineral Resource Exploration and Exploitation in
               Antarctica

EIA            Environmental Impact Assessment

GEMS           Global Environmental Monitoring System

GESAMP         Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution

ICSU           International Council of Scientific Unions

IGY            International Geophysical Year

IMO            International Maritime Organization

IOC            Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission

IUCN           International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
               Resources

IWC            International Whaling Commission

LOS            Law of the Sea

NGO            Non-governmental organization

SCAR           Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research

SPA            Specially Protected Area (under AT)

SSSI           Site of Special Scientific Interest (under AT)

UNEP           United Nations Environmental Programme

Unesco         United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
               Organization

WMO            World Meteorological Organization
-35-

III.   COMPREHENSIVE EFFECTS OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

A.  Effects from outside the Antarctic

In addition to the human activities in Antarctica addressed in the preceding
sections, environmental effects may derive from pollution and other man-made
changes generated outside the area.  These can be transported through the
atmosphere, by sea, or in human conveyances such as ships and airplanes.  In
order to detect and assess their environmental effects, first it will be
necessary to collect baseline data on the state of the Antarctic atmospheric,
terrestrial and marine environments.

To date, baseline data on atmospheric chemistry has been recorded
continuously at the South Pole station and several others since 1959.
However, other aspects of the Antarctic environment, such as the chemistry of
various domains of the Southern Ocean have been sampled only opportunistically.

The most obvious examples of substances transported through the atmosphere
include:

Carbon dioxide         Increased concentrations, especially in the Northern
                       Hemisphere, by burning of fossil fuels.

Methane                Produced mainly by reduction of organic debris, such as
                       soil humification and animal digestion, and more in the
                       "land hemisphere" (Northern Hemisphere)

Chloro-fluorocarbon    Released by varous chemical industries and products
compounds              (refrigerants, aerosol spray cans etc.)

Krypton-85             An isotope released from all nuclear power plants as
                       well as atomic weapons explosions.

The carbon dioxide and methane concentrations are of concern because these
gases transmit shorter wavelenght radiation from the sun better than longer
wavelength radiation.  The result is that these gases act in the fashion of
greenhouse glass to trap radiation of the infrared wavelengths within the
troposphere.  The results are still under debate, some factions contending the
climate of the entire earth would become warmer but the tropics would acquire
additional cloud cover and become cooler.  As a result concentrations of
these gases in the atmosphere must be monitored carefully, and the Antarctic
continent provides the site for greatest freedom from local contributions.

The chloro-fluorocarbons are known to cause destruction of ozone, in the
atmosphere, primarily in the stratosphere.  There is an ozone-negative anomaly
over a portion of the Antarctic Continent at present, probably natural but
poorly understood.  Concern may develop over the possibility that industrial
release of the chlorofluorocarbons may disturb the natural balànce of ozone.
Effects on the "ozone window" over the Antarctic Continent need to be watched
as part of the inquiry as to the significance of that feature.
-36-

Human activities contribute to the increase in Aitken nuclei (particles 
smaller than 1 micrometer) in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere.
This effect, again, is greater in the Northern than in the Southern 
Hemisphere, and it is true.that, owing to Hadley Cell circulation, the 
exchange between the two hemispheres is relatively small.  However, eventually 
the atmosphere does become uniform over the earth.  The increased use of jet 
aircraft in the Southern Hemisphere will speed up the process by contributions 
of nuclei.  The main significance of the nuclei is that of causing 
condensation of moisture in the form of clouds, droplets or ice crystals, and 
those are precursors of rain or snow.  Monitoring of Aitken nuclei in the 
Antarctic may prove a useful piece of information relating to Antarctic 
weather.

The concern abour Krypton-85 is that this gas as it accumulates will make the 
atmosphere increasingly conductive electrically.  The rate at which this is 
likely to occur, and the magnitude of the effect on earth weather, radio 
transmission, and the global electric circuit are still quite unknown. 
Antarctica is a particularly advantageous site for monitoring this gas, and 
that should certainly be continued.

High voltage power transmission lines cause disturbance to the ionosphere to 
the extent that a map of some of the high-voltage networks (e.g. in New York 
State) are reflected in the ionosphere.  It is not known what effects 
disruption of the integrity of the ionosphere may cause, but this may require 
careful attention, as through studies in both polar regions.

Pollutants transported by sea are primarily oil, toxic wastes and marine 
debris like persistent plastics and synthetic materials such as netting and 
ropes.  Oil spills in the marine environment have not persisted to the extent 
earlier believed, although tar balls and other dense aggregates can persist on 
the order of several decades, especially when coated with mineral debris.

Plastic materals transported by ocean currents or discarded from ships may 
pose more problems than petroleum spills on the open sea.  Polystyrene nodules 
and larger plastic fragments have evidently great persistence, as these have 
been found along with cordage, fishing floats and timber on beaches of 
sub-Antarctic islands.  It is to be expected that if current practices 
continue, plastic bodies such as polystyrene, with specific gravity less than 
sea water or other means of buoyancy, may eventually come into the Southern 
Ocean.  One of the problems created is the accumulation of these floating 
fragments on the gills of fish and in the stomachs of seabirds.

In addition to controls produced by the Antarctic Treaty System, there are a 
variety of international and regional agreements governing marine and 
atmospheric pollution that apply to such pollution generated outside 
Antarctica.  These include the International Maritime Organization treaties on 
marine pollution, the London Dumping Convention, the LOS convention, UNEP 
regional agreements on marine pollution and agreements on transboundary air 
pollution.  There is also a body of evolving "soft law" comprised of such 
documents as UNEP guidelines on protection from land-based pollution and from 
offshore mining and drilling activities and IMO manuals on procedures for 
emergency response to accidental oilspills.  The applicability and 
effectiveness of these documents to pollution control in Antarctica will have 
to be assessed.
-37-

B. Synergistic and cumulative effects within and outside the Antarctic.

Increasing scientific and political interest in carrying out research in
Antarctica will entail a build-up of stations and logistics facilities.  To
the extent that countries establish more and larger settlements or establish
shore-based facilities to support exploitation of marine living or non-living
resources, this will aggravate problems, e.g. waste disposal, availability and
use of energy, and human impacts on the Antarctic terrain.  So too will any
development of facilities to support tourism.  Moreover, as one country
decides to construct another airstrip, for instance, it may then determine
that to recoup additional revenue from under-utilized aircraft, it should
organize a few tours to Antarctica. As more revenue is generated, however,
this could produce net revenue that in turn allows for additional scientific,
logistic support and tourist activities.  A similar chain of events could
spring from the addition of research ships to a country's national programme
and thus hasten the growth of activities and impact in Antarctica.

In 1985 the Consultative Parties began to address the issue of overcrowding
and concentration of scientific activities in Antarctica and it was suggested
that SCAR would examine this question and provide assistance to Treaty parties
seeking advice on the siting of a new station.  The thirteenth ATCM also
recommended (XIII-6) that national operating agencies consult together where
they have stations in this same vicinity to safeguard existing scientific
activities, avoid operational logistic difficulties and avoid undue adverse
environmental effects arising from cumulative impacts.  With the growth in
different types of Antarctic activities it will be necessary to devise means
to assure that their combined and cumulative effects are adequately assessed.

Issues of coordination among Antarctic policies and institutions specific to
one or another Antarctic activity will be considered in Section V.  Existing
controls over these issues have been addressed in previous sections.
Figure 1

Number of cruises and total passengers carried by "Lindblad Explorer" (95 
passenger berths) and "World Discoverer" (120 passenger berths) in Antarctica 
1965/6 to 1984/5. (Note: Lindblad Travel Inc. chartered "Lapataia" 1965/6 and 
1966/7, "Navarino" and "Magga Dan" 1967/8, "Aquiles" 1968/9).

                                                                 Total
Number of 
Cruises                                                       Passengers

                                                                 900
                                                                 800
                                                                 700
                                                                 600
                                                                 500
                                                                 400
                                                                 300
                                                                 200
                                                                 100
                                                                   0
5
4
3
2
1


1965/6         1966/7         1967/8         1968/9         1969/70        1970/1         1971/2         1972/3         1973/4         1974/5         1975/6         1976/7         1977/8         1978/9         1979/80        1980/1         1981/2         1982/3         1983/4         1984/5

Austral Summer
Number of                  Total 
Flights                    Passengers

                              5000
                              4000
                              3000
12-                           2000
10-                           1000
 5-
 0                            0

1976/7  1977/8  1978/9  1979/80
       Austral Summer

Figure 2

Number of flights and total passengers carried by Qantas and Air New Zealand 
on day-flights to Antarctica 1976/7 to 1979/80.  (Note: passenger numbers 
based on average loadings of B747 (300), DC10 (230), B707 (140).)
-41-

on request to the greatest extent practicable and feasible, and in accordance 
with national laws and regulations, the annual exchanges of information on 
scientific programmes and results.  In the context of CCAMLR there is no 
public availability of detailed as opposed to summary data.  In the IWC only 
outline statistics on catch and effort are available publicly.  Detailed 
biological data are specifically excluded from the public record unless the 
agreement of both individuals and the States concerned has been obtained.
ANTARCTIC CONVERGENCE


SOUTH
AMERICA                  Falkland
                         Islands
                           South Georgia
                           South Sandwich
                           Islands
                           South Orkney
                           Islands
                           South Shetland
                           Islands
                           Antarctic
                           Peninsula
                           L E S S E R     Antarctica
                           Peter I 0y
MARIE BYRD LAND          Marie Byrd
                         Land
ROSS                     Ross
                         Sea
                         McMurdo Scott
                         Ice Shelf
GREATER                  Halley
ANTARCTICA               Ronne
                         Shelf
                         Neumayer
                         S a n a e
QUEEN MAUDO              75*S - LAND
LAND                     Syowa
                         Enderby
                         Land
                         Mawson
                         Prydz Bay
                         Davis
                         Mirny
                         Oasis
                         Casey
                         Wilkes
                         Land
                         Victoria
                         Land
                         Dumont
                         D'Urville
                         Balleny
                         Islands
                         Scott Island
                         Macquarie
                         Island
                         Campbell
                         Island
                         Auckland Island
NEW
ZEALAND
AUSTRALIA


                      60*S
                      45*S


75*W  70*  65*  60*  55*W  50*W  180*  150*  120*


SOUTH
AMERICA                  Palmer
                         Faraday
                         Rothera
                         Fossil
                         Bluff
                         Belingshausen
                         Frei
                         Arctowski
                         Deception
                         Almirante
                         Brown


80*W                      50*W                      180*                      150*
-43-

V.  SUGGESTIONS TO ADVANCE ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION

The previous sections of this report have addressed individually the legal authorities, policies, and institutions that govern conservation in Antarctica
and have identified specific inadequacies and gaps in these regimes.  They
have covered:

        Science and Logistics
        Marine Living Resources Activities
        Mineral Resources Activities
        Tourism
        Settlements
        Comprehensive effects of human activities on the Antarctic environment
        Data and research requirements.

This section offers suggestions for further study to improve scientific
knowledge, legal authorities, policies, and institutions as they would
contribute to Antarctic conservation, bearing in mind current efforts by
Antarctic Treaty parties to further develop the conservation regime in
Antarctica.  It does not claim to be either definitive or comprehensive.

It is recognized that most of the suggestions are not new.  In some cases,
implementation is already on its way; in others there is much room for
improvement.  Parties new to Antarctic activities might particularly welcome
some of the suggestions as guidelines for their programmes.  It is further
recognized that all the suggestions cannot be implemented at once, therefore
priorities have to be developed.

Information

An important step in seeking to improve conservation measures in
Antarctica with respect to any activity undertaken there is to increase the
type and volume of information available on the activity and its impact on
Antarctica.  As a more complete record of national practice develops, it will
facilitate effective enforcement of existing conservation measures and help
identify additional measures that might be enacted.

There are three primary sources of information that can be used to
identify potentially adverse impacts of Antarctic activities:

        (i) the annual exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty and the
annual national reports to SCAR;

        (ii) inspection reports produced by official observers under the Antarctic
Treaty, and

        (iii) environmental impact assessments prepared by governments on proposed
activities in Antarctic and follow-up monitoring.

It is suggested that studies be undertaken of ways to expand and
standardize the categories of information contained in the annual exchanges on
scientific and logistics programmes, and to promote a comparable level of
detail for the information provided.  For instance, information exchanged
under the Antarctic Treaty could be more specific on matters affecting the
environment, such as power generation.
-44-

It is suggested that the possibilities be explored for instituting formal 
reporting requirements by states party to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS)
regimes on their efforts to implement and ensure compliance with measures
adopted under such regimes, whether legislatively or as enforcement actions.

It is suggested that those responsible for the design and execution of 
research and monitoring programmes consider how to improve collection,
storage, and utilization of data and information needed for long-term
conservation in Antarctica.

Compliance

There is no detailed record of compliance with ATS regimes.  Few countries
conduct inspections as provided for under the Antarctic Treaty and national
practice varies in making public the inspection reports.  Under CCAMLR, there
are as yet no measures to implement observation and inspection as provided for
in the Convention.  The information provided in previous inspection reports,
by member governments as called for in the different regimes, and in
environmental impact assessments (EIAs) is useful for those planning to
conduct inspections in Antarctica.

It is suggested that inspection reports be made publicly available.

It is suggested that the possibility be explored of preparing a checklist
for inspectors to use in carrying out their work in order to produce more
detailed, complete and comparable information in these reports.  This
checklist should include items covering environmental concerns, such as waste
disposal practices.

It is suggested that methods for increasing the frequency and extending
the coverage of inspections be examined, whether under the Antarctic Treaty,
under CCAMLR, or under the future minerals regime.  One way to do so may be to
encourage states to carry out joint inspections.

It is suggested that the possibility of drawing inspectors also from
outside the Treaty parties having a variety of relevant expertises be
explored.

Ensuring compliance with ATS regimes is complicated by the fact that
national practice varies with respect to implementing Antarctic Treaty
recommendations and incorporating them as national law.  Moreover, Antarctic
Treaty recommendations are binding only on Consultative Parties.
Non-consultative parties are encouraged to accept them as binding (Rec
III-7).  Activities by individuals and vessels from states not party to the
Antarctic treaty are not obliged to comply with the Antarctic Treaty or
recommendations adopted pursuant to it.  Enforcement is further complicated by
differing views on the territorial status of Antarctica.  States bound by
Antarctic Treaty measures must rely on either nationality of individual,
nationality of vessel, and/or territorial jurisdiction (of claimant states).
-45-

It is suggested that the possibility be explored of assessing the
following: (i) the varied procedures employed by Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties to implement and enforce conservation measures in Antarctica and the
extent to which they are legally binding; (ii) efforts by the non-consultative
Parties to implement and enforce Antarctic Treaty measures; and (iii) how to
extend the application of these measures to all states, organizations and
individuals active in Antarctica, including non-governmental expeditions.

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

Environmental impact assessment is central to the problem of identifying
potentially adverse effects of proposed activities on the Antarctic and
surrounding Southern Ocean. Thereafter, periodic reviews and regular
monitoring are necessary.

It is suggested that the possibilities for agreement on environmental
impact assessment procedures applicable to all Antarctic activities be further
explored and options developed. Such procedures could be applied under
national programmes or with respect to activities subject to approval by
institutions established by ATS legal regimes. They could draw on relevant
developments in international law and policy on EIA procedures, such as the
UNEP guidelines on this topic and articles 204-206 in the Law of the Sea
Convention.

It is also suggested that the assessments be circulated for review and
comment prior to final decisions at least to Treaty parties and observers
invited to take part in the relevant ATS regime. It would be desirable if, as
a general rule, these assessments could be made available for scrutiny by
outside experts.

It is further suggested that the impacts of on-going activities should be
subject to regular, long-term monitoring and review, and that procedures as
already agreed by SCAR be considered to facilitate revision of relevant
regulations so as to take account of the results of monitoring programmes.

It is suggested that methods for designing monitoring programmes to
identify cumulative and combined effects of different activities in Antarctica
be considered.

There is a gap in procedures for environmental protection in Antarctica
involving the response to emergencies that could affect Antarctic conservation
significantly.

It is suggested that procedures be investigated to permit expeditious
response to such emergencies.

Education and Public Availability of Information

The benefits of ensuring public availability of ATS documents and
information as well as public education and debate on Antarctic matters relate
both to the conduct of activities in Antarctica and to the formulation,
implementation and enforcement of policies governing these activities. For
instance, if all visitors to the Antarctic (including ships' crews, military
personnel and tourists) were aware of the Agreed Measures, the Code of Conduct
-46-

for Antarctic Activities and Stations, and other requirements for protecting 
and conserving the Antarctic environment, they would be in a better position 
to comply with them.     

It is suggested that among educational materials developed priority by 
given to the preparation of a clearly written, non-technical booklet listing 
these regulations.     

It is further suggested that the value of developing training programmes 
in conservation principles and techniques for personnel to be stationed in 
Antarctica be considered.

Coordination and Institutional Development

As the type and intensity of activities carrie out in Antarctica expand, 
it will become more important to ensure coordination among the different 
institutions and regimes that comprise the ATS in order to promote consistent 
application of standards.  In 1985 the Consultative Parties adopted one 
measure to improve coordination among different ATS regimes by calling for 
reports from CCAMLR, SCAR, and CCAS at their biennial Consultative Meetings.

It is suggested that the establishment of new institutions to carry out 
this function be explored, such as a secretariat under the Antarctic Treaty.

It is further suggested that, in order to coordinate ongoing review of 
Antarctic activities taking place under different ATS regimes as they may 
potentially impact on Antarctica, methods be explored to collect information 
on plans for any new or expanded activities in Antarctica.

It is suggested that additional mechanisms to facilitate effective 
enforcement of ATS regimes be considered.
-47-

It is suggested that the potential benefits of developing more extensive 
working relationships with appropriate international organizations should be 
examined.  For instance, as contemplated in a decision of the twelfth 
consultative meeting, inviting these organizations to participate as observers 
in consultative meetings could promote a wider exchange of information and 
expertise about Antarctic environmental matters discussed at these meetings.

Marine Living Resources Exploitation

It is likely that the suggestions made for marine conservation activities 
will appear somewhat arbitrary.  Both CCAMLR and the International Whaling 
Commisson (IWC) have active Scientific Committees that are involved in a 
series of activities of high relevance and importance to conservation in the 
Antarctic.  Rather than review and endorse these activitites, it is felt more 
appropriate to highlight those areas of study which might not be on the 
cantral agenda of these groups.

If whaling continues at its current levels, there will be a need to assess 
the way in which the minke whale stocks are responding to exploitation.  This 
activity is currently being undertaken by the Scientific Committee of the 
IWC.  If this were to cease, alternatives would need to be explored.  In the 
future, the recovery (or lack of it) of the great whale populations may be a 
management issue for CCAMLR.

It is suggested that there is a need to explore alternative methods and 
perhaps institutional arrangements for monitoring whale stocks.

There are some open questions concerning the scientific interpretation of 
CCAMLR as it applies to the way that the exploitation of krill affects species 
dependent on it.  The use of protected areas which are provided for in CCAMLR 
has yet to be explored and similarly suggestions for linking commercial 
fishing activities for krill, squid or finfish with scientific programmes to 
monitor the effects of fishing on the dynamics of land based predators have 
yet to be investigated.  It is suggested that these possibilites be explored.

One concern about CCAMLR is the limited ability of the Scientific 
Committee to provide advice to the Commission in a timely manner.  This does 
not merely refer to the prompt submission of data, but also to its accuracy 
and extent, as well as to the levels of harvest; in short, in the way in which 
information can be collected, processed and anlysed, to give advice on the 
implications of harvesting.  It is suggested that this problem be 
investigated.

There is some doubt about the appropriate institutional arrangements for 
dealing with small cetaceans.  It is possible that conservation problems may 
become acute if squid fishing develops in the area.  It is suggested that the 
conservation problems of small cetaceans within the Antarctic need 
investigation.
-48-

Mineral Resources Exploitation

Because the Antarctic minerals regime is still in the process of negotiation it is not possible to know at present the exact form of the 
policies and institutions that will govern possible minerals development 
activities.  Nevertheless, there are several issues of environmental 
consequence that have not yet been fully resolved.  These include:

(i) The adequacy of the decision-making procedures that will operate in 
relation to proposed minerals activities.  It will be important to ensure that 
there is provision for objective, expert scientific, environmental, and 
technical advice with respect to decisions taken under the regime, and that 
options exist for review by all interested parties prior to final 
determinations under the regime.

(ii) The regulatory structure for potentially damaging prospecting 
activities.  Since some forms of prospecting will be able to proceed without a 
positive decision to that effect, it will be important to provide for the 
development of environmental regulations to govern such prospecting as 
necessary.

(iii) Insurance that effective coordination will occur among the different 
institutions and legal regimes charged with different aspects of Antarctic 
management, so as to ensure consistent application of environmental standards.

and (iv) Design and adoption of effective liability, enforcement, emergency 
response, and dispute settlement provisions related to environmental concern.

It will also be appropriate to review guidelines and legal authorities, 
other than the emerging Antarctic minerals regime, that could contribute to 
sound conservation measures for Antarctic minerals development.  These would 
include UNEP principles on environmental impact assessment and pollution from 
offshore mining and drilling activities; International Maritime Organization 
(IMO) treaties and regulations on vessel-source pollution control and on 
offshore installations and structures, including regulations on removal of 
such structures, and the Law of the Sea Convention.

It is suggested that these issues be kept under review as the minerals 
regime is completed.

Tourism

Regulations governing tourism in Antarctic have evolved on an ad hoc basis 
in response to changing needs and may not be adequate for the future.

It is suggested that the preparation of a plan outlining objectives for 
Antarctic tourism be considered.  This document could establish guidelines 
for tourism that encourage responsible conduct while at the same time avoiding 
any conflicts with other activities in the region and harmful environmental 
effects.  Among the important matters the guidelines could address are:
conditions for approval of tourist visits to stations in Antarctica, codes of 
conduct, safety standards, reporting procedures, and educational materials and 
programmes.
-49-

Settlements

The impacts that arise from settlements are essentially the same as those 
arising from other human occupation.  It is suggested that information be 
collected on settlements in Antarctica and included in information exchanges 
under the Antarctic Treaty.

Marine Pollution and Marine Debris

As additional activities take place in Antarctica, and outside it that may 
affect the Southern Ocean, it will be important to compile and evaluate data 
on increases in the extent of marine pollution and marine debris.

It is suggested that the possibility of formulating additional measures 
to control marine pollution and marine debris from human activities on land 
and at sea in the Antarctic be explored as the need arises.  These could be 
adopted under the Antarctic Treaty of CCAMLR.  The applicability or further 
development of measures adopted under the auspices of other international 
organizations, such as UNEP, IMO, the London Dumping Convention and the LOS 
Convention, could also be considered.

Protected Area Concepts

Several ideas for the further development and application of protected 
area concepts in Antarctic and the Southern Ocean have been suggested by a 
variety of organizations including SCAR, IUCN and other non-governmental 
bodies as well as within the consultative mechanism of the Antarctic Treaty. 
These include adaptations of Biosphere Reserves under the Unesco Man and the 
Biosphere Programme, the World Heritage Convention, wilderness or park area 
designations, stable reference areas, and the utilization of buffer zones, 
management plans and monitoring programs for these areas.  It is suggested 
that these possibilities be explored.

There have been a number of proposal discussed in different forums 
concerning the cessation of various activities and the prohibition of 
development. It is suggested that specific legal and managerial proposals 
should be formulated in order that their implications can be assessed.

Shared Facilities for Antarctic Operations

The thirteenth ATCM began to consider the possibility of dealing with 
issues of the crowding and concentration of Antarctic activities and stations 
and referred the question to SCAR.

It is suggested that measures be explored to facilitate coordinated or 
shared science programmes and logistics facilities where these would reduce 
adverse effects of concentrated activities.  One possibility would be to 
consider developing siting criteria for research stations.  However, it is 
recognised that the standing of states making use of shared facilities within 
the consultative mechanism would have to be clarified for this to be 
successful.
-50-

Technology Standards

It is important that technology least likely to cause adverse impact on Antarctica be employed in the Antarctic, whether for waste disposal, such as biodegradable plastics, or for minerals exploration and exploitation.  It is suggested that the development of environmental standards for use in technology in Antarctica be considered.

Ice

If significant interest develops in the utilization of Antarctic ice as a source of freshwater, measures will be required to address conservation issues related to the utilization of Antarctic ice and icebergs.  It is suggested that the need for such measures be kept under review.

Sub-Antarctic Islands

It is suggested that conservation issues relevant to the sub-Antarctic islands, such as the problems of introduced species, be addressed by relevant national authorities in these areas.
