TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                         RIO DE JANEIRO
                         1987

5 - 16 october                                          ANT/XIV/INF 18



SCAR REPORT TO THE FOURTEENTH ANTARCTIC
TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

Secretariat
Scott Polar Research Institute
Lensfield Road
Cambridge
ENGLAND CB2 1ER
Tel. (0223) 62061
Executive Secretary
G.E. Hemmen

SCAR Report to the Fourteenth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting

The President of SCAR will attend the Fourteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting as an observer and will present some highlights of recent international
Antarctic science and the work of SCAR.

Attached are separate statements from SCAR relating to items of the agenda
for XIV ATCM (specifically agenda items 9.10 and 11) and two comments on the
question of mineral exploration and exploitation which SCAR wishes to bring
to the attention of the Representatives at XIV ATCM.

In response to an invitation from the Brazilian government, SCAR has nominated
Mr J Bleasel as an expert to participate in discussions of Air-Safety in
Antarctic (XIV ATCM Agenda item 14).

Past President           Vice-President          Vice-President          Secretary
Dr. C. Lorius           Dr. J.H. Zumberge       Professor Dr. G. Hempel  Professor E.S. Korotkevich  Dr. A.C. Rocha Campos
Geophysique de          University of           Alfred-Wegener-Inst. fur  Institute of            Universidade de Sao Paulo
Laboratoire de Glaciologie et de  Southern California  Polar- und Meeresforschung  Arctic and Antarctic Research  Instituto de Geociencias
l'Environnement         University Park         Columbusstrasse         Ut Beringa 38           Caixa Postal 20899
Domaine Universitaire B.P. 96      Los Angeles             2850 Bremerhaven        Leningrad 199226        Cidade Universitaria - Butanta
36402 St-Martin-d'Heres Cedex      California 90089-0012  FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF    U.S.S.R.                05508 Sao Paulo SP
FRANCE                  U.S.A.                  GERMANY                                 BRAZIL
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

Secretariat
Scott Polar Research Institute
Lensfield Road
Cambridge
ENGLAND CB2 1ER
Tel. (0223) 62061
Executive Secretary
G.E. Hemmen

XIV ATCM Agenda item 9. Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment

1. Environmental Impact Assessment of planned scientific activities and 
related support activities

The SCAR Executive Committee was pleased that this item is on the agenda for 
XIV ATCM, wishes to draw attention to SCAR's response to ATCM Rec XII-3 which 
was in the form of a SCAR publication entitled Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment and hopes that the suggestions contained therein will be helpful 
to the consultative parties in formulating appropriate procedures.

2. Waste Disposal

SCAR appointed an 'ad hoc' panel of experts, chairman J Bleasel, to prepare 
a response from SCAR to ATCM Recommendation XIII-4. The panel is gathering 
information from all national programmes on the types and quantities of 
waste products and the wide variety of disposal procedures at present in 
use. Only when that review is complete, and information is still lacking 
from some countries, will it be practical to formulate logistically feasible 
advice about future practice. SCAR is thus not yet in a position to provide 
a definitive response to Rec XIII-4 but expects to transmit such a response 
to Treaty consultative governments, through National Committees, after the 
SCAR meeting in September 1988. A progress report setting out the panel's 
approach to this problem, is attached (Appendix A).

3. Additional Protective Arrangements

SCAR's response to the first request contained in ATCM Recommendation XIII-5, 
formulated by a specially established 'ad hoc' group, chairman W N Bonner, 
and revised by the SCAR Executive Committee, was sent to National Committees 
in July 1987 for onward transmission to their governments.

A copy of that response is attached (Appendix B) from which it will be seen 
that SCAR is proposing the establishment of a new category of protected area 
which might be known as an 'Antarctic Protected Area'.

4. Environmental Data Management

In considering the second request for advice contained in ATCM Recommendation 
XIII-5, SCAR noted that the increasing tempo and scale of activities in 
Antarctica require increased effort to compile data in formats and in data 
centers so that items and data bases are in uniform or comparable notations 
and are readily accessible. The scale of activities in the Antarctic has 
increased to the point where adverse impact on the environment is likely, 
and measurement of biological and/or environmental change is the necessary 
response to environmental impact assessment.  It was recalled that the

Past President           Vice-President           Vice-President           Secretary
Dr. C. Lorius           Professor Dr. G. Hempel  Professor E.S. Korotkevich Dr. A.C. Rocha Campos
Laboratoire de Glaciologie et  Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Arctec and Antarctic Research Universidade de São Paulo
Geophysique de           Polar- und Meeresforschung U1. Bergns 38           Instituto de Geociencias
l'Environnement          Colombusstrasse          Leningrad 199226         Caixa Postal 20899
Domaine Universitaire B.P. 96 2850 Bremerhaven         U.S.S.R.                 Cidade Universitaria - Butanta
38402 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF  05508 São Paulo SP
FRANCE                   GERMANY                  BRAZIL
Dr. J.H. Zumberge
University of
Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles
California 90089-0012
U.S.A.
Antarctic has been dedicated by the Treaty Nations as "a continent for science"
especially because of:

1. its role in certain global processes such as solar energy exchange,
2. the uniqueness of many plant and animal species and their
communities in the harsh physical environments, and
3. the opportunities afforded for investigations and experimentation
on a pristine continent.

It follows that comparability, storage and accessibility of scientific data
on the physical environments and biota are essential parts of stewardship.

To prepare its response, SCAR has established an "ad hoc" group on Environ-
mental Data Management, chairman W S Benninghoff, with the following terms
of reference:

1. to survey the kinds of biological data bases available and the
nature of their contents,

2. to examine the relevance of data management to existing and
planned SCAR programmes,

3. to assess future needs for new and expanding SCAR programmes
and for ensuring comparability of data formats,

4. to liaise with other relevant programmes (e.g. ICSU's CODATA)
and to recommend further action.

Because of the complexities of the task and the need for detailed consideration
by SCAR and its Working Group on Biology of proposals formulated by the group,
the group has been requested to prepare its report in time for careful
consideration at the Twentieth meeting of SCAR in 1988. Therefore, a
definitive answer to the request contained in ii) of Recommendation XIII-5
will not be available for the Fourteenth ATCM. Attached for information
(Appendix C) is a copy of the first working paper prepared by the chairman
of the SCAR 'ad hoc' group.

5. Concentration of siting of stations

ATCM Recommendation XIII-6 did not call for any specific action by SCAR but
SCAR expressed the view that the environmental impact procedures suggested
in SCAR's response to Recommendation XII-3 (see 1 above) would help
considerably to avoid problems that might arise from contiguous stations.
The SCAR Executive Committee has recorded its concern that the continued
increase in the number of stations on King George Island could result in
unproductive duplication of programmes.

6. Safeguards for Scientific Drilling

The SCAR Executive Committee notes that "safeguards for scientific drilling"
appears on the agenda for XIV ATCM and wishes to draw the attention of the
consultative parties to a relevant recommendation adopted at XIX SCAR:

Rec GEOL SEG 1986-3
Scientific Ocean Drilling Program

Recognizing the likely gains to our knowledge of the palaeoenvironmental
history and tectonic evolution of Antarctica from scientific ocean drilling,
the Working Groups on Geology and Solid Earth Geophysics:
1) strongly support scientific drilling already planned by the Ocean Drilling Program in the Southern Ocean;

2) strongly endorse further scientific drilling in high southern 
latitudes, including drilling on the Antarctic Continental 
Shelf.

7. Introduction of living material into Antarctica

The SCAR Working Group on Biology had invited W S Benninghoff to convene an 
"ad hoc" group to study problems of introduction of living material into 
Antarctica. It was realised that some kinds of high risk introductions 
might arise because of inadequate regulation, some examples being:

- discarding of rotten fruit or vegetables with release of 
mould spores

- introduction of mushroom cultures in manure compost .

- import of organisms in timber.

The "ad hoc" group has been asked to report to the SCAR Working Group on 
Biology in 1988 what measures, additional to those in the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, might be desirable to 
control accidental harmful introductions.

8. Statistics on seals and birds killed or captured

Tabulated statistics of seals and birds killed or captured in the Antarctic, 
1975 to 1985, based on returns provided under Article XII of the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, were published in 
SCAR Bulletin 86, May 1987.
MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT - WASTE DISPOSAL

SCAR Progress Report on ATCM Recommendation XIII-4

To respond to ATCM XIII Recommendation 4, SCAR formed a Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal.  The Panel has summarised its approach to the problem as being to:

1.  assess whether present waste disposal procedures, including mechanical plant emissions, at stations, field camps and on ships are, or are likely to be, harmful to the environment;

2.  In the event of waste disposal procedures causing environmental impacts, identify procedures that contribute to impacts;

3.  review and, if necessary, make recommendations to amend the existing Code of Conduct on waste disposal; and

4.  advise on monitoring studies to assess environmental impacts associated with waste at stations and field camps.

The Panel is considering a broad range of waste products, to encompass all kinds of domestic and operational waste including atmospheric, terrestrial and marine emissions generated during Antarctic operations and liable to be disposed of continuously or periodically. The second of the tasks listed above will allow unsatisfactory procedures to be identified and amended in the course of the review.  The fourth task refers to the need to develop practical scientific monitoring programs for all categories of wastes.

In conducting its inquiry,.the Panel has sought the active involvement of SCAR National Committees and national Antarctic operators as being the only practical means of obtaining accurate information on current Antarctic waste disposal procedures and their environmental effects.

The Panel circulated a series of questions and a workplan to all national operators and SCAR National Committees.  The Panel invited SCAR National Committees to review the information collected, identify waste disposal procedures which may be environmentally harmful, and to recommend research and monitoring studies aimed at reducing the environmental impact caused by waste disposal procedures.

The quality of responses to the First Circular was highly variable and involved long time delays.  A number of responses provided only minimum information and from some countries no response had yet been received.

From the limited information yet available, it has been possible to list waste disposal procedures for many year-round stations as well as a small number of field stations.  Also, fuel usage figures have been obtained for many station, field, ship and air operations, thus making it possible to estimate gaseous and particulate emissions.  These data have been used by the Panel to construct a first draft impact matrix which identifies the magnitude, persistence and likely extent of environmental disturbance caused by disposal practices for domestic, chemical, combustible and non-combustible wastes.  In particular, the matrix has pointed to a range of
2

disposal procedures which may have a potentially significant environmental 
impact.  Accordingly, further effort will be concentrated on investigating 
whether these practices do have a significant impact and on identifying 
alternate disposal procedures.

Because of the lack of sufficient information at this stage SCAR is not in 
a position to make a Final Report to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
XIV.

The Panel's future investigations involve four elements. Firstly, from 
national operators, greater factual detail on waste disposal procedures 
at all stations and field camps is needed.  Secondly, from national 
operators, an estimation of the types and concentrations of their waste 
residues is required.  Thirdly, the Panel will seek advice from SCAR 
National Committees on the environmental impacts of these waste residues 
and on recommended monitoring methods.  Finally, additional specialist 
information is being collected on selected aspects of waste disposal e.g. 
current technology for compacting and baling non-combustible wastes, and 
the comparative effectiveness of low and high temperature incineration.

The draft final Report will then be referred to the SCAR Logistics Working 
Group to ensure the logistic feasibility of the procedures to be recommended 
and then to National Committees for comment.
THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC

Report of the SCAR ad hoc Group on
Additional Protective Measures

Response of SCAR to Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting Recommendation XIII-5

Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
International Council of Scientific Unions

Cambridge, UK                                  June 1987
CONTENTS

The Protected Area system in the Antarctic                     1

Appendix 1.  Full text of ATCM Recommendation XIII-5           5

Appendix 2.  Terms of Reference for the SCAR ad hoc 
             Group on Additional Protective Measures           6

Appendix 3.  Objectives of Conservation in the 
             Antarctic                                          7

Appendix 4.  Existing Protective Arrangements in the 
             Antarctic Treaty System                           11

Appendix 5.  Deficiencies of Existing Arrangements             14

Appendix 6.  Options for Improving Protective Arrangements     16

Appendix 7.  Practical aspects of Conservation                18

Appendix 8.  Acronyms.                                         20
THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC

Introduction

.1 The Antarctic has been regarded as a Special Conservation Area since the 
third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Brussels in 1964. 
Since then, efforts to improve the conservation of the Antarctic 
environment, its fauna and flora have resulted in the matter being 
raised at several subsequent ATCMs, most recently at the Thirteenth, in 
1985, when a Recommendation (XIII-5) was approved which called on the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to provide, inter 
alia, scientific advice:

"on the system of protected areas in the Antarctic, including Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and Specially Protected Areas 
(SPAs) and the question of a possible additional category of area 
under a different form of protection"

.2 The full text of this recommendation is given in Appendix 1. An ad hoc 
group on Additional Protective Measures was established at the 1986 
meeting of SCAR to address the above request.  The group consisted of 
W.S. Benninghoff, W.N. Bonner (Convenor), P.R. Condy and K.R. Kerry. 
The terms of reference are given in Appendix 2.  The Group met in 
Cambridge in June, 1987, and this report is the result of its 
deliberations.

.3 The ad hoc Group identified the objectives of protecting areas in the 
Antarctic (Appendix 3), the existing protective arrangements of the 
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) (Appendix 4) and their deficiencies 
(Appendix 5).  It examined a variety of options for improving the system 
of protected areas (Appendix 6) and considered some practical aspects 
(Appendix 7).

Recommendations for the Improvement of the Protective Area System in 
the Antarctic

The existing system of protected areas in the Antarctic does not now 
fully serve the objectives of conservation of the Antarctic environment, 
its fauna and flora.  These deficiencies are discussed in Appendix 5. 
The following five main recommendations are put forward as a practical 
means of improving conservation, while at the same time preserving the 
freedom for scientific research embodied in the Antarctic Treaty.

.1 It is recommended that the existing and proposed provisions for 
Antarctic conservation should be subject to periodic assessment 
(including site visits) to determine whether the objectives of 
conservation are being achieved and the extent to which the existing 
regulations are being observed. Such assessments should concentrate 
on protected areas (both existing categories and the one proposed in 
Recommendation 5), but will not necessarily be confined to these. 
Assessments may be programmed in advance or performed opportunistically.

.2 It is recommended that information arising from such assessments, or 
in the course of carrying out scientific research should be freely 
available to those concerned with conservation issues. Retrieval of 
such information will be facilitated by its storage in a central
database. Information exchange between consultative partics would be 
facilitated by the existence of an office charged with this responsit-
ility.  The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and 
Natural Resources (IUCN) maintains a conservation database at its 
Protected Areas Data Unit (PADU).

2.3     It is recommended that a management plan for each existing and all 
future Specially Protected Areas should be prepared and agreed.
In the past, SPAs have been created for very specific purposes, but they 
can potentially provide protection for all elements of the ecological 
systems present within them.  To serve this purpose better, management 
plans should be prepared.  Such plans could also identify and authorise 
activities that could be carried out in designated SPAs without 
jeopardising their specified purpose.

2.4     It is recommended that Consultative Parties take measures to 
encourage the submission of proposals for additional protected areas to 
provide for geographically distributed representative examples of all 
Antarctic terrestrial, inland water and marine ecosystems.  This point 
has been addressed by ATCM Recommendation VII-2.  The ecosystem 
classification matrices published in SCAR Bulletin No. 55, 1977, 
provide a useful list of such ecosystem types.

2.5     It is recommended that a new category of protected area be 
introduced to the system while retaining the present categories.  
The new category, in this document called an Antarctic Protected Area 
(APA), is a multi-purpose area into which can be incorporated SPAs, 
SSSIs, Historic sites, Monuments and Tom?s as management units. An APA 
could incorporate both terrestrial and marine areas.  The objective of 
an APA is to minimise disturbance to these areas insofar as such 
disturbance might detract from the special value or values manifest in 
these and for which the area was designated.

2.5.1   An area may be designated an APA if it contains one or more of the 
following:-

        - representative examples of an ecological system;
        - unique natural systems, features or complexes;
        - historical sites, relics, monuments or other cultural features;
        - SPAs, SSSIs or reserves established under the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) or the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

        - areas on which the exploitable natural resources are ecologically 
dependent;

        - areas or features of particular significance by virtue of their 
scenic beauty, inspirational quality, potential for recreational 
pursuits, or their status as wilderness.

2.5.2   Establishment of an APA would require the zoning of the whole area for 
different levels of protection or use.  An APA could be a fairly 
extensive area, incorporating within it the current categories of 
protected areas where it is appropriate.  It could include refuge huts, 
field stations, roads, runways and even permanent base installations but 
would require that the boundaries of such high-use zones be defined.
2.5.3 The presentation and assessment of proposals for APAs could be 
undertaken in a similar manner to that currently used for the 
establishment of SPAs and SSSIs.  After consideration by SCAR, a 
proposal would be presented by a Consultative Party or Parties at an 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  There might also be related 
recommendations by other sections of the Treaty System (e.g. CCAS, 
CCAMLR) if necessary.

2.5.4 Proposals would need to include the following information which will 
then form the basis of a management plan if the proposal is accepted:

- description of the area, together with a map showing SPAs, SSSIs and 
Historic Monuments and Tombs within it, perimeter boundaries, and 
boundaries of zones within the area;

- reasons for designation in terms of features, systems, and attributes 
to be protected and threats to them that are perceived or anticipated;

- details of human activities currently undertaken or planned within 
the area, and their likely effects on the features, systems and 
attributes to be protected;

- history of human impacts on the environment within the area;

- details of management measures proposed including:

        constraints on activities within the area, and within each zone;

        periodic assessment necessary to identify disturbance;

        any other relevant measures needed.

- review periods:

        for the determination of the extent to which the original 
objectives of the APA are being met;

        for the management plan.

3.      Conclusions

The five recommendations listed above will:

3.1     contribute to a coherent system of protected areas for the Antarctic, 
as recommended by the Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on Long-Term 
Conservation in the Antarctic;

3.2     provide guidelines for their implementation and management, and

3.3     provide for frequent assessment of the protected areas regarding 
status and compliance, and wider exchange of information about these 
matters.
4. Acknowledgemonts

The Group has been assisted in its work by numerous people, and 
particularly by the members of the Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on Long-Term 
Conservation in the Antactic.  The following people provided helpful advice or 
comments:

Sherburne B Abbott
John Beddington
Paul Dingwall
Jeremy Harrison
John Heap
George Hemmen
Peter Heyward
Takao Hoshiai
Peter Keage
Harry Keys
Lee Kimball
Jose Valencia

W. N. Bonner
Convenor
22 June 1987
Appendix 1

Full text of ATCM Recommendation XIII-5

XIII-5 Man's impact on the Antarctic environment: additional
protective arrangements

The Representatives,

Recalling the measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty of the protection of
the environment, the protection of historic sites and monuments, the
conservation of fauna and flora, and in particular the setting aside of
Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest;

Desiring to ensure that activities in Antarctica should not harm the unique
Antarctic environment, disrupt scientific investigation or other legitimate uses
or be otherwise contrary to the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty;

Bearing in mind that the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research at the
XVIIIth Meeting in Bremerhaven considered the question of the establishment of a
new type of conservation area in the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that through their National Committees they
invite the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to offer Scientific
advice:

(i) on the system of protected areas in the Antarctic, including Sites of
Special Scientific Interest and Specially Protected Areas and the question of a
possible additional category of area under a different form of protection; and

(ii) on steps that possibly could be taken to improve the comparability and
accessibility of scientific data on Antarctica.
Appendix 2

Terms of Reference for the SCAR ad hoc Group on Additional Protective 
Measures:

I. To review:

1) the effectiveness of Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and subsequent practice in 
according special protection to certain areas as a conservation mechanism,
and

ii) the effectiveness of ATCM Rec VII-3 and subsequent practice in 
designating SSSIs as a means of protecting scientific research from 
harmful interference.

II To consider how the concept of management of areas might be applied 
in the Antarctic Treaty area as a means of:

1) improving the effectiveness of the Agreed measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora,

ii) regulating the environmental impact of coastal and inland 
stations and field camps and their associated activities,

iii) protecting areas of non-biological significance and/or outstanding 
scenic value, and

iv) achieving other ends of conservation and environmental protection 
consistent with the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty 
system.

III To advise accordingly.

Composition of the Group

W S Benninghoff
W N Bonner (Convenor)
P R Condy
K R Kerry
Appendix 3

Objectives of conservation in the Antarctic
(identified by the ad hoc Group but not yet approved by SCAR or other subsidiary
groups of SCAR)

1. Background

1.1 With the increase of the human population and the developnent of
sophisticated technology (both products largely of the last two
centuries), human ability to modify the environment has achieved such
potential that there is now a risk that the environment will be damaged to
the extent that it could no longer support human life and culture at those
levels which are now seen as desirable.

1.2 With this in mind the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources (IUCN), in collaboration with the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the Food and
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco), published in
1980 the World Conservation Strategy (WCS) (IUCN. 1980).  The three main
objectives of WCS are:
-   to maintain essential ecological processes and life-support systems;
-   to preserve genetic diversity;
-   to ensure the sustainable utilisation of species and ecosystems.

1.3 WCS is concerned with resource conservation; it is a strategy to allow the
material processes of life on this planet to continue. Other, aesthetic,
factors are also important to humankind, however. With a human population
increasingly concentrated in urban centres, a trend which seems likely to
continue, 'wilderness' is seen to have intrinsic value. Scenic resources
(which may overlap with wilderness) are also valued for their aesthetic
appeal. Places or objects which have important historical or cultural
associations are other features valued by society.

1.4 The Antarctic shares with other parts of the world the general needs
expressed in the WCS.  It possesses unusual ecological processes and unique
genotypes that have arisen as a result of rigorous natural selection
processes resulting from the extreme environmental conditions.
Sustainable utilisation in the Antarctic will be confined to marine
resources.  The Southern Ocean has the potential to provide a significant
contribution to the world's marine harvest, and preserving this potential
must be a high priority.

1.5 Antarctica comprises the last remaining extensive wilderness on Earth and,
while not entirely pristine, is the area by far the least affected by human
activity.  As such, it provides unparalleled opportunities for scientific
research on systems and processes, the understanding of which may be vital
to our future wellbeing.  It is a reference standard for monitoring
studies which assess the way in which industrial societies are affecting
the global environment.

1.6 The scenic values of the Antarctic are especially high and it has some,
though because of its recent discovery, few, historical and cultural sites.
2. Objectives

The objectives of protecting areas in the Antarctic are to minimise 
disturbance to them by human activity so that:

2.1 the diversity of natural phenomena and systems, both in the context of the 
Antarctic and the Planet Earth can be maintained;

2.2 genetic diversity can be preserved by ensuring that adequate 
representative populations of animals and plants are maintained in situ;

2.3 unique features, localities or complexes of features and sites of 
historical importance are undisturbed;

2.4 scientific research, including the provision of baseline data against which 
to measure change can be supported;

2.5 cultural values, such as scenic beauty, inspirational quality and 
wilderness status can be maintained;

.6 recreational activities such as tourism should be supported.

.1 The Antarctic consists of two types of system:

(i) Small, but numerous, terrestrial areas where human activity can have 
a considerable impact, even if it is itself on a relatively modest 
scale;

(ii)Large, broadly uniform marine and terrestrial [icecap] areas capable of 
absorbing substantial human activity with little or no impact.

(Heap & Holdgate, 1986)

The first category comprises the 2% of the Antarctic's 14 million km2 
that are free of permanent snow or ice. This is made up of a number of 
coastal strips and islands, mountainous rock outcrops and remarkable inland 
areas where ablation outstrips snowfall and 'dry valleys' result.

Terrestrial vegetation (apart from some snow algae) is necessarily confined 
to these places. The vegetation may in turn support lower forms of animal 
life of which the most highly developed are tiny mites and primitive 
insects. In the most favoured coastal areas quite extensive stands of 
bryophytes, together with sparse occurrences of two flowering plants, may 
be found. In a few places higher insects (wingless midges) may occur. 
Coastal (and some inland) areas may contain small freshwater bodies whose 
ice-cover thaws briefly in the summer. In some of these areas the majority 
of the biota is concentrated in the lakes. Exposed rock areas such as 
these are needed as breeding sites by seabirds (except emperor penguins) 
and some seals. The excreta of these animals, which feed at sea, modify 
and fertilise the primitive soils of the terrestrial environment.

2 The ecological interactions and physiological adaptations of such 
communities are of especial interest to scientists, since the extreme 
environmental conditions, coupled with the fact that relatively few species 
are involved, tend to simplify processes, making their understanding 
easier than in other parts of the world and providing simple analogues with 
which to interpret more complex systems. The presence of many large tame 
vertebrates offers incomparable opportunities for the study of their 
behaviour, physiology and ecology. These examples could be multiplied 
almost indefinitely. They have basic importance to the study of biology 
and the understanding of the environment.
3.3 Because of the discontinuous nature of these habitats, their low species
diversity, the relative lack of species competition and the very low growth
rates of the terrestrial biota, their communities are exceedingly
vulnerable. Physical fragility is evidenced in the way that passage of
vehicles, or even human feet, compacts soil structure, dislodges lichens or
disrupts moss carpets. The communities of these areas are ecologically
fragile in the sense that they have small capacity to absorb change without
themselves being profoundly altered. Such systems are particularly
vulnerable to introductions, since because of their low species diversity,
there may be many unoccupied niches and the indigenous species, through
lack of adaptation to competition, will have little ability to resist
invaders.

3.4. The second category comprises two distinct sub-categories, the sea and the
ice-cap, where conditions are very different.

3.4.1 The ice-cap, apart from some snow algae and occasional transient
organisms, mostly dispersed by the wind, is devoid of life. Its remote
areas are the most sterile part of the Earth's surface. However, it is
resilient to human pressures. There are no living systems to disrupt, and
introductions cannot establish themselves. The marks of man or vehicles
are soon obliterated by snow or scoured away by the wind. Foreign bodies
(waste, etc.) are frozen and entombed in ice, limiting the spread of
pollution. Dispersion from catchments to sumps cannot occur in this frozen
world. The ice-cap is, of course, liable to general pollution from the
atmosphere. This provides an important scientific resource, since cores of
the ice-cap can provide a dated record of fluctuations of substances in the
atmosphere.

3.4.2 The sea is resilient in a very different manner. The Southern Ocean is a
high-energy system that has great buffering capacity and general ability to
disperse pollution. It is most unlikely to suffer any detectable general
impact from localised human activities (Heap and Holdgate, 1986).
Environmental conditions in the sea are less extreme, more uniform and more
continuous than on land, all factors that make for stability (Bonner,
1984). The marine ecosystem, in comparison with the terrestrial one, has a
rich and diverse biota with a capacity to absorb change. The continuous
nature of the marine environment and the mobility of most of its organisms
ensure that local depletions can be restored, while high levels of
competition and niche occupancy lessen the possibility of the establishment
of alien introductions.

3.4.3 A characteristic of the Southern Ocean ecosystem is the dominance of a
single member of the zooplankton, the shrimp-like krill, Euphausia superba.
Krill represents a very important link in the Southern Ocean food
web and the consequences of a major reduction of this species would be
severe. It is conceivable that such a reduction could be brought about by
commercial exploitation.

3.4.4 The shallow seas represent a special case. At depths deeper than the
limit of iceberg scour they support a rich marine fauna. This is
localised, discontinuous and sessile, all factors which render it
relatively fragile. Not enough is known of the vulnerability of such
benthic communities to perturbation, but it is certainly much greater than
that of the pelagic system and is greater still when the waters are
enclosed in a bay or fjord.

4.  Threats to Antarctic Systems

4.1 The threats against which protection is required include physical damage,
disturbance of wildlife, the introduction of alien species, including
microorganisms; and pollution by natural or man-made substances.

Environmental impacts which might occur in the Antarctic as a result of 
scientific research or the logistical support of such research are listed 
in Table 4 in Benninghoff & Bonner (1985).  Such a list would need to be 
expanded should mineral resources development activities occur in the 
Antarctic.

4.2  Although disturbance to the environment is an inevitable consequence of any 
activity, it is the degree of disturbance which is of primary concern.  
Thus it is necessary for there to be a very clear idea of what the values 
to be protected are, and the effect on those values that any activity or 
combination of activities will be likely to have.

5.   Application of conservation measures

5.1  A clear definition of what is to be protected is necessary in order to 
determine whether the existing protective measures can achieve the 
objectives and guard against the threats, and whether their enforcement is 
adequate.  Having done this, the fundamental requirement is information 
about the value, how it is manifested in an area and what are the potential 
threats to it.  Since the value itself and threats posed to it will not 
be constant over time, it may be necessary to review the requirements for 
the protection of the particular value and to monitor the effectiveness of 
protective measures which have been taken.

5.2  The shape and size of the appropriate area will depend on a number of 
factors, including the nature of the value to be protected, topography and 
water catchment, prevailing winds, proximity to threats (eg stations, 
traverse routes, airfields) and ecological relationships and other factors 
such as the foraging ranges of birds.

5.3  Different values will require differing levels and categories of 
protection.  When more than one value is found in an area, arrangements 
should be made for the adequate protection of each of these values.

5.4  The freedom to conduct those activities that do not adversely affect those 
values to be protected should be maintained.

References

Benninghoff, W.S. and Bonner, W.N. 1985.  Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment:  a procedure for evaluating impacts from scientific and 
logistic activities.  Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, 
International Council of Scientific Unions, Cambridge.

Bonner, W.N. 1984.  Conservation.  In Antarctic Ecology, Vol. 2, ed. Laws, R.M. 
pp. 821-850.  Academic Press, London and New York.

Heap, J.A. (ed.). 1987. Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System.  Fifth 
Edition, February 1987. Cambridge.

Heap, J.A. and Holdgate, M.W., 1986.  The Antarctic Treaty System as an 
Environmental Mechanism - an approach to environmental issues.  In 
Antarctic Treaty System: an Assessment.  Polar Research Board, Washington.

IUCN, 1980. World Conservation Strategy.  International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources.  Gland, Switzerland.
Appendix 4

Existing Protective Arrangements in the Antarctic Treaty system

1. The Agreed Measures

At a meeting of SCAR in 1960, scientists developed a set of rules of conduct for the conservation of living resources in Antarctica.

At the first ATCM it was agreed to consider this further and the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna & Flora were produced at the third ATCM (Recommendation III-8)

The Agreed Measures provide the basis for conservation within the Antarctic Treaty area. They make provision for:

    (i) prohibition of the killing, wounding, capturing or molesting of 
         any native mammal or native bird except in accordance with a 
         permit;
    (ii) such permits to be issued only for certain restricted purposes;
    (iii)the designation of Specially Protected Species;
    (iv) the designation of Specially Protected Areas;
    (v) regulating the importation into Antarctica of non-indigenous 
         species, parasites and diseases;
    (vi) minimizing harmful interference with the normal living conditions 
         of Antarctic mammals and birds
    (vii)exchange of information between Consultative Parties as to 
         actions they have permitted.

On the advice of SCAR two species of seal (the Ross Seal and fur seals) 
have been accorded special protection.  Twenty areas have been designated 
as Specially Protected Area, of which three have had their designation 
changed to Sites of Special Scientific Interest.  Limits have been placed 
on the importation of plants, animals, viruses, bacteria, yeasts and fungi 
and requirements established for the inoculation of dogs against certain 
diseases.  (Heap, 1987).

2. Protective Categories for Land and Sea Areas

There are currently six forms of protective category for land or sea areas 
available under the Antarctic Treaty System: Specially Protected Areas 
(SPA), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Historic Monuments, 
Tomb, Seal Reserves and closed areas under CCAMLR.

2.1 Specially Protected Areas

SPAs are defined in Article VIII of the Agreed Measures as areas "of 
outstanding scientific interest" which are to "be accorded special 
protection ... in order to preserve their unique natural ecological 
system."

The permit system set up by the Agreed Measures was extended in SPAs to 
cover the collection of native plants and to allow only those activities 
necessary to serve "a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served 
elsewhere" and which "will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in 
that area". The driving of vehicles within an SPA is prohibited, and 
ATCM Rec VIII-5 later made entry to an SPA for a compelling scientific 
reason subject to permit, except in cases of extreme emergency involving 
possible loss of human life or involving the safety of ships or aircraft.
12.

ATCM Rec VII-2 clarified the nature of the SPA by extending the type of 
area to be considered for protection to:

a) representative examples of the major Antarctic land and freshwater 
ecological systems;
b) areas with unique complexes of species;
c) areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any plant or 
invertebrate species;
d) areas which contain specially interesting breeding colonies of birds 
or mammals; and
e) areas which should be kept inviolate so that in future they may be used 
for purposes of comparison with localities that have been disturbed by man.

This Recommendation also involved SCAR in the process of assessment of 
proposals for SPAs, and introduced two further restrictions; that the 
number of SPAs should be kept to the minimum that will meet the above 
criteria; and, "that the size of each SPA should be the minimum required to 
serve the purpose for which the Area has been designated."

2.2   Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The category of "Site of Special Scientific Interest" was established under 
ATCM Rec VII-3 to protect areas where scientific investigations were being 
undertaken but which were not suitable for or could not be designated as 
SPAs.

Sites could be proposed only if (i) Scientific investigations were being 
carried out, or were planned to begin before the following meeting of SCAR, 
and where there was a demonstrable risk of interference which would 
jeopardise those scientific investigations; or (ii) they were of 
exceptional scientific interest and therefore required long term protection 
from harmful interference.

SSSIs are designated for a definite period, which may be extended following 
a review by SCAR, usually in the first instance by the Sub-committee on 
Conservation of the Working Group on Biology.

Each SSSI must have a management plan giving, where appropriate, the 
following details:

(i)   A description of the site, together with a map delineating its 
boundaries;
(ii)  The reason for designation;
(iii) A summary of the scientific investigations to be carried out at the 
site;
(iv)  The proposed date at which the designation would expire unless 
extended;
(v)   Proposed point of access;
(vi)  Proposed pedestrian or vehicular routes;
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigation which would not cause harmful 
interference
(viii) A statement on and guidelines for permitted scientific sampling;
(ix)  Any other necessary restraints.
13.

Designation as SSSI confers a significantly higher measure of protection
than that afforded by the Agreed Measures alone.

2.3     Historic Monuments

After consideration of the protection of "tombs, buildings or objects of
historic interest" at the first ATCM, Rec. I-9, V-4 and VI-14 led to the
drawing up, in Rec VII-9, of a list of Historic Monuments which should be
preserved.  These recommendations require that ATCPs adopt all adequate
measures to preserve and protect from damage these monuments.  The list of
Monuments includes huts, cairns and graves, monuments, plaques, crosses,
etc., erected to commemorate the opening of stations, deaths of
expeditioners and other notable events.  The Historic Monument category has
limited and specific objectives which do not relate to biological
conservation.

2.4     Tomb

A unique category of protected area, that of Tomb, was created by ATCM
Recommendation XI-3 following the tragic crash of an airliner in 1979. It
was recommended that the site on the northern slopes of Mount Erebus
where the accident took place should be declared a tomb and should be left
in peace.

2.5     Seal Reserves

The category of Seal Reserve derives from the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS).  In a Seal Reserve it is forbidden
to kill or capture seals. Currently there are three Seal Reserves, mostly
made up of sea areas, with a combined area of 190,000 km2.  They are
seal breeding areas, or the site of long-term scientific research.

2.6     Areas set up under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
        Marine Living Resources

Part 2(g) of Article IX of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) provides for "the designation of the
opening and closing of areas, regions and subregions for the purposes of
scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection
and scientific study."  So far, only one area has been designated under
this provision.  Fishing, other than for scientific research purposes, is
prohibited in waters within 12 nautical miles of South Georgia by
Conservation measure 1/III.

For the purposes of CCAMLR, the term "conservation" includes rational use,
so conservation measures introduced under the Convention are likely to
relate directly to the utilisation of marine living resources.

Reference

Beap, J.A. ed., 1987. Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, Fifth Edition.
February 1987.
Appendix 5

Deficiencies of Existing Arrangements

1.   Despite the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the designation of the 
     Antarctic under the Agreed Measures as an area where no native mammal or 
     bird may be killed, captured, wounded or molested, which created the 
     world's largest protected area, several deficiencies are apparent in the 
     existing system of protected areas.  These are elaborated below.

2.  Inadequate representation and size

2.1  SPAs and SSSIs are incomplete in ecological scope, with marked gaps in the 
     representation of marine and inshore coastal environments, high mountains, 
     inland aquatic ecosystems, and non-biological areas, such as ice, rock, 
     soil and landform sites (as addressed by Recommendation VII-2 and clarified 
     in the ecosystem classification matrices of SCAR (SCAR, 1977; Bonner and 
     Lewis Smith, 1985).

2.2  Geographical distribution of SPAs and SSSIs is inadequate.

2.3  There is no provision for protecting areas of recreational, cultural, 
     aesthetic, scenic or wilderness value.  Sites are chosen for almost 
     entirely scientific reasons, as in the protection of research activities at 
     SSSIs, and to preserve areas of unique natural ecological systems (SPAs).

2.4  There is no provision for protecting larger areas of general ecological 
     importance.  SPAs are required to be the minimum size to serve only the 
     specific purpose for which they were designated.

3.  Lack of consistency and enforcement

3.1  There is a lack of consistency of approach to conservation matters as 
     domestic legislation is not uniform among countries.

3.2  No effective central system exists for detecting, reporting or dealing with 
     violations; for limiting or restricting activities in adjacent areas to 
     avoid or minimize the risk of not satisfactorily achieving the objectives 
     of designation; for exchanging information and for assessing the degree to 
     which SSIs and SPAs, etc, are meeting their designated objectives.

4.  Inadequate fulfillment of conservation objectives

4.1  Measures for achieving varying levels of protection are inadequate.  There 
     is no provision for buffer zones, for clear demarcation of boundaries or 
     comprehensive management plan for SPAs.

4.2  There are no detailed instructions in the Antarctic Treaty System for the 
     preparation of the description of sites to be designated.  Although SCAR 
     encourages the provision of detailed information about the site and likely 
     threats to it as part of the management plan of SSSIs, in practice only 
     minimal information has generally been provided, especially for SPAs.

4.3  No provision is made for periodic assessment of conditions in areas to 
     determine the effectiveness of protection or to identify the need for 
     review of SPAs.  Without basic information it is difficult to determine 
     whether the protection afforded by the designation is sufficient, or 
     necessary.
References

SCAR, 1977. Classification of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic terrestrial,
freshwater and inshore marine benthic ecosystems. SCAR Bulletin, No. 55,
January 1977, 169-172.

Bonner, W.N. & Lewis Smith, R.I., 1985. Conservation Areas in the Antarctic.
299pp. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, International Council
of Scientific Unions, Cambridge.
Appendix 6

Options for improving protective arrangements

1. The ad hoc group identified and considered various options for the improvement of conservation in the Antarctic in the light of the deficiencies of the present system (Appendix 5) and protected area concepts (e.g. World Park, Biosphere Reserve).

2. There appear to be four basic options:

2.1 Establish Antarctica as a World Park or Biosphere Reserve

Both concepts have certain merits in conservation terms. However, it is difficult, in political terms, to see how the concept of a World Park could be accommodated within the Antarctic Treaty. Under the present regime the Treaty has provided a valid basis for the goals of use of the Antarctic for peaceful purposes only and guaranteeing freedom for scientific investigation. Subordinating the Antarctic to any UN regime might involve the risk of politicising the area and re-open claims to sovereignty, presently held in abeyance by the Treaty. It may be noted that the UN Study on the Question of Antarctica has not recommended an administrative role for the UN. Similarly, establishment of Biosphere Reserves would conflict with the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. For these reasons this option is not considered further.

2.2 Improve the present system

The present system represents a comprehensive array of protective arrangements. However, there are shortcomings in their conception and design, and in the enforcement of and compliance with them. The present suite of protected areas (i.e. SPAs and SSSIs) is also incomplete in ecological scope and geographical distribution. These deficiencies are treated in greater detail in Appendix 5.

2.3 Introduce a new category of protected area while retaining the present system

Bearing in mind the deficiencies noted in 2.2 above and in Appendix 5, this option would mean the introduction of a new form of protected area which would, to the greatest extent possible, provide for buffer zones, multiple use, management plans and values other than those of a purely scientific nature. The question of central mechanisms for enhancing compliance and information exchange is addressed in Appendix 7.

2.4 Abandon the present system and formulate an entirely new system

While a completely new system of protected areas might provide a better framework for Antarctic conservation, its development and introduction could involve lengthy negotiations and possibly the elaboration of a new Convention. It might also be the most difficult to bring about and could take a long time. Long delays would exacerbate the problems presently being experienced (Appendix 5) and run the risk of a hiatus occurring in conservation.

3. It is concluded, therefore, that the action most likely to provide the best
17.
solution to remedy the problems with the current system of protected areas 
is:

- the introduction of a new category of protected area (option 2.3)
which could include within it the current categories and some elements 
of the Biosphere Reserve concept.  Such an area might be known as an 
Antarctic Protected Area (APA);

- upgrading of the existing system to overcome deficiencies and the 
establishment of a central registry for information collection and 
distribution (option 2.2).
Appendix 7

Practical aspects of conservation

1. The following paragraphs elaborate some of the points raised in the main 
body of this report.

2. Consistency of standards and exchange of information

Although it is a mutual responsibility of all Consultative Parties to 
ensure that arrangements made under the ATS are observed and implemented,
in practice the oversight of any designated APA might well have to be 
undertaken by one Consultative Party or perhaps a small group of Parties.
It will be necessary to promote consistency of standards as the system is 
operated.

Some mechanisms exist under the Treaty which could be used to work towards 
consistency. The Exchange of Information under the Treaty, suitably 
expanded to include a report on relevant domestic legislation, designation 
of areas, activities carried out within them, management measures applied,
and observed impacts, could enable inconsistencies in approach to be 
identified and discussed at the ATCM level. The present Antarctic Treaty 
inspection system, used both unilaterally and multilaterally, could enable 
the effectiveness of designations of areas and of components of their 
management plans to be reviewed. However the responsibility for the 
initiation of inspections still rests with individual Consultative Parties 
and for them to be of direct use in the management of protected areas, some 
form of coordination would probably be necessary.

The provision and subsequent availability of information on protected areas 
is vital to the attainment of the objectives of protection. The provision 
of a database would clearly aid the task of managing such areas.

3. Assessment and review.

No protocol exists for assessment under the present system, so it will be 
necessary to develop this in association with APA management plans. The 
initial description of an APA would need to include a basic inventory of 
what it contained. Assessment at intervals would be needed to see what 
changes were occuring and whether any of them could be attributed to human 
activity and, if so, whether action should be taken to arrest or mitigate 
such changes.

In this connection the status of APAs, or parts of them, such as SPAs, 
SSSIs, etc., or the provisions of their management plans, would need to be 
periodically reviewed to determine whether the original purposes for which 
the areas had been designated still pertained, or whether changes in zoning 
or management plans were needed. Any Environmental Impact Assessment which 
might be required under the Antarctic Treaty System should be taken into 
consideration in reviewing the zoning of an APA or any management 
measures that apply within it.

4. Requirement for an infrastructure.

The proposed new form of protected area will involve a considerable amount 
of work in all phases of proposal and operation. Currently the Working 
Group on Biology of SCAR, and in particular, its Conservation 
Sub-Committee, do most of the work associated with the preparation and 
refinement of proposals for new SPAs and SSSIs. The additional work
19.

involved in APAs would be a substantial extra burden.

As activities in the Antarctic intensify and the provisions for 
environmental protection become more sophisticated thought needs to be 
given to the provision of support from the ATS to the scientific scrutiny 
provided by SCAR.

Should any central organisation be established for the Antarctic Treaty it 
would be useful if this could provide for the reception and distribution of 
information relating to environmental matters, and with the coordination of 
joint activities should these be called for.

Such an organisation could ensure that environmental matters were dealt 
with expeditiously in the intersessional periods between successive ATCMs 
and be responsible for maintaining contact with SCAR on matters referred to 
SCAR from an ATCM.

5. It is important to ensure that all personnel visiting or working in the 
Antarctic are aware of the Agreed Measures, the Code of Conduct for 
Antarctic Activities and Stations, and any other requirements for 
protecting and conserving the Antarctic environment.

6. It is clear, and proper, that the effective protection of the environment 
in the Antarctic requires more complex measures than in the past.  Neither 
the Antarctic Treaty organisation nor SCAR should shrink from taking the 
steps necessary to achieve proper environmental protection while preserving 
the freedom of scientific research enshrined in the Treaty.
Appendix 8          Acronyms


APA     Antarctic Protected Area (provisional and unofficial term)
ATS     Antarctic Treaty System
ATCM    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
ATCP    Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party

CCAMLR Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCAS    Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
FAO     Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN)
IUCN    International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural
        Resources

PADU    Protected Areas Data Unit (of IUCN)

SCAR    Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research

SSSI    Site of Special Scientific Interest (of ATS Agreed Measures)

SPA     Special Protected Area (of ATS Agreed Measures)

UN      United Nations Organisation
UNEP    United Nations Environment Program
Unesco  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

WCS     World Conservation Strategy
WWF     World Wildlife Fund
Notes for

SCAR ad hoc GROUP ON DATA MANAGEMENT

Membership

Prof. William S. Benninghoff  (chairman)         Terrestrial biota
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Dr. Richard Hennemuth                            Marine fisheries
Northeast Fisheries Service, NOAA

Dr. Robert J. Hofman                             Marine mammals
U. S. Marine Mammal Commission

Dr. Anna Palmisano                               Marine plankton &
NASA, Ames (& University of Tennessee?)         microbiology

Prof. Roy Siegfried                             Ornithology
University of Capetown

Dr. David Walton                                 Terrestrial biota
British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge

Terms of Reference:

1.  to survey the kinds of biological data bases available and the 
    nature of their contents,

2.  to examine the relevance of data management to existing and 
    planned SCAR programmes,

3.  to assess future needs for new and expanding SCAR programmes 
    and for ensuring comparability of data formats,

4.  to liaise with other relevant programmes (e.g. ICSU's CODATA) 
    and to recommend further action.

Possible Responses

1. Kinds of biological data bases available and the nature of 
   their contents:
    a.  Periodical publications
        - Annual Reports of Consultative Parties
          (1) Report of research effort completed in past year
          (2) Report of research planned for next year
          (3) Bibliography of published reports
        - Antarctic Bibliography (published by National Science 
          Foundation, Washington, D.C.
        - New Zealand Antarctic Bibliography, Christchurch, N.Z.
        - Antarctic Journal of the United States (five issues 
          per year)
        - Professional journal, by discipline:
          Oceanus
          Polar Record
          New Zealand Journal of Antarctic Research
-2-

Possible Responses (cont.)

1.  Kinds of biological data bases (cont.)

-- Compendiums e.g.:
    Antarctic Atlas, by American Geographical Society

b. Unpublished data on biota:
    -- BIOMASS Data Centre, BAS, Cambridge
    -- BIOMASS Data Centre, Alfred Wegener Institut f&r 
       Polar- und Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven
    -- CCAMLR Data Centre, Hobart, Tasmania
    -- NOAA Data Centre for Fisheries, Woods Hole, Mass. 
       and Washington, D. C.
    -- Percy Fitzpatrick Centre for African Ornothology,
       Records of Antarctic bird banding
    -- BIOTAS (Biological Investigations of Terrestrial 
       Antarctic Systems) circular letters, chronicaling 
       current biological research

c. Unpublished data on physical environment:
    -- Meteorological records at national centres in 
       Australia, Chile, Argentina, France, Japan, etc.
    -- Geologic data, at national agencies, institutes, 
       and universities
    -- Glaciological data, at national agencies, institutes, 
       and universities

d. Collections:
    -- Oceanographic Sorting Center, Smithsonian Institution, 
       Washington, D. C.
    -- Alfred Wegener Institut f&r Polar- und Meeresforschung, 
       Bremerhaven

2. Relevance of data management to existing and planned SCAR programmes:

    a. For monitoring man-induced changes in biotas and physical 
       environments, in the service of biological conservation 
       and protection of the natural enviranment.

    b. To provide more and improved time-series observations 
       of biotas and environments.

    c. To improve archiving and accessibility of data on biotas 
       and physical environments.

3. Assessment of future needs for new and expanding SCAR programmes 
   and for ensuring comparability of data formats:

    a. Extension of SCAR national committee responsibility for 
       Antarctic conservation by directed national programmes 
       and through cooperation with other SCAR national committees.
Possible Responses (cont.)

3. Assessment of future needs (cont.):

b. Development of a unified system of data management embodying 
   comparability of data terms, units, and formats, minimal 
   duplication, and maximum accessibility.

c. Incorporation of periodic reviews of trends in time-series 
   data, neglected subject areas, opportunities for improved 
   methods, and gaps in records.

d. Development of a system for alerting cooperating parties 
   to actual, imminent, or previously unrecognized man-induced 
   changes in biotas or physical environments.

4. Establishment of liaison between SCAR and other relevant pro-
   grammes with respect to data management, including some or all 
   of the following:

   CODATA of ICSU with regard to standardized units of 
   measurement
   UNISIST of UNO, the proposed world science information 
   system
   ICSU Abstracting Board, a working group on bibliographic 
   description
   MARC (Machine Readable Cataloging) of U. S. Library of 
   Congress, British National Bibliography, and Canadian 
   National Bibliography
   Excerpta Medica
   ASIDIC (Association of Scientific Information Dissemination 
   Centers)
   ISO (Internatioanl Organization for Standardization)
   European T?anslation Centre in Delft
   IFIP (International Federation for Information Processing)
   FID (International Federation for Documentation)
   ESTEC (European Space Technology Centre in the Netherlands)
   COSPAR (ICSU's Scientific Committee on Space Research)
   SCOR (ICSU's Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research)

Goals of Data Management

1. Cost-efficient archiving, retrieval, and dissemination of data 
   relating to Antarctic biota and environments, especially time-
   series, with priority accorded to those of current or potential 
   use for conservation or environmental protection.

2. Registry of data on biotas and physical environments in uniform 
   or compatible terms and formats.
-4-

Goals of Data Management (cont.)

3. Assurance of free access to data on biotas and physical environ-
   ments for cooperating parties.

4. Maintenance of a system for alerting cooperating parties to 
   actual, imminent, or previously unrecognized man-induced 
   changes in biotas or physical environments.

Proposed Recomendations (first approximation):

1. Establish liaison with data centres (see lb above) and other 
   relevant programmes (see 4 above) to ascertain the present 
   and potential relation to this data management effort.

2. Consult with leading Antarctic data centres and depositories 
   regarding terms, units, and formats and compatibility of 
   computer software and hardware, and recomend best choice 
   or choices.

3. Seek participation and cooperation of national committees by 
   demonstrating benefits available at minimal cost.

4. Enlist participation of cooperating national committees in alert 
   network for man-induced disturbances to biotas or physical en-
   vironments, including participation in teams of specialists 
   to review sites and cases and to recomend measures for 
   mitigation of the problems.

W. S. Benninghoff
chairman

10 June 1987
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

Secretariat
Scott Polar Research Institute
Lensfield Road
Cambridge
ENGLAND CB2 1ER
Tel. (0223) 62061
Executive Secretary
G.E. Hemmen

XIV ATCM Agenda Item 10. Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
and Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)

1) ATCM Recommendations XIII-7, XIII-8 and XIII-9. Sites of Special
Scientific Interest

SCAR noted with approval the extensions to the designations of SSSIs 2 to 8,
the amended management plan for SSSI 1, which incorporated a large extension,
and the designation of new SSSIs 9 to 21.

2) SCAR was disappointed that SSSIs at Port Foster, Chile Bay and South Bay
had not been approved at the Thirteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
It was believed that this was largely because all three proposals incorporate
marine areas, the first two being exclusively marine, but it was noted that
several established SSSIs contain marine areas and that at the Eighth ATCM
a group of experts had concluded that the designation of marine areas was
possible.

SCAR therefore invited its National Committees to inform their governments
that SCAR wishes these three proposals to be resubmitted for consideration
again at the Fourteenth ATCM. (Enclosure)

3) SCAR, noting that the period of designation of SSSI No 2, Arrival Heights,
is due to expire on 31 December 1987 but that it is important that this site
continue to be protected from man-made electromagnetic interference over a
range of frequencies from 10 -2 Hz to 10 8 Hz because it is a most valuable
site for the study of natural electromagnetic phenomena of relevance to
ionospheric and magnetospheric physics, recommends that the designation of
this site be extended by a further ten years, to 31 December 1997.

4) SCAR recommends the establishment of four new Sites of Special Scientific
Interest:

Yukidori Valley, Langhovdem Lutzow-Holme Bay
Svarthamaren, Muhlig-Hofmanfella, Dronning Maud Land
Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land

Proposals for these sites with proposed management plans were conveyed to
National Committees in July 1987 for onward transmission to governments.(Enclosure)


Past President        Vice-President        Vice-President        Secretary
Dr. J.H. Zumberge     Professor Dr. G. Hempel  Professor E.S. Korotkevich  Dr. A.C. Rocha Campos
University of         Alfred-Wegener-Institut fur  Institute of Arctic and      Instituto de Geociencias
Southern California   Polar- und Meeresforschung  Antarctic Research        Universidade de Sao Paulo
University Park       2850 Bremerhaven      Lenin[?]ad 199226         Caixa Postal 20899
Los Angeles           FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF  U.S.S.R.                 Cidade Universitaria - Butanta
California 90089-0012  GERMANY                                  05508 Sao Pauto SP
Martin-d'Heres Cedex
Universitaire B.P. 96
38041 Grenoble Cedex
FRANCE
5)  ATCM Recomendations XIII 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.

SCAR welcomed the establishment of new Specially Protected Areas:

No 18   North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
No 19   Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay
No 20   'New College Valley', Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island

and the extension of the boundaries of SPA No 7, Cape Hallett, Victoria Land.
1

PORT FOSTER, DECEPTION ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Deception Island is an intermittently active volcano situated near the
south-west end of the South Shetland Islands archipelago.  Port Foster is a
caldera lake almost entirely enclosed by land, with narrow access on the
south side through Neptunes Bellows from the open ocean.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

The Site comprises two small areas of benthic habitat located in Port
Foster as follows:

Area A: From between 50 and 150 m depth and between the following
co-ordinates:

Lat. 62°55.5'S, Long. 60°38'00"W
Lat. 62°55.2'S, Long. 60°37'00"W

Area B: From between 100 and 150 m depth and between the following
co-ordinates:

Lat. 62°57.2'S, Long. 60°37'20"W
Lat. 62°57.9'S, Long. 60°36'20"W

Long-term research programmes are being undertaken in the two areas and
it is important to reduce, as far as possible, the risk of accidental
interference which could jeopardise these scientific investigations.  The
Site is of particular ecological.interest because of its actively volcanic
character.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: Not applicable
Inland waters: Not applicable
Marine:  Area A: S6, V6, W6
             Area B: S6, V6

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. Deception Island is a caldera formed by subsidence of a
group of Cenozoic volcanoes superimposed along radial faults.  Port
Foster is an almost-entirely enclosed body of water which receives large
volumes of fresh water during periods of melt.  Most of the shoreline is
made up of fine ash beaches. except along about 5 km of the east coast
where glacier ice from the slopes of Mt Pond enter the bay.  In several
places around the coast and within Port Foster (notably Pendulum Cove
and Whalers Bay) there is geothermal activity.

(b) Geology.  The island's geology and volcanic activity, with particular
regard to the eruptions between 1967 and 1970, have been described by
Hawkes'(1961), Baker et al. (1975) and González-Ferrán and Katsui
(1970).  The history of volcanism has been documented by Roobol (1973).
The botton of Area A consists of coarse- to medium-sized, poorly sorted
volcanic sediment, and that of Area B consists of medium to fine,
better sorted volcanic ash.

(c) Meteorology.  Climatic records were obtained at the British station in
Whalers Bay from 1944 (Pepper 1954) and the Chilean station Pedro
Agiurra Cerda in Pendulum Cove from the 1950s.  Both stations were
destroyed in 1969 by a volcanic eruption.  Records were also obtained at
the Argentine station in Fumarole Bay.  No records from any station
exist after 1967.  The climate of Deception Island is cold, humid and
oceanic in nature.  Total cloud cover is frequent, as are strong winds.

5.  BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial.  Not applicable.

(b) Iniand waters.  Not applicable.

(c) Marine.  The composition of benthic assemblages has varied greatly since
it was first investigated imediately after the volcanic eruption of
December 1967.  Benthic animal communities have been most unstable
since then.  The most recent quantitative data (Retamal et al., 1982)
indicate a high dominance of polychaetes, both in terms of numbers (71%)
and biomass (54%).  The most conspicuous macrofauna recovered from
dredge samples include: the nemerteans Lineus sp. and Parborlasia
corrugatus, the isopod Serolis kemsi, the bivalve Yoldia eightsii, the
echiurids Abatus agassizi and Sterechinus neumayeri, the asteroids
Lysasterias gerl?ieri and Odonaster validus, the opniurold
Ophi?notus victoriae, and the holothurian Ys?ilothuria sp. (Gallardo et
al. 1977.

(d)  Birds and seals.  Not applicable.

6.  SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Port Foster has a long history of natural disturbances through volcanic
eruption.  The most recent of these occurred in 1967, 1969.and 1970,
affecting the benthic sub-littoral fauna.  A programe of benthic
observations was started soon after the 1967 eruption (and pursued in
subsequent years) in order to study the recovery of the affected benthic
community.  The area is particularly suitable for studying the stability or
resilience of Antarctic benthic systems.

7.  HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

Port Foster was the site of three permanent scientific stations (in
Whalers Bay, Pendulum Cove and Fumarole Bay) prior to 1967; earlier still
a whaling station (in Whalers Bay) operated in the 1910s and 1920s.  Impacts
on the benthic habitat associated with these presumably occurred but, with
the exception of Whalers Bay, these would probably have been negligible
compared with the volcanic disturbances occurring from time to time.  The
possibility of cnronic geotherma? impact also exists.
0   100   200   300


                                                                                  82°30'


                                                                                  80°30'


                                                                                  80°15'


                                                                                  82°30'


                                                                                  80°30'


                                                                                  80°15'


0   10   20   Kilometers


0   10   20   Statute Miles


Contour Interval = 40 Feet
8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Baker, P.E., McReath, I., Harvey, M.R., Roobol M.J. & Davies, T.C.
1975 The geology of the South Shetland Islands: V. Volcanic evolution
of Deception Island. Br. Antarc. Sci. Repts. No. 78, 81 pp.

Etcheverry, H.D. 1983 Algas bentónicas de la Antártica Chilena.
Publ. INACH. Ser. Cie., 30, 97-124.

Gallardo, V.A. & Castillo, J.C. 1968 Mass mortality in the benthic
infauna of Port Foster resulting from the eruptions in Deception Island,
South Shetland Is. Publ. INACH, 16, 1-13.

Gallardo, V.A. & Castillo, J.C. 1970 Quantitative observations on the
benthic macrofauna of Port Foster (Deception Island) and Chile Bay
(Greenwich Is.). In: Antarctic Ecology, (ed. M.W. Holdgate), Vol. 1,
pp. 242-243. London: Academic Press.

Gallardo, V.A., Castillo, J.G., Recamal, M.A., Yanez, A., Moyano, H.I. &
Hermosilla, I.C. 1977 Quantitative studies of the soft-bottom
macro-benthic animal communities of shallow Antarctic bays. In:
Adaptations within Antarctic Ecosystems (Texas) (ed. G.A. Llano), pp. 361-387.
Houston (Texas): Gulf Publishing Co.

Gonzáles-Ferrán, O. & Katsui, Y. 1970 Estudio integral del volcanismo
Cenozoico superior de las Islas Shetland del sur, Antártica. Publ.
INACH Ser. Cie., 1(2), 123-174.

Gonzáles-Ferrán, O., Munizaga, F. & Moreno, H. 1971 Síntesis de la
evolución volcánica de Isla Decepcion y la erupcion de 1970.
Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 2(1), 1-14.

Hawkes, D.D. 1961 The geology of the South Shetland Islands: II. The
geology and petrology of Deception Island. Br. Antarc. Surv. Sci.
Repts. No. 27, 43 pp.

Hermosilla, J. 1976 A contribution to the knowledge of Tintinniids and
dinoflagellates after a volcanic eruption in Foster Bay, Deception
Island, Antarctica. Publ. INACH, 9, 59-61.

Hermosilla, J.C. 1977 Contribución al conocimiento de los dinoflagelados
y tintinidos de la Antartica. II Plancton colectado en Bahia Foster,
diciembre de 1970. Publ. INACH. Serie Cientifica, 5(1), 17-34.

Hermosilla, J.C. 1978 Endemismo antartico de las especies de
dinoflagelados de Bahia Foster, Isla Decepción, Antártica. Publ.
INACH Ser. Cie., 24, 5-9.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1973. Bryozoa de bahias antarticas: algunos aspectos
ecologicos. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 24, 35-60.

Pepper, J. 1954. The meteorology of the Falkland Islands and Dependencies
1944-1950. London: Falkland Islands and Dependencies Meteorological
Service.
39°30'E

69°00'S

East Ongul Island
SYOWA STATION

West Ongul Island

LÜTZOW-HOLM BAY

Yukidori Valley

Breidvågnipa

Skarvsnes

Langhovde

Ice-free ground

0         10
   km
- 8 -

Suzuki, M. 1964. On the microfauna of the Antarctic region. I. 
Moss-water community at Langnovde. JARE Sci. Rep., Ser. E (Biol.),
19, 1-41.

Suzuki, M. 1979. On the microfauna of the Antarctic region. III.
Microbiota of the terrestrial interstices. Mem. Natl Inst. Polar
Res., Spec. Issue, 11 104-126 with 10 pls.
- 7 -

Ishikawa, T., Tatsumi, T. Kizaki, K., Yanai, K. Yoshida, M., Ando, H.,
Yoshida, Y. & Matsumoto, Y.  1976. Langhovde. Antarct. Geol. Map
Ser., 5 (with explanatory text, 10 p).  Tokyo, Natl Inst. Polar
Res.

Kanda, H.  1981. Flora and vegetation of mosses in ice-free areas of
Soya Coast and Prince Olav Coast, East Antarctica.  Hikobia,
Suppl. 1, 91-100.

Kashiwadani, H.  1970. Lichens of the Prince Olav Coast, Antarctica.
JARE Sci. Rep., Ser. E (Biol.), 30, 1-21.

Matsumoto, Y. Yoshida, M. & Yanai, K.  1979. Geology and geologic
structure of the Langhovde and Skarvsnes regions, East Antarctica.
Mem. Natl Inst. Polar Res., Spec. Issue, 14, 106-120.

Nakanishi, S.  1977. Ecological studies of the moss and lichen
communities in the ice-free areas near Syowa Station, Antarctica.
Nankyoku Shiryo (Antarct. Rec.), 60, 47-56.

Ohyama, Y. & Matsuda, T.  1977. Free-living prostigmatic mites found
around Syowa Station, East Antarctica.  Nankyoku Shiryo (Antarct.
Rec.), 59, 172-176.

Nakatsubo, T. & Ino, Y.  1986. Nitrogen cycling in an Antarctic
ecosystem.  I.  Biological nitrogen fixacion in the vicinity of
Syowa Station.  Memoirs of National Institute of Polar Research,
Ser. E, No. 37, Biology and Medical Science, 1-10.
- 6 -

the Site. Therefore, limited pedestrian and no vehicular access has 
been permitted since the construction of the hut. The valley has not 
been subjected to any environmental disturbance, with the exception of 
carefully controlled small-scale biological sampling of lake water, 
soil, lichens, mosses, invertebrate and sea birds.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

Field surveys of geoscience and biological science have been carried out 
in the Langhovde area, including the Site, since the first Japanese 
Antarctic Research Expedition in 1957. Geological results for the 
region have been summarized by Ishikawa et al. (1976).

A preliminary biological survey was made during JARE 15 and 16 
(1973-75). This study aimed to obtain information on the pristine state 
of the terrestrial ecosystem to compare with that influenced by Man 
around Syowa Station on East Ongul Island. The research studies were 
mainly undertaken in summer, and terminated after two seasons. The 
present programme is planned to gain a deeper understanding of the 
terrestrial ecosystems in this Site.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hirakawa, K., Ono, Y., Hayashi, M., Aniya, M., Iwata, S., Fujiwara, K., 
Moriwaki, K. & Yoshida, Y. 1984. Langhovde. Antarct. Geomorphol. 
Map Ser., 1 (with explanatory text, 49 p); Tokyo, Natl Inst. Polar 
Res.

Hirano, M. 1979. Freshwater algae from Yukidori Zawa, near Syowa 
Station, Antarctica. Mem. Natl Inst. Polar Res. Spec. Issue 1, 
1-26 with 9 pls.
mites (Nanorchestes antarcticus and Tydeus erebus) were also 
reported by Ohyama (1977) and Ohyama and Matsuda (1977) from the 
Site. 

(b) Inland waters. A study of the freshwater algae in the Site was 
carried out by Hirano (1979). Sixty-four species of microalgae, 
including cyanobacteria and green algae, were reported from Lake 
Yukidori and the adjacent area. Among them, one new species of 
Cosmarium (C. yukidoriense) and three new varieties of C. clepsydra 
have been described.

(c) Marine. Detailed studies have not been made and no data are 
available.

(d) Birds and seals. Several pairs of the south polar skua (Catharacta 
maccormicki) and numerous snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) breed in 
the Site.  The excrement of snow petrels is especially important as 
a major supply of nutrients for lichens and mosses. There is no 
information on seals.

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Yukidori Valley is representative of the typical continental Antarctic 
fellfield ecosystem. With more extensive expeditions in the ice-free 
areas, pedestrian traffic is increasing in the vicinity of the 
exceptional stands of vegetation. In order to achieve the project 
commenced by the 27th JARE 1985, a biological research hut was 
constructed near the beach at the mouth of the valley. This beach is 
approximately 250 m from the western boundary of the Site. However, it 
is intended to minimize Man's impact on the fauna, flora and terrain of
the lower valley formed by relatively steep cliffs. Fluvioglacial 
terraces which consist of rather fine sand and gravel in the lower 
part of the valley. There is a dissected deltaic fan formed at the 
mouth of the stream. Detailed information on the geomorphology of 
the valley is given in the geomorphological map of Langhovde 
(Hirakawa et al. 1984). 

(b)    Geology and soils.  The Yukidori Valley area is underlain by 
well-layered sequences of late Proterozoic metamorphic rocks.  They 
are garnet-biotite gneiss, biotite gneiss, pyroxene gneiss and 
hornblende gneiss with metabasite.  The foliation of the gneisses 
strikes N 10°E and dips monoclinically to the east at a moderate 
angle (Ishikawa et al. 1976, Matsumoto et al. 1979). 

(c)    Meteorology.  A continuous climatic record has been maintained 
since 1957 at Syowa Station (published as "Antarctic Meteorological 
Data" by the Japan Meteorological Agency).  Local climatic 
observations were occasionally carried out by field parties.

5.  BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a)    Terrestrial.  Almost all of the plant species recorded from the 
Langhovde area occur within the Site.  They include the mosses 
Bryum pseudotriquetrum (= B. algens), B. argenteum, Ceratodon 
purpureus, Pottia heimii, Grimmia lawiana, and the lichens Usnea 
sphacelata (= U. sulphurea), Umbilicaria antarctica, U. decussata, 
Alectoria (= Pseudephebe) minuscula, Xanthoria elegans.  There are 
no liverworts or vascular plants (Kashiwadani 1970, Nakanishi 1977, 
Kanda 1981).  The invertebrate fauna of the moss-water communities 
was studied by Sudzuki (1964, 1979), and two species of free living
- 3 -

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Research of other disciplines that might affect the biological
studies should be avoided.

(viii) Scientific sampling

This should be restricted to the minimum required in connection
with the programme. No rock samples may be obtained unless
authorized in the entry permit.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified.

3. MATRIX CODE: Terrestrial: B1, C1, D1, E1, L1
       Inland waters: L1, M11

       Marine: not known

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The valley is about 3 km in length from east to west
and 0.5 to 1.5 km in width. The head of the valley, about 200 m
above sea level, abuts the edge of the ice cap. A melt stream
flows from the ice cap towards the sea through V-shaped and
U-shaped sectors of the valley. Lake Higashi Yukidori lies north
of the head of the valley. The main stream of the valley enters
Lake Yukidori, in the middle of the valley, 125 m above sea level.
It flows from the south-west corner of the lake and runs through
- 2 -

A preliminary biological survey was undertaken by the 15th and 
16th JARE (1973-75). Taxonomical and ecological studies of moss 
and lichen vegetation along the stream and the lake margin were 
carried out, with particular reference to the relationship 
between this vegetation and water supply.  The area has been 
chosen for an on-going biological research programme and for 
long-term monitoring studies.  It is therefore necessary to 
afford protection to the Site so as to minimize human impacts.

(iii) Outline of research

A three year intensive study of the ecosystem commenced during 
the 1985-1986 season.  This project consists of several 
ecological studies on fauna and flora in relation to the 
climatic and edaphic environmental conditions.  Long-term 
monitoring of fauna and flora in some selected areas has also 
been conducted from the early stages of the investigation.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

Initially 5 years from the date of designation, and thereafter 
subject to review.

(v) Access points

None specified.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Pedestrians should enter the Site only in connection with 
research activities.  The operation of surface vehicles and the
SSSI 1/87

YUKIDORI VALLEY, LANGHOVDE, LUTZOW-HOLM BAY

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Yukidori Valley (lat. 69°14'30" S, long. 39°46'00" E), is situated in 
the middle part of Langhovde, on the east coast of Lutzow-Holm Bay,
Greater Antarctica. The Japanese Station, Syowa, is situated on East
Ongul Island about 30 km north of the site. (Note: "Yukidori" is the
Japanese for snow petrel, Pagodroma nivea).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The Site encompasses an area of 3 km by 0.5-1.5 km, the
boundaries of which are shown on the accompanying map, located
between a tongue of the ice cap and the east end of the valley.
It includes a prominent stream and two lakes, and extends up to
50 m offshore near the mouth of the stream.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site has a prominent fauna and flora which are
representative of the terrestrial ecosystems of continental
Antarctica. It has been chosen to satisfy the logistic needs of
a continuing scientific study.
Zamorano, J.H. 1983 Zonación y biomasa de la microfauna bentónica en Bat South, Archipélago de Palmer, Antárticas. Publ. INACH, Serie Cientí 30, 27-38.

Zamorano, J. [In press]. Zonación del macrobentos sublitoral en Bahía South Antártica. Proc. Symp. on Recent Advances in Antarctic Aquatic Biology with special reference to the Antarctic Peninsuia Region. Bariloche, 6-10 June 1983.
The spatial distribution of nine species of fish and their trophic
relations have been described (Moreno et al. 1977). Species are
segregated according to their habitat preferences, sponges and algae
being refuges against predators.

(d) Birds and seals. No bird surveys have been carried out for this site.
Seals, in particular Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) visit
the area to feed. Cetaceans, like killer whales (Orcinus orca) and
humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) enter the bay, sometimes to
rest.

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

[Not available at time of printing].

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

[Not available at time of printing].

3. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Etcheverry, H.D.  1983 Algas béntónicas de la Antártica Chilena.
Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 30, 97-124.

Hooper. P.R. 1962 The petrology of Anvers Island and adjacent islands.
Falk. Is. Dep. Surv. Sci. Repts. No. 34, 69 pp.

Jaramillo, E. 1977 Aega antarctica Hodgson y Plalcarthrium typoicum
Chilton. en Bahía South Antártica Chilena. (Crustacea, Isopoda).
Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 5(1), 59-64.

Moreno, C.A. & Zamorano, J.H. 1979-80. Seiección de los alímentos en
Notothenia coriiceps neglecta del cinturón de algas de Bahia South,
Antarctica. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 25-26, 33-43.

Moreno, C.A., Zamorano, J.H. & Duarte, W.E. 1977 Distribución y
segregación espacial de las poblaciones de peces en Bahía South (Isla
Doumer), Antártica. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 5(1), 45-58.

Moreno, C., Zamorano, J., Duarte, W. & Jara, F. 1981 Abundance of
Antarctic juvenile fishes on soft bottom substrata: the importance of
the refuge. Cybium, 6(1), 37-41.

Moyano, R.I.G. 1978 Bryozoa de bahías antárticas: algunos aspectos
ecológicos. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 24, 35-60.

Pepper, J. 1954 The meteorology of the Falkland Islands and Dependencies
1944-1950. London: Falkland Islands and Dependencies Meteorological
Service.

Vinje, T.E. 1981 Meteorological observations from Bouvetoya. Norsk
Polarinst. Skrft. No. 175, pp. 85-103.

Watkins, B.P. 1981 Seabird observations at Bouvet Island. S. Afr. J.
Antarct. Res., 10/11, 38-40.
(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

        Any scientific research that requires collection of organisms
should be avoided. Observations by scuba diving, which should not
cause significant interference.

(viii) Scientific sampling

        Collection of samples should be made only for compelling
scientific purposes.

(ix) Other restraints

        The dumping of waste from ships and bottom crawling should be
avoided. Anchoring should be avoided except for compelling
reasons.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: Not applicable
Inland waters: Not applicable
Marine: S5, S6, S7, V5, V6

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

        (a) Topography. The entrance to South Bay is about 1 km wide, from where it
is about 2.2 km to the north-east inner coastline. The maximum depth is
200 m near the centre of the bay, to the west of the Site.

        (b) Geology. Doumer Island is composed chiefly of hybrid rocks of the
Andean Intrusive Suite, predominantly tonalite, of late Cretaceous to
early Tertiary age (Hooper 1962).

        (c) Meteorology. No data are available for this site, but conditions can be
expected to be similar to those recorded at the former British station
at Port Lockroy, Goudier Islet, 6 km to the north (Pepper, 1954).

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

        (a) Terrestrial. The littoral is the only community present in this Site, 
but no data are available.

        (b) Inland waters. Not applicable.

        (c) Marine. Four different types of bottom surface have been described:
rocky with algal growth, from 0 to 30 m depth; predominantly rock,
covered by algae, silt and large quantities of sponges, from 30 to 110 m
depth; mixed bottoms with predominantly deposits of mud and few rock
outcrops with sponges, from 100 to 150 m depth; soft bottoms of silt and
mud, from 150 to 200 m depth, corresponding to the deepest depression,
occur near the centre of the bay just outside the site (Moreno et al.
1977).

        The benthic macroinfaunal species richness increases with depth and
is accentuated in bottoms with a steep slope. Biomass values fluctuate
between 8 and 7690 g m-2 wet wt.  Ice scour exerts a strong influence on
the patterns of distribution and the abundance of benthic fauna
(Zamorano 1983).
Cape Kemp
              200
              160
              120
               80
               40
                0
BISMARCK STRAIT         SOUTH BAY         SSSI No. 11         PELTIER CHANNEL
               Py Point
Contours in metres
0        1 
km      63°38'                                  63°34'W
                       64°52'S
ANVERS ISLAND

-64°45'S

BISMARCK STRAIT

Cape Lancaster
N
E
U
M
A
Y
E
R
C
H
A
N
N
E
L

South Bay
Port
Loco?y
Doumer
ISLAND
Cumming
P?nt?

Cape ?mera

0         10        20km
63°30'                        63°00'W

WIENCKE ISLAND

GERLACHE STRAIT

LEMAIRE
ISLAND

Porpoise
Harbour
BRAYDE ISLAND

DANCO COAST
SOUTH BAY. DOUMER ISLAND,
PALMER ARCHIPELAGO

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Doumer Island lies at the south-west entrance to Neumayer Channel
between Anvers Island to the north-west and Wiencke Island to the east.  It
is separated from Wiencke Island by the Peitier Channel.  South Bay lies on
the south coast of Doumer Island.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(1) Description of Site

The Site consists of a small area of coastal and subtidal
benthic habitats down to 45 m depth subtended to the North by lat.
64°42'S, between long. 63°34'00"W and long. 63°35'20"W; and to the
South by a diagonal line that starts at a point 100 metres from the
Refuge [sub-base Yelcho] to long. 63°34'00"W.  Boundaries are shown
on the attached map.

(ii) Reason for designation

This Site is subject of a long-term ecological research
programme; the purpose of the designation is to reduce, as far as
possible, the risk of accidental interference which could jeopardize
these scientific investigations.

(iii) Outline of research

The objective of the research is the study of the relationships
among marine organisms in this area, which was started by scuba
diving in 1972.  Since 1981 advanced type experiments to understand
community structure and functioning are under way, and will continue
in the future.  These require the avoidance, as much as possible, of
artificial interference.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

June 1988.

(v) Access points

Access points as such are not applicable.  The area is not
affected by the passage of boats.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Restricted.
Gallardo, V.A., Cascillo, J.G., Retamal, M.A., Yanez, A., Moyano, H.I. & 
Hermosilla, J.G. 1977  Quantitative studies of the soft-bottom shallow 
Antarctic bays. In: Adaptations within Antarctic ecosystems. (ed. G.A. 
Llano), pp. 361-387. Houston (Texas): Gulf Publishing Co.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1968. Distribucion y profundidades de las especies 
exclusivamente antarticas de Bryozoa Cheilostomata recolectadas por la 
Decima-novena Expedicion Antartica Chilena 1964-65.  Boln. Soc. 
Biol. Concepcion, 40, 113-123.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1969  Bryozoa colectados. por la Expedicion Antartica 
Chilena, 1964-65. III Familia Cellariidae Hincks, 1880.  Boln. Soc. 
Biol. Concepcion, 41, 41-77.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1970  Bryozoa colectados por la Expedicion Antartica 
Chilena 1964-65. IV. Familia Arachnopusiidae Jullien, 1888.  Bol. 
Soc. Biol. Concepcion, 42, 5-15.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1972  Investigacion bentonica durante la XXV Comision 
Antartica Chilena.  Bol. INACH, 73, 17-18.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1975  Romancheira asymetrica sp. nov., nueva especie 
de la Antartica y clave para las especies antarticas y magallanicas de 
Exoche1lidae (Bryozoa, Cheilostomata).  Boln. Soc. Biol. Concepcion, 49, 
61-69.

Moyano, H.I.G. 1978  Bryozoa de bahias antarticas: algunos aspectos 
ecologicos.  Publ. INACH Ser. C1e., 24, 35-60.

Shiino, S.M. 1970  Paratanaiidae collected in Chile Bay, Greenwich Island 
by the XXII Chilean Antarctic Expedition, with an Aspendes from Provenir 
Point, Tierra del Fuego Island.  Publ. INACH Ser. Cie., 1(2), 77-122.

Valenzuela, E. & Varela, J. 1972  Sedimentology of submarine deposits from 
Bahia Chile, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands.  In 'Antarctic 
geology and geonvsics (ed. R.J. Adie), pp. 75-81.  Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
(c) Mereorology. Data for Arturo Prat Station are deposited with the 
National Meteorological Bureau, Santiago, Chile.

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. Not applicable.

(b) Inland waters. Not applicable.

(c) Marine. The benthic assemblages have high species diversity and 
biomass. Bottom copography and sediment features influence the 
structure of the communities and distribution pattern of species. 
Two assemblages have been recognized: one, dominated by the 
polychaete Maldane sarsi antarctica, is located in the outer part 
of the bay, mainly below 100 m depth; other characteristic species 
in this assemblage are Cenaxinus boncrain11, Cyamomactra 
denticulatum, Typhlotanais greenwicnessis and Pycnogonida spp.. 
The inner assemblage, on the other hand, is not dominated by any 
single species but contains Yoldia eightsii and Eudorella gracilior 
as charcteristic fauna. The mean number of organisms deternined in 
1968 in the outer assemblage was 6030 individuals m-2; the 
corresponding number in the inner assemblage was 3390. The mean 
wet weight biomass, however, was similar, i.e. 180 g m-2 and 164 g 
m-2, respectively (Gallardo and Castillo 1969). The diet of 
Notothenia rossii and N. neglecta from Chile Bay has been described 
by Bahamonde and Moreno (1970).

(d) Birds and seals. Not applicable.

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

[Not available at time of printing].

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

[Not available at time of printing].

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Araya, R. & Herve, F. 1965 Estudio geomorfológico y geológico en las Isla 
Sherland del Sur, Antártica. Inst. Antart. Chileno. Publ. No. 8. 
77 pp.

Arcos, D. & Salamónca, M.A. 1980 Observaciones hidrograficas en Bahía 
Foster y Bahía Chile (Islas Shetland del Sur). Enero 1978. Boln. 
Inst. Oceanogr.. Sao Paulo. 29(2), 51-55.

Bahamonde, N. & Moreno, C. 1970 Relaciones tróficas en Notothenia rossii 
marmorata Fischer Notothenia coriiceps neglecta Nybecin; de Bania Chile. 
Antartica. Inst. Antart. Chileno. Bol. 1970 No. 5, pp. 3-10.

Castillo, J.G. 1967 Ophiuroideos colectados por la XIX Expedición 
Antártica Chilena. Publ. INACH. 13 , 1-34.

Gallardo, V.A. & Castillo, J.C. 1969 Quantitative benthic survey of the 
infauna of Chile Bay (Greenwich I., South Shetland Is.). Gavana. Zool., 
16, 1-18.

Gallardo, V.A. & Castillo, J.C. 1970 Quantitative observations on the 
benthic macrofauna of Port Foster (Deception Island) and Chile Bay 
(Greenwich Island). In: Antarctic Ecology (ed. M.W. Holdgate), Vol. 1. 
pp. 242-243. London: Academic Press.
59°44'
              59°37'W
ENGLISH
STRAIT
Spark Point
62°27'
CHILE
BAY
( DISCOVERY BAY)
Ash Point
BASE
ARTURO
PRAT
GREENWICH ISLAND
         0          1 km
       62°30'S
(vi) Fedestrian and vehicular routes

Not applicable.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Scientific research other than the study of benthic habitats and
communities.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Samples from the benthic habitats should only be taken for
compelling scientific purposes. A programme should be initiated to
monitor any pollution arising from ship activities.

(ix) Other restraints

Ships should avoid, so far as possible, the specific area of the
SSSI. Anchoring should be performed for compelling reasons only.
Ships should not discharge solid wastes within Chile Bay, and should
minimise the discharge of liquid wastes. Bottom trawling or siting
of bottom devices should be avoided.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: Not applicable
Inland waters: Not applicable
Marine: Areas A and B: S8, S9, V6

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The entrance to Chile Bay is about 3.5 km across from Spark
Point (Punta Bascope) to Ash Point (Punta Troncoso). The inner
coastline is irreguiar with several small bays, coves and islets.

Two glaciers reach the coastline. Great Traub Glacier on the west,
and Air Force Glacier on the east to the south of Arturo Prat Station.

(b) Geology. Rock outcrops are not frequent around the bay. There is a
vesicular andesitic cover of Jurassic to Cretaceous age, with intrusions
of dioritic and andesitic stacks and dykes. There are a few isolated
outcrops of horizontal basaltic andesites and lapilli-tuffs, of Tertiary
age (Araya and Herve 1965).

The bottom of both sites consists of coarse to fine silt. The
lithological and mineralogical composition of the sediments show their
provenance from the outcrops and littoral deposits surrounding
Chile Bay, i.e. porphyritic andesite, aphanitic andesite, diorite and
andesitic volcanic breccia and tuffs (Valenzuela and Varela 1972).
This material is transported to the coastline mainly by glaciers,
solifluction and mud flows. These processes are intensified in the
inner part of the bay where a glacier terminates. Chile Bay has a
transverse submarine barrier, possibly a submerged moraine, trending
south-east to north-west, separating areas A and B and dividing the bay
into an inner part and an outer part. Sediments of the inner bay are
protected from the action of waves and currents, thereby preserving the
grain size distribution, sorting and shape of the material contained
therein.
CHILE BAY, GREENWICH ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Chile Bay (also known as Discovery Bay) lies on the north-east side of
Greenwich Island, between Robert Island to the east and Livingston Island to
the west.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(1) Description of Site

The Site comprises two tracts of benthic habitat located as follows:

Habitat 1 [= Area A]: From between 50 and 100 m depth and between the
following coordinates:

Lat. 62°28.9'S             Long. 59°41'12"W
Lat. 62°29.3'S             Long. 59°41'43"W

Habitat 2 [= Area B]: From between 100 and 200 m depth and between
the following coordinates:

Lat. 62°28.3'S             Long. 59°40'15"W
Lat. 62°28.7'S             Long. 59°40'47"W

(11) Reason for designation

In Chile Bay there has been continued quantitative and
qualitative benthic research since 1967. Data being accumulated
provide a baseline for long-term investigations. The site is of
exceptional scientific interest and therefore requires long-term
protection from possible harmful interference.

(111) Outline of research

A long-term research programme was started in 1967 in connection
with the study of benthic fauna re-establishment within Port Foster,
Deception Island, following the volcanic eruptions of December 1967.
Chile Bay has been designated a control study area. These studies
are performed yearly during the summer. The community criteria to
observe biota changes will be implemented with other acceptable
criteria in order to comply with requirements of a long-term
biological monitoring programme.

(1v) Date of expiry of designation

March 1983.

(v) Access points

Not applicable.
Retamal, M.A., Quintana, R. & Neira, F.  1982 Análisis cuali y 
cuantitativo de las comunidades bentónicas en Bahía Foster (Isla 
Decepción) (XXXY Expedición Antártica Chilena, enero 1981).  Publ.
INACH Ser. Cie.. 29, 5-15.

Roobol, M.J.  1973 Historic volcanic activity at Deception Island.
Br. Antarc. Surv. Bull., No. 32, pp. 23-30.

Sandoval, V.S. & Silva, J.M.  1975 Descripción de las condiciones 
oceanográficas de la Bahía Foster, Isla Decepción, Enero de 1972.
Publ. INACH Ser. Cie.. 3(1). 80-86.

Silva, N. & Muñoz, J.  1975 Descripción de las condiciones 
oceanográficas de Bahía Foster, Isla Decepción.  Publ. INACH Ser.
Cie.. 3(1). 80-86.

Valenzuela, E., Chávez, L. & Munizaga, F.  1968 Informe preliminar sobre 
la erupción de Isla Decepción ocurrida en Diciembre de 1967.  Bol.
INACH. 3. 5-16.
39°44'E                                  39°48'
69°14'S
                                 
                                 Lake Yukidori
Hut   Yukidori Valley
69°15'
0                1
               km
Depression      Lake
~ Stream       Contours in metres
1

SSSI 3/87

SUMMIT OF MT. MELBOURNE, NORTH VICTORIA LAND

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Mt. Melbourne, North Victoria Land (lat. 74°21'S, long. 164°42'E) is 
situated between Wood Bay, on the west side of Ross Sea, and Campbell 
Glacier, about 20 km to the west.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i)  Description of site

The Site comprises all terrain above the 2200 m contour on the 
main crater of Mt. Melbourne.

(ii)  Reason for designation

The Site is of exceptional interest because of its extensive 
ice-free ground, at high altitude, which possesses several 
geothermal areas supporting a unique cryptogamic flora and 
microbiota.  It also possesses unusual glaciomorphological and 
geomorphological features, and accumulations of organic matter.
- 2 -

(111) Outline of research

There has been little previous research activity in the Site.

The studies that have been undertaken have involved

investigations of geothermal and volcanic activity and a survey

of the plant and microbial communities. Future research is

likely to include studies of soil microbiology and microfauna,

vegetation, volcanology and the geophysics of the area.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

Initially ten years from the date of designation, and thereafter

subject to review.

(v) Access Points

Access to the Site is normally by helicopter and landings should

be made only in the caldera, thereby avoiding any of the

vegetated or other sensitive areas.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

No vehicle should be used within the Site. Pedestrians should

avoid, whenever possible, walking on any obvious areas of warm

ground or disturbing any vegetation. Entry to the "Cryptogam

Ridge" area of the Site should be made only from either end of

the ridge. Entering the ridge directly up its slopes should be

avoided.
- 3 -

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Low impact studies which have a minimal effect on the 
environment of the Site are permitted.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Samples should be acquired only for compelling scientific 
reasons and should not be taken to the detriment of the 
environment or of further scientific investigation. Sampling 
should be undertaken without causing the introduction of any 
foreign organisms.

(ix) Other restraints

Sterile protective overclothing should be worn and footwear 
should be sterilized before entering the Site to minimize 
contamination. Sterilized sampling equipment should also be 
used. All wastes should be removed from the Site.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: B8, F8, (?)G8

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. In profile, Mt. Melbourne is an almost perfect 
low-angle cone rising to 2732 m a.s.l., showing only slight 
dissection and little or no glacial erosion. Many basaltic cones
- 4 -

and mounds occur near the base and on the flanks of the mountain.

The summit caldera is about 1 km in diameter and forms a névé for a 
glacier flowing westward. The two main areas of ice-free ground (A 
- "Cryptogam Ridge" - and B on the accompanying map) are on the 
edge of the caldera, with a third area (C) 250 m lower on the 
northern slopes.

"Cryptogam Ridge", on the southern side of the main crater, is an 
area of geothermal activity. About 300-400 m of this ridge is 
ice-free with the remainder covered by numerous ice hummocks. 
These hummocks are hollow and are 1-6 m in diameter and up to 4 m 
high. The warmest areas of ground support the growth of patches of 
yellow-green moss, liverwort and brownish crusts of algae.

(b) Geology and soils. Mt. Melbourne is part of the McMurdo Volcanics 
which are a line of extinct volcanoes running along the coast of 
Victoria Land. The Mt. Melbourne area is more likely to be late 
Quaternary than late Tertiary in age, and the most recent eruption 
may have been only about 150 years ago.

The mountain is a large low-angle strato-volcano containing basalt, 
trachyandesite and trachyte flows and including pyroclastics. 
Small basalt scoria cones are scattered around the base, some of 
which appear to be very recent as they are undissected. Several 
older slightly dissected cones occur on the summit caldera.

Surface ground temperatures vary markedly over distances of 
centimetres on ice-free warm ground, up to a recorded maximum of 
47°C. Random probing to depths of 1 m and detailed temperature 
transects to depths of 15 cm indicate substrate temperatures of up
to 60°C. Within the ice pinnacles soil surface temperatures range 
from 10°C to over 40°C. Frost heave occurs at some warm areas.

Although the substratum is classified as azonal, there are two 
distinct soil zones within some areas of hot ground. These may 
have been formed by natural processes caused by heat, moisture and 
gases from below. A typical profile comprises an upper 0-5 cm 
layer of dark sandy soil with a lower 6-30 cm horizon consisting of 
large lighter coloured scoria gravels. The upper layer contains 
organic matter in which there is microbiological activity, 
including cyanophaecean nitrogen fixation. No clay minerals have 
been detected.

(c) Meteorology. No detailed data are available for the Site. Field 
party records, during one week in late November 1984, indicate 
summer air temperatures in the caldera area of -6°C to -20°C, with 
an absolute minimum of -32°C.

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. The Site contains an unique bryophyte community 
comprising the moss Campylopus pyriformis and the liverwort 
Cephaloziella exiliflora. C. pyriformis is not known elsewhere in 
the Antarctic biome, and C. exiliflora is known from three other 
(low altitude) areas of continental Antarctica. Other than at a 
similar geothermal site at the summit of Mt. Erebus (protonemata 
only) this is the highest altitude at which bryophytes have been 
found in Antarctica. The unusual occurrence of shallow peat is 
evidence of bryophyte growth having taken place over at least 
several decades.
- 6 -

Algae grow over wide areas of the warm ground and on the surface of 
warm rocks in some fumaroles. The microflora comprises a range of 
unicellular and filamentous algae, including the green Chroococcus 
sp., Tolypothrix sp. and Stigonema sp. and the cyanobacteria 
Mastigocladus laminosus and Pseudococcoomyxa simplex.

Thermotolerant and thermophilic micro-organisms have been isolated 
from the soils.

A single unidentified lichen has been observed as a component of 
black crusts over small areas of warm soil. The only invertebrate 
reported is a testate amoeba, Corythion dubium, amongst the 
vegetation.

(b) Inland waters. It is possible that a sub-surface reservoir of 
liquid water may be present below the hollow near the ice-fall 
outlet from the Mt. Melbourne summit caldera to the sub-surface 
melt of ice. However, there are no data confirming this.

The occurrence of plant life is made possible only by the water 
droplets formed by the condensation of steam. Very small 'pools' 
up to c. 50 cm2 and about 1 cm deep have been observed on occasions 
where dripping condensate gathered in small depressions.

(c) Marine. Not applicable.

(d) Birds and seals. No observations of birds have been made near the 
summit of the volcano. In the adjacent, low-lying coastal regions 
there are breeding populations of south polar skuas, snow petrels 
and Adelie penguins.
- 7 -

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Certain areas within the Site support unique plant communities on 
steam-warmed ground; all lie above the 2200 m contour. The closest 
documented fumarolic ground is 400 km to the south at the summit of Mt. 
Erebus, but there the organisms differ significantly from those on Mt. 
Melbourne. However, recent evidence suggests that geothermal activity 
also occurs near Mt. Melbourne close to the coast. Elsewhere in 
Antarctica vegetation on steam-warmed ground is known only in low 
altitude maritime areas of the Antarctic Peninsula region where, again, 
the vegetation differs significantly from the Mt. Melbourne community. 
The Site is of extreme interest to botanists, microbiologists, 
volcanologists and geophysics. Uncontrolled human activity within this 
area could cause severe damage by trampling of plants, compacting soil 
and altering soil temperature gradients, changing rates of steam release 
and possibly causing the introduction of alien micro-organisms and 
cryptogamic plants. In 1984 geothermal area B (see map) experienced 
minor impact.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

Mt. Melbourne was first sighted in 1841 by James Ross and first climbed 
in January 1967 by a New Zealand party. Since then the summit area has 
been visited by New Zealand parties in December 1972 and November 1984. 
The 1984 party surveyed the biota on "Cryptogam Ridge" (Area A on the 
map). Brief visits were also made in January 1983 by a United States 
party and more recently by West German (1984/85) and Italian (1985/86) 
parties.
- 8 -

8.  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Broady, P.A.  1984  Taxonomic and ecological investigations of algae 
on steam-warmed soil on Mt Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica.
Phycologia, 23(3), 257-271.

Broady, P.A.  1985  A preliminary report of physiological studies in 
Northern Victoria Land and on Ross Island during 1984/85.
Melbourne University Programme in Antarctic Studies, Report No. 66,
145 p.

Broady, P.A., Given, D., Greenfield, L. & Thompson, K.  1987  The 
biota and environment of fumaroles on Mt Melbourne, northern 
Victoria Land. Polar Biology, 7, 97-113.

David, T.W.E., Priestley, R.E.  1914  Glaciology, physiology, 
stratigraphy, and tectonic geology of South Victoria Land.  Reports 
of the British Antarctic Expedition 1907-1909, Geology 1, 319 p.

Gair, H.S.  1967  The geology from the Upper Rennick Glacier to the 
coast, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica.  New Zealand Journal of 
Geology and Geophysics 10(2), 409-444.

Holdsworth, G. & Ugolini, F.C.  1965  Fumarolic ice-towers on Mt 
Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica.  Journal of Glaciology 5, 878-879.

Keys, J.R., McIntosh, W.C. & Kyle, P.R.  1983  Volcanic activity of 
Mt Melbourne, northern Victoria Land.  Antarctic Journal of the 
United States, 18(5), 10-11.
- 9 -

Lyon, G.L. & Giggenbach, W.F. 1974  Geothermal activity in Victoria 
Land, Antarctica. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics,
17(3), 511-521.

Nathan, S. & Schulte, F.J. 1967  Recent thermal and volcanic activity 
on Mt Melbourne, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica. New Zealand 
Journal of Geology and Geophysics, 10(2), 422-430.
VICTORIA LAND
72°S                                   160°E                  170°
                                 Wood Bay
                                 Mt Melbourne
                        Terra Nova Bay
                                 Ross Sea
74°
                                 McMurdo 
                                 Sound
76°                                                                      Mt Erebus
                                                                                  Ross Island
                                 Glaciers and shelf 
                                 ice
0                  100                  200
                        km
78°
                                 Ross Ice Shelf
N
ICEFALL
CALDERA
"Cryptogam
Ridge"
2732m
0                1
         km

Areas of rock and scree not
geothermally heated and in
places heavily snow-drifted.

Ice-free steaming ground
(Dec. 1984)

Fumaroles inside ice-hummocks
and ice towers

Ridge lines
Steep slopes
and cliffs
Crevasses

Mt
Melbourne
2200
1000
400
165 00'E
Wood
Bay
74°15'S
Terra Nova Bay
0                 10
         km
Cape
Washington
Contours in metres
Campbell
Glacier
SSSI 2/87

SVARTHAMAREN, MÜHLIG-HOFMANNFJELLA, DRONNING MAUD LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The mountain Svarthamaren (lat. 71°53'S, long. 5°10'E) is situated in
Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land.  The distance from the ice
shelf barrier is about 200 km.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The Site consists of the mountain Svarthamaren with extensive
screes at an elevation of about 1600 m a.s.l., about 3.9 km² in
area.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site provides exceptional opportunities for research on the
Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), snow petrel
(Pagodroma nivea) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki),
and the study of different types of adaptation in seabirds
breeding inland on the Antarctic continent.
- 2 -

(iii) Outline of research

A study of the breeding biology and ecophysiological adaptations
in the Antarctic petrel was initiated in 1985. This is planned
to continue during future Norwegian Antarctic Expeditions. The
accessibility of the Site is limited by its location far inland,
and this may hinder frequent research visits.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

10 years from the date of designation.

(v) Access points

The Site may be entered from any direction but access should
cause minimum disturbance to the bird colonies.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site. Pedestrians should not move
through the populated areas except in the course of scientific
investigations. Helicopters and low-flying aircraft should
avoid the biru culonies in accordance with the Agreed Measures
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which will not cause
harmful interference

Any scientific investigation which will not cause significant
disturbance to the biological programmes for which the Site has
been designated.
- 3 -

(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of the bird population by killing, capture, or 
taking of eggs should be done only for a compelling scientific
purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: H8, G8

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The Svarthamaren mountain is about 6 km long in a
NW-SE direction, with the highest point being 2195 m a.s.l. The
northern part of the NE side is dominated by screes, extending
240 m upwards from the base of the mountain. Above these screes,
which are sloping 31-34°, are almost vertical cliffs. Beneath the
slopes is a narrow area of flat ground bordered by glacier ice.
The major feature of this side are two rock amphitheatres
inhabitated by breeding petrels.

(b) Geology and soils. The main rock types are coarse and medium
grained charnockitoids and small amounts of xenoliths. Banded
gneisses, biotite amphibolites and granites of the amphibolite
facies mineralogy are included in the charnockitoids. The slopes
are covered by decomposed felspathic sand.
- 4 -

(c) Meteorology. Meteorological data exist only for the period 13 
January to 15 February 1985, during which the air temperature 
varied mostly between -5°C and -15°C.  An automatic weather station 
was set up by NARE 1984/85 at Jutulsessen, 100 km west of 
Svarthamaren, to obtain long term weather statistics.

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. The flora and vegetation at Svarthamaren are sparse, 
even compared with other areas in Mühlig Hofmannfjella and 
Gjelsvikfjella to the west of the Site (Engelskjøn 1985, 1986). 
This is apparently due to the considerable elevation of 
Svarthamaren, the prevailing shortage of meltwater, and the 
excessive nutrient deposition from the bird colonies. The only 
plant species occurring in abundance, but peripherally to the most 
manured areas, is the foliose green alga, Prasiola crispa.  A 
fairly rich cyanophycean and lichen vegetation occurs elsewhere in 
the Mühlig-Hofmannfjella area. However, the surroundings of Camp 
Norway 5 support only a few lichen species on erratics 1-2 km away 
from the bird colonies: Candelariella hallettensis (= C. 
antarctica), Rhizoplaca (= Lecanora) melanophthalma, Umbilicaria 
spp., and Xanthoria spp. Bryophytes have not been recorded on 
Svarthamaren proper, but the moss Grimmia lawiana is frequent on 
the peripheral nunatak chains Hamarskaftet and Plogskaftet.

Areas covered with Prasiola are inhabited by Collembola 
(Cryptopygus sverdrupi) and a relatively rich fauna of mites 
(Eupodes angardi, Tydeus erebus), protozoans, nematodes and 
rotifers (Sømme 1985, 1986).
- 5 -

(b) Inland waters. A shallow pond measuring about 20 x 30 m, lying
below the middle and largest bird subcolony, is heavily polluted by
petrel carcasses, and supports a strong growth of a yellowish-green
unicellular alga, Chlamydomonas sp. Smaller concentrations of
algae occur on the fringes of a small frozen lake below the
northern face of the mountain. No invertebrates were recorded.

(c) Marine. Not applicable.

(d) Birds and seals. There are very large breeding colonies of
seabirds. The north-east slopes of Svarthamaren are occupied by a
densely populated colony of Antarctic petrels, divided into three
separate subcolonies. Less than ten breeding colonies of Antarctic
petrels are described in the literature (Watson 1975), and the
Svarthamaren colony is by far the largest known. The colony was
subjected to the first close examination in January/February 1985
by Norwegian ornithologists participating in NARE 1984/85. The
total number of breeding pairs in 1985 was estimated to be
208,000. In addition, 500 - 1000 pairs of snow petrels and 50
pairs of south polar skuas were breeding in the area in 1985
(Mehlum et al. 1985). The Antarctic petrels nest in the two rocky
amphitheatres with a mean density of 0.75 nest per square metre.
Most of the snow petrels nest in separate parts of the scree
characterized by larger rocks. The south polar skuas nest on the
narrow strip of flat, snow-free ground below the screes.

There are no sea mammals at Svarthamaren.
- 6 -

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

The Svarthamaren Antarctic petrel colony is the largest known seabird
colony situated inland on the Antarctic continent, and probably
represents a significant proportion of the world population of this
species.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

The Antarctic petrel colony was discovered by Soviet geologists in
January 1961 (Konovalov 1962, Konovalov & Shulyatin 1964) during the
Fifth Soviet Antarctic Expedition.  The expedition landed in the area
with an AN-2 aircraft and quite unexpectedly encountered thousands of
birds taking off. The Soviets probably stayed in the area for one day
only.  During the period 9 January to 16 February 1985 ten of the
scientists of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE)
1984/85 worked in Mühlig-Hofmannfjella and Gjelsvikfjella, and
established a main base camp (Camp Norway 5) on the glacier
approximately 500 m north-east of the northernmost slope of the Site.
Three ornithologists visited the colony daily, and the area was also
investigated by a botanist and an invertebrate zoologist.  Researchers
of other disciplines surveyed this and nearby areas using skidoos
(Orheim 1985).  Only one landing by helicopter (a Bell 206) occurred
during the period. The camp consisted of several tents and one wooden
laboratory hut; the latter was left to be used by potential future
expeditions to the area.
8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Engelskj?n, T. 1985. Botany of Gjelsvikfjella and
Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 43-54 in Orheim, O.
(ed.): Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE
1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

Engelskj?n, T. 1986. Botany of two Antarctic mountain ranges:
Gjelsvikfjella and Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. I.
General ecology and development of the Antarctic cold desert
cryptogam formation. Polar Research, 4 n.s., No. 2, 205-224.

Konovalov, G.V. 1962. Observations of birds in Queen Maud Land. Sov.
Antarctic Exped. Inform. Bull, 4, 156-158.

Konovalov, V.I. & Shulyatin, O.G. 1964. Unique bird colony in
Antarctica (in Russian). Priroda, 10, 100-101.

Mehlum, F., Bech, C. & Haftorn, S. 1985. Ornithological investigations
in Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 27-34 in Orheim,
O. (ed.): Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition
(NARE 1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

Orheim, O. (ed.) 1985. Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research
Expedition (NARE 1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

S?mme, L. 1985. Terrestrial invertebrates of Muhlig-Hofmannfjella,
Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 55-62 in Orheim, O. (ed.): Report of the
Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE 1984/85). Norsk.
Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.
- 8 -

S?mme, L. 1986. New records of terrestrial arthropods from Dronning
Maud Land, Antarctica. Polar Research, 4 n.s., No. 2, 225-229.

Watson, G.E. 1975. Birds of the Antarctic and Subantarctic. American
Geophysical Union, Washington.
4°40'E                                  5°00'                   5°20'                   71°45'S

□ Ice-free ground
0     5     10 
km
Contours in metres

Skigarden2086 m
Petrellfjellet                      2678 m
1800
Svarthamaren
2195 m
Cumulusfjellet
2333m
Hågsenga
Basbolken
2725 m
Breplogen
72°00'                   Plogskal              O
oo
oHamar
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
5°05'E                 5°15'
 
Ice-free ground
Scree
0        1        2
         km
Contours in metres

                   Svarthamaren
-71°55'S
1800
2195 m
2000
SSSI 4/87

MARINE PLAIN, MULE PENINSULA, VESTFOLD HILLS, PRINCESS ELIZABETH LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Marine Plain (23.4 km2) opens into an arm of Crooked Fjord on the 
southern side of Mule Peninsula, the southernmost of the three major 
peninsulas which comprise the Vestfold Hills. The Vestfold Hills 
comprise an essentially ice-free oasis (approx. 400 km2) of bedrock, 
glacial debris and water at the eastern side of Prydz Bay on the eastern 
coast of Princess Elizabeth Land.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The boundary of the Site is as follows:

commencing at lat. 68°36'30"S, long. 78°09'00"E it runs 
south-easterly to lat. 68°36'45"S, long. 78°10'30"E; thence 
south-easterly to lat. 68°37'30"S, long. 78°10'30"E, then 
south along the parallel of long. 78°12'30"E to its 
intersection by the low water mark on the northern shore of 
Crooked Fjord; from here it follows the low water mark of 
the northern shore of Crooked Fjord to its intersection
- 2 -

with the meridian of long. 78°03'00"E; thence north along
the meridian of long. 78°03'00"E to its intersection with
the parallel of lat. 68°37'30"S, then north-easterly to
lat. 68°37'00"S, long. 78°05'00"E, and finally
north-eastwards to the point of commencement.

All co-ordinates are expressed in terms of the World Geodetic
System, 1972.

(11) Reason for designation

The site contains Pliocene marine sediments principally in the
area below 20 m a.s.l. In addition to the dominant important
fossils such as molluscs and diatoms, which define the age, the
site has yielded well-preserved vertebrate remains of a new
species, genus and probably family of fossil dolphin, plus at
least one other vertebrate species.

Burton Lake, as a hypersaline lake which is still in seasonal
connection with sea, presents the opportunity for important
limnological research. It represents a unique stage in the
biological and physico-chemical evolution of a terrestrial water
body from the marine environment.

Davis (68°85'S, 77°58'E), a permanently occupied Australian
scientific station, is located on Broad Peninsula, the central
peninsula of the Vestfold Hills, 6 km to the north-west of the
Site. It is the focus of continuing biological, including
limnological, studies within the Vestfold Hills. As a result of
its proximity, the scientific value of the Site could be
diminished by accidental interference.
- 3 -

(iii) Outline of research

A palaeontological research programme has commenced following 
the initial discovery of vertebrate fossils at the site in 
1985.  The programme consists of the collection of 
well-preserved fossil molluscs and diatoms and, in particular, 
fossil vertebrates, with the aim of documenting the fauna of the 
epoch.  Oxygen isotope studies on the well-preserved bivalve 
fauna will be employed to help quantify water temperature at 
that time.

Burton Lake is the subject of detailed year-round research as 
part of a programme aimed at understanding the evolution of the 
hydrological system in the Vestfold Hills, by looking at various 
stages of isolation from the marine environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

10 years from the date of designation, and thereafter subject to 
review.

(v) Access points

Access should, where possible, be from the sea ice in Ellis 
Fjord or Crooked Fjord, or by helicopter at places where no 
disturbance can be caused by the aircraft to water bodies, 
vegetation or sediment deposits.  If these means of access are 
not possible, access by land, either by vehicle or on foot, 
should be via Ellis Rapids at the eastern end of Ellis Fjord.
- 4 -

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not be used within the site except for over-snow
travel by motorized toboggan.  Pedestrians or vehicles must not
damage areas of vegetation, or disturb steep inclines marking
sediment outcrops or the lake margins near these outcrops.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Other research likely within the area is a study of the ecology
of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), snow petrels
(Pagodroma nivea), mosses and lichens, and other biota, and
investigation of water bodies other than Burton Lake.  Other
scientific investigations which do not disturb the
palaeontological, ecological and limnological programmes
described are also permitted.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Scientific sampling should be restric[t]ed to that required for
the programmes described in (iii) and (vii) above.

(xi) Other restraints

All waste materials taken into, or generated within the Site
should be removed as soon as practicable.  No fuel depots should
be made within the Site, nor should refuelling operations be
undertaken.  No permanent buildings should be erected within the
Site.  Power boats should not be used on Burton Lake and use of
- 5 -

other boats should be restricted to the minimum necessary to

support programmes consistent with this plan.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: None

Inland Waters: P6 (and seasonally Q6), and probably M1 and/or L1

Marine: None

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The site includes Burton Lake (surface at sea level)

as a major component of the western part of the region. An

extensive low level (less than 20 m above sea level) area occupies

the centre of the site with a north-south orientation.  In the

north-east is another area below 20 m.  Areas above 20 m are mostly

low hills of Precambrian rock acting as divides between the

shallower parts. They are quite rugged and separated at their base

by a marked change in their slope, probably representing an old

(Holocene?) shoreline, from the much lower areas below 20 m.  The

surface of the lower areas below 20 m is marked by a series of

concave-to-the-south recessional moraine ridges leading to the

present "iceberg graveyard" in Crooked Fjord, at the southern end

of the central low area.  The geomorphology of this region has been

reviewed by Pickard (1986).

(b) Geology. The Precambrian rock consists basically of 3000 Ma

gneisses both from igneous and metamorphic protoliths (Collerson

and Sheraton, 1986) intruded by numerous metabasalt dykes (intruded

in at least three intervals between 1800 and 1375 Ma) with a

roughly north-south orientation, a major feature of the Vestfold
- 6 -

Hills. Low lying areas consist of at least 8 m of early Pliocene 
(40-46 million years) diatomites and less common lenticular 
sandstone (Pickard et al. 1986, in press, Quilty in press) 
overlying the Precambrian rock and occupying the sites of what were 
embayments in the early Pliocene. In the western lobe (central 
area of the map, below 20 m a.s.l.), the Pliocene deposits are 
ovelain by a thin veneer of Holocene (6490 ± 130 y BP) glacial 
debris covering an area of 8-10 sq km, in places containing a few 
molluscs (Laternula elliptica King and Broderip) in situ.

Low scarps in the Pliocene adjacent to small lakes have yielded 
remains of a new genus, species and probably family - all extinct - 
of dolphin and there is evidence of another larger form. This 
vertebrate fossil fauna is the reason for the designation of the 
Site.

The geology of the Neogene is described in more detail by Quilty 
(in prep) and Pickard et al. (1986, in press) and the Precambrian 
has been reviewed by Collerson and Sheraton (1986).

(c) Meteorology. No data are available from the area, but conditions 
for Davis station, 6 km to the north-west, are similar (Burton and 
Campbell, 1980).

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. No detailed studies have been made of plants within 
the Site, but Seppelt et al. (in press) have reported few species 
and no significant stands of vegetation.
(b) Inland Waters. There are many small lakes and ponds which have
neither been studied nor named. The largest water body, Burton
Lake, is more marine in character because of its summer daily tidal
flow.

(c) Marine. Burton Lake opens to Crooked Fjord at its south-western
corner. It has been the site of biological research for several
years (e.g. Burke and Burton in press, Bayly 1986) (For the
purposes of the Matrix Code, Burton Lake appears to better fit into
the Inland Waters classification).

(d) Birds and Seals. No bird or seal surveys have been conducted in
the area, but it is relatively devoid of birds and sea mammals,
although Wilson's storm petrels and snow petrels occur sporadically
and nest in the Precambrian hills.

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Apart from the area's prime significance as a site of fossils, Burton
Lake and several of the small lakes are important as examples in a
spectrum of lake types in the Vestfold Hills.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

The area lies on the pedestrian route to the Mule Peninsula lakes
(Clear, Laternula, Cemetery and McCallum) from Ellis Rapids, and many
field parties have walked through the area in the 33 years of Australian
occupation at Davis station.  However, as the area is arid and barren
(as is much of the Vestfold Hills), no biological work has been
undertaken, apart from surveying the distribution of moss and lichen
vegetation (found to be largely absent, Seppelt et al. in press) and 
research on Burton Lake, and there has been little or no impact on the 
area. Since the recent (1985) discovery of vertebrate fossils in the 
Pliocene marine sediments in the area, a research programme involving 
further visits to the area has commenced.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J.  1983. Late Quaternary ice movement across 
the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica (ed. R.L. Oliver, P.R. James & J.B. 
Jago).  In: Antarctic Earth Science, pp. 465-469.  Australian 
Academy of Science, Canberra.

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J.  1986. Cainozoic history of the Vestfold 
Hills.  In: Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), pp. 63-97.  Academic 
Press, Sydney.

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J.  1986. Physiography and geomorphology of 
the Vestfold Hills.  In: Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), pp. 
99-139.  Academic Press, Sydney.

Bayly, I.A.E.  1986. Ecology of the zooplankton of a meromictic 
Antarctic lagoon with special reference to Drepanopus bispinosus 
(Copepoda Calanoida).  Hydrobiologia, 140, 199-231.

Burke, C.M. & Burton, H.R. in press.  The ecology of photosynthetic 
bacteria in Burton Lake, Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.  
Hydrobiologia.
- 9 -

Burton, H.R. & Campbell, P.J. 1980. The climate of the Vestfold Hills,
Davis station, Antarctica, with a note on its effect on the
hydrology of hypersaline Deep Lake. ANARE Scientific Reports,
Series D, Meteorology, No. 129, 1-50.

Collerson, K.D. & Sheraton, J.W. 1986. Bedrock geology and crustal
evolution of the Vestfold Hills. In: Antarctic Oasis (ed. J.
Pickard), 21-62. Academic Press, Sydney.

Fordyce, R.E. & Quilty, P.G. in prep. A new family of fossil whales
from the Pliocene of East Antarctica.

Franzmann, P.D., Skyring, G.W., Burton, H.R. & Deprez, P.P. in press.
Sulphate reduction rates and some aspects of the limnology of four
lakes and a fjord in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.
Hydrobiologia.

Harwood, D.M. 1986. Early Pliocene marine diatom floras from Marine
Plain, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica. In: Diatom
biostratigraphy and paleoecology with a Cenozoic history of
Antarctic ice sheets. Ph.D. Dissertation, Ohio State University,
316-342. [Unpublished].

Johnstone, G.W., Lugg, D.J. & Brown, D.A. 1973. The biology of the
Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. ANARE Scientific Reports, Series B
(1), Zoology, No. 123, 1-62.

McMeekin, T.A. in press. Preliminary observations on psychrotrophic and
psychrophilic heterotrophic bacteria from Antarctic water samples.
Hydrobiologia.
- 10 -

Pickard, J. 1986. The Vestfold Hills: a window on Antarctica. In:
Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), 333-351). Academic Press,
Sydney.

Pickard, J., Adamson, D.A., Harwood, D.M., Miller, G.H., Quilty, P.G. &
Dell, R.K. 1986. Early Pliocene marine sediments in the Vestfold
Hills, East Antarctica: implications for coastline, ice sheet and
climate. South African Journal of Science, 82, 520-521.

Pickard, J., Adamson, D.A., Harwood, D.M., Miller, G.H., Quilty, P.G. &
Dell, R.K. in press. Late Tertiary marine sediments and coastline
of East Antarctica. Geology.

Pickard, J., Selkirk, P.M. & Selkirk, D.R. 1984. Holocene climates of
the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica and Macquarie Island. In: Late
Cainozoic paleoclimates of the Southern Hemisphere (ed. J.C.
Vogel), 173-182. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.

Quilty, P.G. in prep. The geology of Marine Plain, Vestfold Hills, East
Antarctica. [Paper submitted to 5th International Symposium on
Antarctic Earth Sciences, Cambridge, August 1987.]

Seppelt, R.D. 1986. Lichens of the Vestfold Hills. In: Antarctic
Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), 247-274. Academic Press, Sydney.

Seppelt, R.D., Broady, P.A., Pickard, J. & Adamson, D.A. in press.
Plants and landscape in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.
Hydrobiologia.
- 11 -

Zhang Quinsong 1983. Periglacial landforms in the Vestfold Hills, East
Antarctica: preliminary observations and measurements.  In:
Antarctic Earth Science (ed. R.L. Oliver, P.R. James & J.B. Jago),
478-481.  Australian Academy of Science, Canberra.

Zhang Quinsong & Peterson, J.A.  1984. A geomorphology and Late
Quaternary geology of the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.  ANARE
Reports, No. 133, 1-84.

Zhang Quinsong, Xie, Y. & Li, Y.  1983. A preliminary study on the
evolution of the post late Pleistocene Vestfold Hills environment,
East Antarctica.  In: Antarctic Earth Science (ed. R.L. Oliver,
P.R. James & J.B. Jago), 473-477.  Australian Academy of Science,
Canberra.
76°00'E

 
Ice-free areas
0                  50
         km         
Vestfold Hills
DAVIS STATION      Sørsdal Glacier
Prydz Bay         
Rauer Group       
69°00'S           
Svenner Is.       Ranvik Bay
                  Ranvik
                  Glacier
Lichen I.         
Brattstrand Bluffs
Steinnes          
Larsemann Hills   
Stornes Peninsula 
                  

INGRID CHRISTENSEN COAST
78°00'
Tryne
Bay
78°00'E                                  78°10'
    Lake
    Ice cliffs
0        2         4
         km
Contours in metres
-68°36'S


                        Broad Peninsula

                        F i o r d


Mule Peninsula          E l i s          Burton     
                                            Lake
                        20-                 Marine
                                            Plain
          Crooked          20-
          Fjord
                        S?rsdal Glacier


-68°40'
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNIONS

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

                                          Secretary
                                  Scott Polar Research Institute
                                          Lensfield Road
                                      Cambridge ENGLAND CB2 1ER
                                          Tel. (0223) 62061
                                      Executive Secretary
                                          G.E. Hemmen

XIV ATCM Agenda item 11. Effects of Tourism and Non-Governmental
Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area

In June 1987, the SCAR Working Group on Logistics discussed the question of
non-governmental activities. Whilst acknowledging that the determination
of policies and courses of action in relation to non-governmental activities
is a matter for governments, the SCAR Executive Committee believes that the
report of the discussions on this subject prepared by the chairman of the Working
Group on Logistics, as amended by the SCAR Executive Committee. may be
helpful to the Representatives at XIV ATCM.  A copy is appended.


                                                                 Vice-President              Vice-President                          Secretary
                                                                 Professor Dr. G. Hempel     Professor E.S. Korotkevich              Dr. A.C. Rocha Campos
                                                              Alfred-Wegener-Institut fur     Arcttc and Antarctic Research          Universidade de Sâo Paulo
vs                                                           Polar- und Meeresforschung     Institute                                Instituto de Geociencias
                                                              Colombussstrasse            Ul Beringa 38                            Caixa Postal 20899
                                                              2850 Bremerhaven            Leningrad 199226                         Cidade Universitaria - Butanta
                                                              FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF        U.S.S.R.                                 05508 Sâo Paulo SP
                                                              GERMANY                                                                             BRAZIL
                                                                  
                                                                  Past President
                                                                  Dr. H.H. Zumberge
                                                              University of Southern California
                                                              Los Angeles
                                                              California 90089-0012
                                                              U.S.A.

                                                              viii 
C. Lorius
oratoire de Glaciologie et de
Geophysique de
Environnement
Universitaire B.P. 96
02 St-Martin-d'Hères Cedex
NCE
REPORT ON NON-GOVERNMENT ACTIVITY IN ANTARCTICA,
SCAR WORKING GROUP ON LOGISTICS.

1.      Introduction
In 1986 at San Diego, the Logistics Working Group introduced the term
'Non-Government Activity' (NGA) to supersede the term 'non-government expedition'
which has been used extensively in Antarctic Treaty discussions. The latter term no
longer fully covers the range of activities occurring in Antarctica, particularly the
increasing part played by commercial operators. The term NGA encompasses private
expeditions, commercial tourism and activities of non-governmental conservationist
groups.

At its meeting at Boulder, 8-10 June 1987, the SCAR Working Group on Logistics
(WGL) resolved to prepare a paper defining the categories and scope of NGAs to
identify the nature and extent of the impact on programs in Antarctica. The SCARWGL
concluded that NGA is a matter for governments

This paper summarises information on NGA for the period 1983-84 to 1986-87, and
examples of national program difficulties caused by NGA over a larger period.
2. Scope and Categories of Non-Government Activity

Unlike national operations whose programs are publicly accountable and directed by 
national policy, NGA is less restricted and generally seasonal in activity, with broad 
geographical interests. NGA frequently involves mixed groups of foreign nationals and 
is often under a corporate umbrella.  A summary of NGA between 1983/4 and 
1986/7 is being prepared:

NGA falls into four categories; overnights, cruises, private expeditions or voyages, and 
activities which require permanent facilities.

2.1 Overflights

Overflights were popular up until the tragic Mount Erebus air liner disaster in 1979. 
Overflights are less environmentally damaging than most other forms of tourism. They 
have no requirement for permanent facilities although they do rely on established 
observation and communications networks for weather and navigation information.

2.2 Cruises

There are presently three cruise ships operating. These cruises are the chief means of 
Antarctic tourism. Landing points are, typically, accessible scenic locations, areas 
where native fauna can be found and areas convenient to historic sites. Because 
tourists are accommodated on board ship, the likely impact on station facilities and 
local environments is not as high, per person, as for other forms of tourism, although 
experience is that interruptions are caused to station and some field scientific 
programs. Except in an emergency, organisers must plan to visit only those Antarctic 
stations for which permission has been sought and granted (ATCM IV-27). Cruise 
organisers must notify their itinerary for the purposes of information exchange under 
the Antarctic Treaty. At the end of each operational season, cruise operators should 
report on their activities including details of the stations which they visited 
(ATCM VIII-9).

The potential problems associated with this form of tourism include:

.   Possible disturbance and damage to historic sites and monuments when 
    concentrations of tourists are landed in one location;

.   Possible environmental impact caused by mechanical breakdowns, strandings of 
    passengers and groundings, fuel and oil spillages or the introduction of exotic 
    biota;

.   Possible medical emergencies; and

.   Possible disruption to national programs. Over the last two years, some stations 
    on the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula have experienced 
    seasonal visitor numbers in the order 1000. At several stations, about 40 days of 
    valuable summer program time were disrupted by the need to guide and supervise 
    tourists.
2.3 Private Expeditions and Small Craft Voyages
These are typically adventure expeditions operating from cruising yachts, converted trawlers, whalers and ocean-going tugs. A number of expeditlons have undertaken 
limited scientific activitles, but the mainstay of financial sponsorship for private 
expeditions is their adventure appeal.

A number of private expeditlons have received substantial assistance. Although the 
number of people who visit Antarctica in this way is relatively small, because of their 
need for extensive publicity they can be highly influentlal, often leading public opinion 
on Antarctlc issues.

2.4 Permanent Facilltles and Infrastructure
This category includes all NGA which have a long-term presence and permanent 
Antarctic facilltles. Such activitles place demands on the relatively small area of 
ice-free land and special measures are required to minimise potential impact on the 
environment.

Aircraft have taken large numbers of tourists to the maritime Antarctic, but the lack of 
suitable runways and accommodation facilltles has limited the scale of operations. 
The permanent facilities required for the growth of this category of NGA are capital and 
labour intensive and include: airports and runways, wharves and bunkering, hostel or 
hotel accommodation, waste disposal and other infrastructure, and additonal field 
shelters.

Of all the forms of NGA in the Antarctic, hotel-based tourism is potentially the form 
which has the most lasting and most concentrated environmental impact. In its favour it 
could be said that it localises impact in one place and allows for the ready adoption of 
technological innovation to problems of waste disposal in particular; and also control is 
relatively straightforward .

Greenpeace established a "wintering-over" station at Ross Island in 1986/87 
after an unsuccessful attempt in 1985/86.

3. Assistance Provided to NGA
Assistance provided by national Antarctic operators to all categories of NGA continues 
to increase. There is a wide range of assistance which national operators already 
provide in all stages of NGA planning and operations.

Speciallsed assistance provided to separate categories of NGA is summarised below.

Overflights  Air navigation, radio communications and in-flight information.
Depending on the populartity of future overflights, flight planning will be 
necessary in air space in use by national research programs.
Government-sponsored tourist flights are being conducted at the Antarctic 
Peninsula and maritime Antarctic regions.

Private air operations are potentially the most disruptive to station activities, 
especially in the event of an emergency. The reinstatement of tourist overflights 
and the continuing increase in light aircraft operations will place great 
responsibility on ground staff to provide the best possible in-flight and weather 
prediction information.

Crulses At stations, research sites, and important sites for wildlife, there is a general 
need to guide and oversee the movements of comparatively large tourists groups 
(minimum size is about 120). Tourists are attracted to Antarctic stations because 
of their remoteness and because of a general interest in observing human activity 
in Antarctica. In the past two season's, about 2000 tourists visited King George 
Island. Successive cruises have produced major disruptions to station activities 
at their busiest time. In addition, several cruise ships have grounded and 
required assistance.

Because of the disruption to national programs caused by tourist cruises, some 
national operators have limited the number and timing of tourist visits which can 
be made to stations.

Private Expeditions and Small Craft. Small private expeditions using motor 
vessels or yachts have shown the greatest increase of all categories of NGA. 
Experience is that while all expeditions claim to be self-sufficient, the majority 
have made extensive use of the resources of national programs. This has 
included assistance which national operators have provided because of concern 
for the safety and well-being of expeditions. A number of expeditions have 
received assistance from up to four national programs.

Private air operations have allowed tourist groups to visit even the most 
inaccessible areas of Antarctica. Air operations often involve routing through a 
number of national stations, assistance in fuel handling and depoting, providing 
flight and weather information, search and rescue (SAR) standby, and ground 
crew commitment for landings, refuelling, and take-offs. In addition, there is 
added ski-way and site maintenance in the event of unannounced visits by 
private aircraft.

Permanent Facilities and Infrastructure The small number of expeditions which 
have sufficient resources to maintain small wintering parties have located their 
operations close to existing national stations. While these private expeditions 
have a comparatively broad range of facilities, they have little or no logistic 
backup or flexibility should an emergency arise. The New Zealand and United 
States of America Antarctic Research Programs have been involved in 
large-scale emergency assistance to these expeditions.
Year-round NGA has mostly involved national operators making available their 
radio communications facilities and weather prediction services. However, 
because these private expeditions emphasise their self-reliance, they tend to 
resist seeking or divulging information on their operations. In particular, WGL 
members have pointed to the difficulties experienced in seeking basic 
operational information from Greenpeace's first expedition.

4. Conclusion

Because increasing NGA in Antarctic is inevitable, so too is the likelihood of national 
operators having to provide both advisory and emergency assistance to them. The 
WGL's concern is the potential problems created by NGA which may jeopardise 
national research programs, put lives at risk in SAR operations, and increase financial 
costs for national operators.

The range of costs to national Antarctic programs of providing assistance to NGA may 
be summarised as:

.   Time and labour commitment for predeparture briefings and specialist advice on 
the activities which are planned;

.   Prior to and in Antarctica, the costs incurred to national operators in monitoring 
the NGA. This assistance is of two kinds. Firstly, ensuring that the NGA is well 
planned and the organisers have a comprehensive knowledge of relevant 
Antarctic Treaty measures. Secondly, a commitment by national operators to 
ensure that facilities (e.g. ski-ways, SAR facilities and radio communications) are 
fully operational in the event of their use by NGA;

.   The costs incurred in providing supplies, shelter, transport and other emergency 
support. Because supplies taken to Antarctica are carefully rationed and costly to 
transport and store in Antarctica, the loss of small quantities has an over 
proportional cost to national programs.

.   Lost research opportunity caused by disruption to programs and disturbance to 
monitoring sites. For example, the unannounced arrival of an NGA party to a 
research station has jeopardised human biological studies centred on the effects 
of isolation and restricted contact with the outside world;

.   Disruption to entire national programs which may be caused by diverting ships, 
aircraft and personnel. Most national programs depend on shipping to resupply 
stations and for personnel transport. Because shipping operations take place 
within a narrow operational season, ship (and aircraft) diversions of a few 
days may significantly impact on the national programs. The emergency 
assistance of more than one national operator has been provided to a number of 
private expeditions. Despite advice to the contrary, expeditions have continued 
regardless, often to an unsuccessful conclusion and additional recovery costs to 
national operators.
6

The effect of diverting a national operator's ship can be quite serious. For 
example, a few years ago an Australian Antarctic vessel on its last voyage of the 
season had to be diverted to a rescue mission. After one day, Australia was able 
to locate another vessel to take over the rescue. If it had not been able to pass 
the rescue to another national operator, Australia would have had to leave 54 
summer expeditioners to winter on the Antarctic continent and charter a ship to 
collect the Macquarie Island summer party; and

Risks which may have to be faced by personnel from national programs in 
providing SAR and other emergency assistance. Emergency operations have 
involved personnel from national programs in flying operations in conditions 
which they would normally consider too dangerous for operations.

Ways must be found to provide NGA with as much assistance as is necessary to 
minimise the likelihood of disrupting national programs. In providing advice to NGA 
organisers, national operators need to stress the following points:

  The indicative costs involved in assistance by national operators;

  Concern to protect the national scientific programs;

  The liability of NGAs for costs of assistance rendered and the need for 
appropriate insurance;

  Antarctic Treaty obligations in respect of NGA;

  Guidance on the Code of Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and Station Activities;

  The requirement to protect historic sites, monuments and artefacts;

  The requirement to protect the environment; and

  Liability for inadvertent environmental damage, if appropriate.

A Handbook in national languages, giving guidelines for NGA could be prepared. It is 
suggested that in the interests of all national operations a uniform Code of Conduct be 
prepared. This approach would provide an 'agreed' approach to NGA and also allow 
the opportunity for each national operator to make known the set of conditions upon 
which it is prepared to grant permission for groups to visit Antarctic Stations which it 
maintains (ATCM IV Rec.27). An 'agreed' approach would strengthen the position of 
Antarctic operators. There is also a need for consistency about how national 
programs, which in some cases have dispersed heads of responsibility, can be 
contacted . The Handbook should list key contact addresses for the national operators 
so that organisers of NGA have clear avenues of approach to operators during the 
planning stages of their expeditions.
TABLE 1.  National Operators Affected by Non-Government Activity, 1983-87.

NATIONAL      
OPERATOR(S)      
AFFECTED         DATE         TITLE                  TRANSPORT                ESTIMATED      
                                                                                                   VISITOR      
                                                                                                   NUMBERS          DESTINATION

AUSTRALIA        1984-85      Project                Yacht                       12              Commonwealth Bay
                                                       Blizzard                  Dick Smith Explorer                     Dumont D'Urville

AUSTRALIA        
AND FRANCE       1985-86      Project                Motor Vessel              24              Commonwealth Bay
                                                       Blizzard                  Southern Quest                        Dumont d'Urville

ARGENTINA        1986-87      Lindblad               Cruise Liner              576             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       Travel Inc.               M.S. Society Explorer      
                                                                                 (Multiple visits)

BRAZIL           1987         Amyr Klink             Private Yacht                              Antarctic Peninsula

CHILE            1983-87      World                  Cruise Liner              999             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       Discovery                 World Discoverer
                                                                                 (Multiple visits)

                                 1984         Aero Petrel            Cessna 404                30              King George Island
                                                                                 (Crashed Nelson                         Antarctic Peninsula
                                                                                 Island, December                        Fatal crash at
                                                                                 1984)                                               Nelson Island

                                 1984-85                              Cruise Liner              587             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                                                 Lindblad Explorer         
                                                                                 (Multiple visits)

                                 1986-87                              Cruise Liner              576             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                                                 Society Explorer         
                                                                                 (Multiple visits)

ITALY            1987         World                  Cruise Liner                              Ross Sea
                                                       Discovery                 World Discoverer

NEW ZEALAND      1986         Riquita                Yacht                       4               Cape Hallet
                                                       Expedition                Riquita                                 Cape Adare
                                                                                                                         Macquarie Island

NEW ZEALAND      
AND UNITED       
STATES OF        
AMERICA          1984-86      Footsteps of           Motor Vessel                              Ross Sea - Scott
                                 Scott Expedition      Southern Quest                         McMurdo & S. Pole

                                 1985-86      Austrian             Motor Vessel                              Scott-McMurdo
                                                       Mountaineering            Southern Quest                         proposed Mt. Minto
                                                       Expedition                                                                climb abandoned

                                 1985-86      Greenpeace             Motor Vessel                              Ross Sea
                                                       International             Greenpeace

                                 1986-87      Greenpeace             Motor Vessel              31              Ross Sea
                                                       International             Greenpeace                              Scott & McMurdo
                                                                                                                         Dumont D'Urville
                                                                                                                         Macquarie Island

NEW ZEALAND,     
USA AND ITALY    1987         90 Degrees             Motor Vessel                              Ross Sea - Scott
                                                       South                     M.V. Aurora                             McMurdo and
                                                                                 Twin Otter & Bell 206                   South Pole

UNITED STATES    
OF AMERICA       1983         Brooke Knapp           Gulfstream III                              McMurdo Station

                                 1983         Seven Summits          Tri-Turbo DC3                             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       Odyssey                                                                   Siple Station

                                 1985         Antarctic              Twin Otter                29              Palmer Station
                                                       Airways                                                                   Ellsworth Mtns.

                                 1986-87      Antarctic              Twin Otter                              King George Island
                                                       Airways                                                                   Ellsworth Mtns.

                                 1986-87      Private sailing vessels 80              Antarctic Peninsula

                                 1986-87      Society                Cruise liner              600             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       Expeditions               M.S. Society Explorer      
                                                                                 (6 visits)

                                 1986-87      World                  Cruise liner              300             Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       Discovery                 World Discoverer          
                                                                                 (3 visits)

                                 1986-87      Private tour           Argentine Navy Vessel                    Antarctic Peninsula
                                                       operator              Bahia Pariso              
                                                                                 (2 visits)
