TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                                AOGOBOP OB AHTAPKTHKE
                                                                XIV KOHCYЛЬTAГИBHOE COBEЩAHИE

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

ANT/XIV/INF 7

ITEM 9

THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES

Report of the SCAR ad hoc Group on
Additional Protective Measures

Response of SCAR to Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting Recommendation XIII-5
THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC

Report of the SCAR ad hoc Group on
Additional Protective Measures

Response of SCAR to Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting Recommendation XIII-5

Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
International Council of Scientific Unions

Cambridge, UK                                  June 1987
CONTENTS

The Protected Area system in the Antarctic                      1

Appendix 1.  Full text of ATCM Recommendation XIII-5             5

Appendix 2.  Terms of Reference for the SCAR ad hoc 
              Group on Additional Protective Measures             6

Appendix 3.  Objectives of Conservation in the 
              Antarctic                                            7

Appendix 4.  Existing Protective Arrangements in the 
              Antarctic Treaty System                             11

Appendix 5.  Deficiencies of Existing Arrangements               14

Appendix 6.  Options for Improving Protective Arrangements       16

Appendix 7.  Practical aspects of Conservation                  18

Appendix 8.  Acronyms.                                           20
THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC

1.      Introduction

1.1     The Antarctic has been regarded as a Special Conservation Area since the 
third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Brussels in 1964. 
Since then, efforts to improve the conservation of the Antarctic 
environment, its fauna and flora have resulted in the matter being 
raised at several subsequent ATCMs, most recently at the Thirteenth, in 
1985, when a Recommendation (XIII-5) was approved which called on the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to provide, inter 
alia, scientific advice:

"on the system of protected areas in the Antarctic, including Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and Specially Protected Areas 
(SPAs) and the question of a possible additional category of area 
under a different form of protection"

1.2     The full text of this recommendation is given in Appendix 1. An ad hoc 
group on Additional Protective Measures was established at the 1986 
meeting of SCAR to address the above request.  The group consisted of 
W.S. Benninghoff, W.N. Bonner (Convenor), P.R. Condy and K.R. Kerry. 
The terms of reference are given in Appendix 2.  The Group met in 
Cambridge in June, 1987, and this report is the result of its 
deliberations.

1.3     The ad hoc Group identified the objectives of protecting areas in the 
Antarctic (Appendix 3), the existing protective arrangements of the 
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) (Appendix 4) and their deficiences 
(Appendix 5).  It examined a variety of options for improving the system 
of protected areas (Appendix 6) and considered some practical aspects 
(Appendix 7).

2.      Recommendations for the Improvement of the Protective Area System in 
the Antarctic

The existing system of protected areas in the Antarctic does not now 
fully serve the objectives of conservation of the Antarctic environment, 
its fauna and flora. These deficiencies are discussed in Appendix 5. 
The following five main recommendations are put forward as a practical 
means of improving conservation, while at the same time preserving the 
freedom for scientific research embodied in the Antarctic Treaty.

2.1     It is recommended that the existing and proposed provisions for 
Antarctic conservation should be subject to periodic assessment 
(including site visits) to determine whether the objectives of 
conservation are being achieved and the extent to which the existing 
regulations are being observed.  Such assessments should concentrate 
on protected areas (both existing categories and the one proposed in 
Recommendation 5), but will not necessarily be confined to these. 
Assessments may be programmed in advance or performed opportunistically.

2.2     It is recommended that information arising from such assessments, or 
in the course of carrying out scientific research should be freely 
available to those concerned with conservation issues.  Retrieval of 
such information will be facilitated by its storage in a central
database.  Information exchange between consultative parties would be
facilitated by the existence of an office charged with this responsib-
ility.  The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (IUCN) maintains a conservation database at its
Protected Areas Data Unit (PADU).

2.3 It is recommended that a management plan for each existing and all
future Specially Protected Areas should be prepared and agreed.
In the past, SPAs have been created for very specific purposes, but they
can potentially provide protection for all elements of the ecological
systems present within them. To serve this purpose better, management
plans should be prepared. Such plans could also identify and authorise
activities that could be carried out in designated SPAs without
jeopardising their specified purpose.

2.4 It is recommended that Consultative Parties take measures to
encourage the submission of proposals for additional protected areas to
provide for geographically distributed representative examples of all
Antarctic terrestrial, inland water and marine ecosystems. This point
has been addressed by ATCM Recommendation VII-2. The ecosystem
classification matrices published in SCAR Bulletin No. 55, 1977,
provide a useful list of such ecosystem types.

2.5 It is recommended that a new category of protected area be
introduced to the system while retaining the present categories.
The new category, in this document called an Antarctic Protected Area
(APA), is a multi-purpose area into which can be incorporated SPAs,
SSSIs, Historic sites, Monuments and Tombs as management units. An APA
could incorporate both terrestrial and marine areas. The objective of
an APA is to minimise disturbance to these areas insofar as such
disturbance might detract from the special value or values manifest in
these and for which the area was designated.

2.5.1 An area may be designated an APA if it contains one or more of the
following:-

- representative examples of an ecological system;

- unique natural systems, features or complexes;

- historical sites, relics, monuments or other cultural features;

- SPAs, SSSIs or reserves established under the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) or the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

- areas on which the exploitable natural resources are ecologically
dependent;

- areas or features of particular significance by virtue of their
scenic beauty, inspirational quality, potential for recreational
pursuits, or their status as wilderness.

2.5.2 Establishment of an APA would require the zoning of the whole area for
different levels of protection or use. An APA could be a fairly
extensive area, incorporating within it the current categories of
protected areas where it is appropriate. It could include refuge huts,
field stations, roads, runways and even permanent base installations but
would require that the boundaries of such high-use zones be defined.
2.5.3  The presentation and assessment of proposals for APAs could be 
        undertaken in a similar manner to that currently used for the 
        establishment of SPAs and SSSIs.  After consideration by SCAR, a 
        proposal would be presented by a Consultative Party or Parties at an 
        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  There might also be related 
        recommendations by other sections of the Treaty System (e.g. CCAS, 
        CCAMLR) if necessary.

2.5.4  Proposals would need to include the following information which will 
        then form the basis of a management plan if the proposal is accepted:

        - description of the area, together with a map showing SPAs, SSSIs and 
          Historic Monuments and Tombs within it, perimeter boundaries, and 
          boundaries of zones within the area;

        - reasons for designation in terms of features, systems, and attributes 
          to be protected and threats to them that are perceived or anticipated;

        - details of human activitites currently undertaken or planned within 
          the area, and their likely effects on the features, systems and 
          attributes to be protected;

        - history of human impacts on the environment within the area;

        - details of management measures proposed including:
          constraints on activities within the area, and within each zone;
          periodic assessment necessary to identify disturbance;
          any other relevant measures needed.

        - review periods:
          for the determination of the extent to which the original 
          objectives of the APA are being met;

          for the management plan.

3.      Conclusions

3.1     The five recommendations listed above will:
          contribute to a coherent system of protected areas for the Antarctic, 
          as recommended by the Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on Long-Term 
          Conservation in the Antarctic;

3.2     provide guidelines for their implementation and management, and

3.3     provide for frequent assessment of the protected areas regarding 
          status and compliance, and wider exchange of information about these 
          matters.
4.     Acknowledgements

The Group has been assisted in its work by numerous people, and 
particularly by the members of the Joint IUCN/SCAR Working Group on Long-Term 
Conservation in the Antactic. The following people provided helpful advice or 
comments:

      Sherburne B Abbott
      John Beddington
      Paul Dingwall
      Jeremy Harrison
      John Heap
      George Hemmen
      Peter Heyward
      Takao Hoshiai
      Peter Keage
      Harry Keys
      Lee Kimball
      Jose Valencia

      W. N. Bonner
      Convenor
      22 June 1987
Appendix 1

Full text of ATCM Recommendation XIII-5

XIII-5 Man's impact on the Antarctic environment: additional protective arrangements

The Representatives,

Recalling the measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty of the protection of the environment, the protection of historic sites and monuments, the conservation of fauna and flora, and in particular the setting aside of Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest;

Desiring to ensure that activities in Antarctica should not harm the unique Antarctic environment, disrupt scientific investigation or other legitimate uses or be otherwise contrary to the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty;

Bearing in mind that the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research at the XVIIIth Meeting. in Bremerhaven considered the question of the establishment of a new type of conservation area in the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that through their National Committees they invite the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to offer Scientific advice:

(i) on the system of protected areas in the Antarctic, including Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Specially Protected Areas and the question of a possible additional category of area under a different form of protection; and

(ii) on steps that possibly could be taken to improve the comparability and accessibility of scientific data on Antarctica.
Appendix 2

Terms of Reference for the SCAR ad hoc Group on Additional Protective Measures:

I.  To review:

i)  the effectiveness of Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the 
    Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and subsequent practice in 
    according special protection to certain areas as a conservation mechanism,
    and

ii) the effectiveness of ATCM Rec VII-3 and subsequent practice in 
    designating SSSIs as a means of protecting scientific research from 
    harmful interference,

II To consider how the concept of management of areas might be applied 
    in the Antarctic Treaty area as a means of:

    i)  improving the effectiveness of the Agreed measures for the 
        Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora,

    ii) regulating the environmental impact of coastal and inland 
        stations and field camps and their associated activities,

   iii) protecting areas of non-biological significance and/or outstanding 
        scenic value, and

    iv) achieving other ends of conservation and environmental protection 
        consistent with the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty 
        system.

III To advise accordingly.

Composition of the Group

W S Benninghoff
W N Bonner(Convenor)
P R Condy
K R Kerry
Appendix 3

Objectives of conservation in the Antarctic
(identified by the ad hoc Group but not yet approved by SCAR or other subsidiary
groups of SCAR)

1.  Background

1.1 With the increase of the human population and the development of
sophisticated technology (both products largely of the last two
centuries), human ability to modify the environment has achieved such
potential that there is now a risk that the environment will be damaged to
the extent that it could no longer support human life and culture at those
levels which are now seen as desirable.

1.2 With this in mind the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources (IUCN), in collaboration with the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the Food and
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco), published in
1980 the World Conservation Strategy (WCS) (IUCN, 1980). The three main
objectives of WCS are:
-   to maintain essential ecological processes and life-support systems;
-   to preserve genetic diversity;
-   to ensure the sustainable utilisation of species and ecosystems.

1.3 WCS is concerned with resource conservation; it is a strategy to allow the
material processes of life on this planet to continue.  Other, aesthetic,
factors are also important to humankind, however.  With a human population
increasingly concentrated in urban centres, a trend which seems likely to
continue, 'wilderness' is seen to have intrinsic value.  Scenic resources
(which may overlap with wilderness) are also valued for their aesthetic
appeal.  Places or objects which have important historical or cultural
associations are other features valued by society.

1.4 The Antarctic shares with other parts of the world the general needs
expressed in the WCS.  It possesses unusual ecological processes and unique
genotypes that have arisen as a result of rigorous natural selection
processes resulting from the extreme environmental conditions.
Sustainable utilisation in the Antarctic will be confined to marine
resources.  The Southern Ocean has the potential to provide a significant
contribution to the world's marine harvest, and preserving this potential
must be a high priority.

1.5 Antarctica comprises the last remaining extensive wilderness on Earth and,
while not entirely pristine, is the area by far the least affected by human
activity.  As such, it provides unparalleled opportunities for scientific
research on systems and processes, the understanding of which may be vital
to our future wellbeing. It is a reference standard for monitoring
studies which assess the way in which industrial societies are affecting
the global environment.

1.6 The scenic values of the Antarctic are especially high and it has some,
though because of its recent discovery, few, historical and cultural sites.
2. Objectives

The objectives of protecting areas in the Antarctic are to minimise disturbance to them by human activity so that:

2.1 the diversity of natural phenomena and systems, both in the context of the Antarctic and the Planet Earth can be maintained;

2.2 genetic diversity can be preserved by ensuring that adequate
representative populations of animals and plants are maintained in situ;

2.3 unique features, localities or complexes of features and sites of historical importance are undisturbed;

2.4 scientific research, including the provision of baseline data against which to measure change can be supported;

2.5 cultural values, such as scenic beauty, inspirational quality and wilderness status can be maintained;

2.6 recreational activities such as tourism should be supported.

3.  Nature of Antarctic Systems

3.1 The Antarctic consists of two types of system:

(i) Small, but numerous, terrestrial areas where human activity can have a considerable impact, even if it is itself on a relatively modest scale;

(ii)Large, broadly uniform marine and terrestrial [icecap] areas capable of absorbing substantial human activity with little or no impact.

(Heap & Holdgate, 1986)

The first category comprises the 2% of the Antarctic's 14 million km2 that are free of permanent snow or ice.  This is made up of a number of coastal strips and islands, mountainous rock outcrops and remarkable inland areas where ablation outstrips snowfall and 'dry valleys' result.
Terrestrial vegetation (apart from some snow algae) is necessarily confined to these places.  The vegetation may in turn support lower forms of animal life of which the most highly developed are tiny mites and primitive insects.  In the most favoured coastal areas quite extensive stands of bryophytes, together with sparse occurrences of two flowering plants, may be found.  In a few places higher insects (wingless midges) may occur.
Coastal (and some inland) areas may contain small freshwater bodies whose ice-cover thaws briefly in the summer.  In some of these areas the majority of the biota is concentrated in the lakes.  Exposed rock areas such as these are needed as breeding sites by seabirds (except emperor penguins) and some seals.  The excreta of these animals, which feed at sea, modify and fertilise the primitive soils of the terrestrial environment.

3.2 The ecological interactions and physiological adaptations of such communities are of especial interest to scientists, since the extreme environmental conditions, coupled with the fact that relatively few species are involved, tend to simplify processes, making their understanding easier than in other parts of the world and providing simple analogues with which to interpret more complex systems.  The presence of many large tame vertebrates offers incomparable opportunities for the study of their behaviour, physiology and ecology.  These examples could be multiplied almost indefinitely.  They have basic importance to the study of biology and the understanding of the environment.
3.3 Because of the discontinuous nature of these habitats, their low species 
diversity, the relative lack of species competition and the very low growth 
rates of the terrestrial biota, their communities are exceedingly 
vulnerable.  Physical fragility is evidenced in the way that passage of 
vehicles, or even human feet, compacts soil structure, dislodges lichens or 
disrupts moss carpets.  The communities of these areas are ecologically 
fragile in the sense that they have small capacity to absorb change without 
themselves being profoundly altered.  Such systems are particularly 
vulnerable to introductions, since because of their low species diversity, 
there may be many unoccupied niches and the indigenous species, through 
lack of adaptation to competition, will have little ability to resist 
invaders.

3.4.  The second category comprises two distinct sub-categories, the sea and the 
ice-cap, where conditions are very different.

3.4.1 The ice-cap, apart from some snow algae and occasional transient 
organisms, mostly dispersed by the wind, is devoid of life.  Its remote 
areas are the most sterile part of the Earth's surface.  However, it is 
resilient to human pressures.  There are no living systems to disrupt, and 
introductions cannot establish themselves.  The marks of man or vehicles 
are soon obliterated by snow or scoured away by the wind.  Foreign bodies 
(waste, etc.) are frozen and entombed in ice, limiting the spread of 
pollution.  Dispersion from catchments to sumps cannot occur in this frozen 
world.  The ice-cap is, of course, liable to general pollution from the 
atmosphere.  This provides an important scientific resource, since cores of 
the ice-cap can provide a dated record of fluctuations of substances in the 
atmosphere.

3.4.2 The sea is resilient in a very different manner.  The Southern Ocean is a 
high-energy system that has great buffering capacity and general ability to 
disperse pollution.  It is most unlikely to suffer any detectable general 
impact from localised human activities (Heap and Holdgate, 1986). 
Environmental conditions in the sea are less extreme, more uniform and more 
continuous than on land, all factors that make for stability (Bonner, 
1984).  The marine ecosystem, in comparison with the terrestrial one, has a 
rich and diverse biota with a capacity to absorb change.  The continuous 
nature of the marine environment and the mobility of most of its organisms 
ensure that local depletions can be restored, while high levels of 
competition and niche occupancy lessen the possibility of the establishment 
of alien introductions.

3.4.3 A characteristic of the Southern Ocean ecosystem is the dominance of a 
single member of the zooplankton, the shrimp-like krill, Euphausia superba. 
Krill represents a very important link in the Southern Ocean food 
web and the consequences of a major reduction of this species would be 
severe.  It is conceivable that such a reduction could be brought about by 
commercial exploitation.

3.4.4 The shallow seas represent a special case.  At depths deeper than the 
limit of iceberg scour they support a rich marine fauna.  This is 
localised, discontinuous and sessile, all factors which render it 
relatively fragile.  Not enough is known of the vulnerability of such 
benthic communities to perturbation, but it is certainly much greater than 
that of the pelagic system and is greater still when the waters are 
enclosed in a bay or fjord.

4.    Threats to Antarctic Systems

4.1  The threats against which protection is required include physical damage, 
disturbance of wildlife, the introduction of alien species, including
microorganisms, and pollution by natural or man-made substances.
Environmental impacts which might occur in the Antarctic as a result of
scientific research or the logistical support of such research are listed
in Table 4 in Benninghoff & Bonner (1985). Such a list would need to be
expanded should mineral resources development activities occur in the
Antarctic.

4.2 Although disturbance to the environment is an inevitable consequence of any
activity, it is the degree of disturbance which is of primary concern.
Thus it is necessary for there to be a very clear idea of what the values
to be protected are, and the effect on those values that any activity or
combination of activities will be likely to have.

5.  Application of conservation measures

5.1 A clear definition of what is to be protected is necessary in order to
determine whether the existing protective measures can achieve the
objectives and guard against the threats, and whether their enforcement is
adequate.  Having done this, the fundamental requirement is information
about the value, how it is manifested in an area and what are the potential
threats to it. Since the value itself and threats posed to it will not
be constant over time, it may be necessary to review the requirements for
the protection of the particular value and to monitor the effectiveness of
protective measures which have been taken.

5.2 The shape and size of the appropriate area will depend on a number of
factors, including the nature of the value to be protected, topography and
water catchment, prevailing winds, proximity to threats (eg stations,
traverse routes, airfields) and ecological relationships and other factors
such as the foraging ranges of birds.

5.3 Different values will require differing levels and categories of
protection. When more than one value is found in an area, arrangements
should be made for the adequate protection of each of these values.

5.4 The freedom to conduct those activities that do not adversely affect those
values to be protected should be maintained.

References

Benninghoff, W.S. and Bonner, W.N. 1985.  Man's Impact on the Antarctic
Environment: a procedure for evaluating impacts from scientific and
logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research,
International Council of Scientific Unions, Cambridge.

Bonner, W.N. 1984.  Conservation.  In Antarctic Ecology, Vol. 2, ed. Laws, R.M.
pp. 821-850.  Academic Press, London and New York.

Heap, J.A. (ed.). 1987.  Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System.  Fifth
Edition, February 1987. Cambridge.

Heap, J.A. and Holdgate, M.W., 1986.  The Antarctic Treaty System as an
Environmental Mechanism - an approach to environmental issues.  In
Antarctic Treaty System: an Assessment.  Polar Research Board, Washington.

IUCN, 1980.  World Conservation Strategy.  International Union for the
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources.  Gland, Switzerland.
Appendix 4

Existing Protective Arrangements in the Antarctic Treaty system

1. The Agreed Measures

At a meeting of SCAR in 1960, scientists developed a set of rules of conduct for the conservation of living resources in Antarctica.

At the first ATCM it was agreed to consider this further and the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna & Flora were produced at the third ATCM (Recommendation III-8)

The Agreed Measures provide the basis for conservation within the Antarctic Treaty area.  They make provision for:

(i) prohibition of the killing, wounding, capturing or molesting of any native mammal or native bird except in accordance with a permit;

(ii) such permits to be issued only for certain restricted purposes;

(iii)the designation of Specially Protected Species;

(iv) the designation of Specially Protected Areas;

(v) regulating the importation into Antarctica of non-indigenous species, parasites and diseases;

(vi) minimizing harmful interference with the normal living conditions of Antarctic mammals and birds

(vii)exchange of information between Consultative Parties as to actions they have permitted.

On the advice of SCAR two species of seal (the Ross Seal and fur seals) have been accorded special protection.  Twenty areas have been designated as Specially Protected Area, of which three have had their designation changed to Sites of Special Scientific Interest.  Limits have been placed on the importation of plants, animals, viruses, bacteria, yeasts and fungi and requirements established for the inoculation of dogs against certain diseases.  (Heap, 1987).

2. Protective Categories for Land and Sea Areas

There are currently six forms of protective category for land or sea areas available under the Antarctic Treaty System: Specially Protected Areas (SPA), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Historic Monuments, Tomb, Seal Reserves and closed areas under CCAMLR.

2.1 Specially Protected Areas.

SPAs are defined in Article VIII of the Agreed Measures as areas "of outstanding scientific interest" which are to "be accorded special protection ... in order to preserve their unique natural ecological system."

The permit system set up by the Agreed Measures was extended in SPAs to cover the collection of native plants and to allow only those activities necessary to serve "a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere" and which "will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in that area".  The driving of vehicles within an SPA is prohibited, and ATCM Rec VIII-5 later made entry to an SPA for a compelling scientific reason subject to permit, except in cases of extreme emergency involving possible loss of human life or involving the safety of ships or aircraft.
12.

ATCM Rec VII-2 clarified the nature of the SPA by extending the type of 
area to be considered for protection to:

a) representative examples of the major Antarctic land and freshwater 
ecological systems;

b) areas with unique complexes of species;

c) areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any plant or 
invertebrate species;

d) areas which contain specially interesting breeding colonies of birds 
or mammals; and

e) areas which should be kept inviolate so that in future they may be used 
for purposes of comparison with localities that have been disturbed by man.

This Recommendation also involved SCAR in the process of assessment of 
proposals for SPAs, and introduced two further restrictions; that the 
number of SPAs should be kept to the minimum that will meet the above 
criteria; and, "that the size of each SPA should be the minimum required to 
serve the purpose for which the Area has been designated."

2.2  Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The category of "Site of Special Scientific Interest" was established under 
ATCM Rec VII-3 to protect areas where scientific investigations were being 
undertaken but which were not suitable for or could not be designated as 
SPAs.

Sites could be proposed only if (i) Scientific investigations were being 
carried out, or were planned to begin before the following meeting of SCAR, 
and where there was a demonstrable risk of interference which would 
jeopardise those scientific investigations; or (ii) they were of 
exceptional scientific interest and therefore required long term protection 
from harmful interference.

SSSIs are designated for a definite period, which may be extended following 
a review by SCAR, usually in the first instance by the Sub-committee on 
Conservation of the Working Group on Biology.

Each SSSI must have a management plan giving, where appropriate, the 
following details:

(i)  A description of the site, together with a map delineating its 
boundaries;

(ii) The reason for designation;

(iii)A summary of the scientific investigations to be carried out at the 
site;

(iv) The proposed date at which the designation would expire unless 
extended;

(v)  Proposed point of access;

(vi) Proposed pedestrian or vehicular routes;

(vii)Other kinds of scientific investigation which would not cause harmful 
interference

(viii)A statement on and guidelines for permitted scientific sampling;

(ix) Any other necessary restraints.
Designation as an SSSI confers a significantly higher measure of protection
than that afforded by the Agreed Measures alone.

2.3  Historic Monuments

After consideration of the protection of "tombs, buildings or objects of
historic interest" at the first ATCM, Rec I-9, V-4 and VI-14 led to the
drawing up, in Rec VII-9, of a list of Historic Monuments which should be
preserved.  These recommendations require that ATCPs adopt all adequate
measures to preserve and protect from damage these monuments.  The list of
Monuments includes huts, cairns and graves, monuments, plaques, crosses,
etc., erected to commemorate the opening of stations, deaths of
expeditioners and other notable events.  The Historic Monument category has
limited and specific objectives which do not relate to biological
conservation.

2.4  Tomb

A unique category of protected area, that of Tomb, was created by ATCM
Recommendation XI-3 following the tragic crash of an airliner in 1979. It
was recommended that the site on the northern slopes of Mount Erebus
where the accident took place should be declared a tomb and should be left
in peace.

2.5  Seal Reserves

The category of Seal Reserve derives from the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS).  In a Seal Reserve it is forbidden
to kill or capture seals. Currently there are three Seal Reserves, mostly
made up of sea areas, with a combined area of 190,000 km2.  They are
seal breeding areas, or the site of long-term scientific research.

2.6  Areas set up under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources

Part 2(g) of Article IX of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) provides for "the designation of the
opening and closing of areas, regions and subregions for the purposes of
scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection
and scientific study."  So far, only one area has been designated under
this provision.  Fishing, other than for scientific research purposes, is
prohibited in waters within 12 nautical miles of South Georgia by
Conservation measure 1/III.

For the purposes of CCAMLR, the term "conservation" includes rational use,
so conservation measures introduced under the Convention are likely to
relate directly to the conservation of marine living resources.

Reference

Heap, J.A. ed., 1987.  Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, Fifth Edition,
February 1987.
Appendix 5

Deficiencies of Existing Arrangements

1.  Despite the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the designation of the Antarctic under the Agreed Measures as an area where no native mammal or bird may be killed, captured, wounded or molested, which created the world's largest protected area, several deficiencies are apparent in the existing system of protected areas.  These are elaborated below.

2.  Inadequate representation and size

2.1 SPAs and SSSIs are incomplete in ecological scope, with marked gaps in the representation of marine and inshore coastal environments, high mountains, inland aquatic ecosystems, and non-biological areas, such as ice, rock, soil and landform sites (as addressed by Recommendation VII-2 and clarified in the ecosystem classification matrices of SCAR (SCAR, 1977; Bonner and Lewis Smith, 1985).

2.2 Geographical distribution of SPAs and SSSIs is inadequate.

2.3 There is no provision for protecting areas of recreational, cultural, aesthetic, scenic or wilderness value.  Sites are chosen for almost entirely scientific reasons, as in the protection of research activities at SSSIs, and to preserve areas of unique natural ecological systems (SPAs).

2.4 There is no provision for protecting larger areas of general ecological importance.  SPAs are required to be the minimum size to serve only the specific purpose for which they were designated.

3.  Lack of consistency and enforcement

3.1 There is a lack of consistency of approach to conservation matters as domestic legislation is not uniform among countries.

3.2 No effective central system exists for detecting, reporting or dealing with violations; for limiting or restricting activities in adjacent areas to avoid or minimize the risk of not satisfactorily achieving the objectives of designation; for exchanging information and for assessing the degree to which SSIs and SPAs, etc, are meeting their designated objectives.

4.  Inadequate fulfillment of conservation objectives

4.1 Measures for achieving varying levels of protection are inadequate.  There is no provision for buffer zones, for clear demarcation of boundaries or comprehensive management plan for SPAs.

4.2 There are no detailed instructions in the Antarctic Treaty System for the preparation of the description of sites to be designated.  Although SCAR encourages the provision of detailed information about the site and likely threats to it as part of the management plan of SSSIs, in practice only minimal information has generally been provided, especially for SPAs.

4.3 No provision is made for periodic assessment of conditions in areas to determine the effectiveness of protection or to identify the need for review of SPAs.  Without basic information it is difficult to determine whether the protection afforded by the designation is sufficient, or necessary.
15.

References

SCAR, 1977.  Classification of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic terrestrial,
freshwater and inshore marine benthic ecosystems.  SCAR Bulletin, No. 55,
January 1977, 169-172.

Bonner, W.N. & Lewis Smith, R.I., 1985.  Conservation Areas in the Antarctic.
299pp.  Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, International Council
of Scientific Unions, Cambridge.
Appendix 6

Options for improving protective arrangements

1. The ad hoc group identified and considered various options for the improvement of conservation in the Antarctic in the light of the deficiencies of the present system (Appendix 5) and protected area concepts (e.g. World Park, Biosphere Reserve).

2. There appear to be four basic options:

2.1 Establish Antarctica as a World Park or Biosphere Reserve

Both concepts have certain merits in conservation terms. However, it is difficult, in political terms, to see how the concept of a World Park could be accommodated within the Antarctic Treaty. Under the present regime the Treaty has provided a valid basis for the goals of use of the Antarctic for peaceful purposes only and guaranteeing freedom for scientific investigation. Subordinating the Antarctic to any UN regime might involve the risk of politicising the area and re-open claims to sovereignty, presently held in abeyance by the Treaty. It may be noted that the UN Study on the Question of Antarctica has not recommended an administrative role for the UN. Similarly, establishment of Biosphere Reserves would conflict with the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. For these reasons this option is not considered further.

2.2 Improve the present system

The present system represents a comprehensive array of protective arrangements. However, there are shortcomings in their conception and design, and in the enforcement of and compliance with them. The present suite of protected areas (i.e. SPAs and SSSIs) is also incomplete in ecological scope and geographical distribution. These deficiencies are treated in greater detail in Appendix 5.

2.3 Introduce a new category of protected area while retaining the present system

Bearing in mind the deficiencies noted in 2.2 above and in Appendix 5, this option would mean the introduction of a new form of protected area which would, to the greatest extent possible, provide for buffer zones, multiple use, management plans and values other than those of a purely scientific nature. The question of central mechanisms for enhancing compliance and information exchange is addressed in Appendix 7.

2.4 Abandon the present system and formulate an entirely new system

While a completely new system of protected areas might provide a better framework for Antarctic conservation, its development and introduction could involve lengthy negotiations and possibly the elaboration of a new Convention. It might also be the most difficult to bring about and could take a long time. Long delays would exacerbate the problems presently being experienced (Appendix 5) and run the risk of a hiatus occurring in conservation.

1. It is concluded, therefore, that the action most likely to provide the best
17.

solution to remedy the problems with the current system of protected areas 
is:

- the introduction of a new category of protected area (option 2.3)
which could include within it the current categories and some elements
of the Biosphere Reserve concept.  Such an area might be known as an 
Antarctic Protected Area (APA) ;

- upgrading of the existing system to overcome deficiencies and the 
establishment of a central registry for information collection and 
distribution (option 2.2).
Appendix 7

Practical aspects of conservation

1. The following paragraphs elaborate some of the points raised in the main 
body of this report.

2. Consistency of standards and exchange of information

Although it is a mutual responsibility of all Consultative Parties to 
ensure that arrangements made under the ATS are observed and implemented,
in practice the oversight of any designated APA might well have to be 
undertaken by one Consultative Party or perhaps a small group of Parties.
It will be necessary to promote consistency of standards as the system is 
operated.

Some mechanisms exist under the Treaty which could be used to work towards 
consistency.  The Exchange of Information under the Treaty, suitably 
expanded to include a report on relevant domestic legislation, designation 
of areas, activities carried out within them, management measures applied,
and observed impacts, could enable inconsistencies in approach to be 
identified and discussed at the ATCM level.  The present Antarctic Treaty 
inspection system, used both unilaterally and multilaterally, could enable 
the effectiveness of designations of areas and of components of their 
management plans to be reviewed.  However the responsibility for the 
initiation of inspections still rests with individual Consultative Parties 
and for them to be of direct use in the management of protected areas, some 
form of coordination would probably be necessary.

The provision and subsequent availability of information on protected areas 
is vital to the attainment of the objectives of protection.  The provision 
of a database would clearly aid the task of managing such areas.

3. Assessment and review.

No protocol exists for assessment under the present system, so it will be 
necessary to develop this in association with APA management plans.  The 
initial description of an APA would need to include a basic inventory of 
what it contained.  Assessment at intervals would be needed to see what 
changes were occurring and whether any of them could be attributed to human
activity and, if so, whether action should be taken to arrest or mitigate 
such changes.

In this connection the status of APAs, or parts of them, such as SPAs, 
SSSIs, etc., or the provisions of their management plans, would need to be 
periodically reviewed to determine whether the original purposes for which
the areas had been designated still pertained, or whether changes in zoning
or management plans were needed.  Any Environmental Impact Assessment which
might be required under the Antarctic Treaty System should be taken into 
consideration in reviewing the zoning of an APA or any management 
measures that apply within it.

4. Requirement for an infrastructure.

The proposed new form of protected area will involve a considerable amount 
of work in all phases of proposal and operation.  Currently the Working 
Group on Biology of SCAR, and in particular, its Conservation 
Sub-Committee, do most of the work associated with the preparation and 
refinement of proposals for new SPAs and SSSIs.  The additional work
involved in APAs would be a substantial extra burden.

As activities in the Antarctic intensify and the provisions for 
environmental protection become more sophisticated thought needs to be 
given to the provision of support from the ATS to the scientific scrutiny 
provided by SCAR.

Should any central organisation be established for the Antarctic Treaty it 
would be useful if this could provide for the reception and distribution of 
information relating to environmental matters, and with the coordination of 
joint activities should these be called for.

Such an organisation could ensure that environmental matters were dealt 
with expeditiously in the intersessional periods between successive ATCMs 
and be responsible for maintaining contact with SCAR on matters referred to 
SCAR from an ATCM.

5. It is important to ensure that all personnel visiting or working in the 
Antarctic are aware of the Agreed Measures, the Code of Conduct for 
Antarctic Activities and Stations, and any other requirements for 
protecting and conserving the Antarctic environment.

6. It is clear, and proper, that the effective protection of the environment 
in the Antarctic requires more complex measures than in the past.  Neither 
the Antarctic Treaty organisation nor SCAR should shrink from taking the 
steps necessary to achieve proper environmental protection while preserving 
the freedom of scientific research enshrined in the Treaty.
Appendix 8          Acronyms

APA       Antarctic Protected Area (provisional and unofficial term)
ATS       Antarctic Treaty System
ATCM      Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
ATCP      Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party

CCAMLR   Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCAS      Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN)
IUCN      International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural
          Resources

PADU      Protected Areas Data Unit (of IUCN)

SCAR      Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research

SSSI      Site of Special Scientific Interest (of ATS Agreed Measures)

SPA       Special Protected Area (of ATS Agreed Measures)

UN        United Nations Organisation
UNEP      United Nations Environment Program
Unesco    United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

WCS       World Conservation Strategy
WWF       World Wildlife Fund
