TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                         RIO DE JANEIRO
                         1987

5-16 October

                                                            ANT/XIV/INF/6
                                                            5 October  1987
                                                            United Kingdom

AGENDA ITEM 10

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

SCAR PROPOSALS FOR NEW SITES OF
SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

(Text of SCAR Circular No. 528 of 10 July 1987 to
National Committees and Associate Members received
by the  United Kingdom from its National Antarctic
Committee on 24 July 1987. Submitted by the United
Kingdom Delegation).
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH


10 July 1987

SCAR Circular No 528

To: National Committees
Associate Members

Dear Sir,

SCAR Proposals for new Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

You will recall that at XIX SCAR it was agreed that SCAR would recommend 
the establishment of four new Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
but that the draft management plans required some further attention 
(see attachment to SCAR Circular No 517)

I now have pleasure in enclosing two sets of the final versions of 
these four proposals.

Will you now please inform your government that SCAR recommends the 
establishment of four new Sites of Special Scientific Interest at:

    Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lutzow-Holme Bay
    Svarthamaren, Muhlig-Hofmanfella, Dronning Maud Lane
    Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
    Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestford Hills, Princess 
    Elizabeth Land

and convey a set of the detailed proposals which include the proposed 
management plans.

Yours faithfully,

G E Hemmen
Executive Secretary.

President                     Past President                  Vice-President                  Vice-President                  Secretary
Dr. C. Lorius                 Dr. J.H. Zumberge              Professor Dr. G. Hempel          Professor E.S. Korotkevich      Dr. A.C. Rocha Campos
Laboratoire de Glaciologie    University of                 Alfred-Wegener-Institut fur    Arctic and Antarctic Research  Universidade de São Paulo
et de Geophysique de         Southern California           Polar- und Meeresforschung     Institute                       Instituto de Geociencias
l'Environnement               University Park               Columbusstrasse                Ul. Bennga 38                  Caixa Postal 20899
Domaine Universitaire B.P. 96 Los Angeles                    2850 Bremerhaven               Leningrad 199226               Cidade Universitaria - Butanta
38402 St-Martin-d'Heres Cedex California 90099-0012          FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF           U.S.S.R.                       05508 São Paulo SP
FRANCE                        U.S.A.                        GERMANY                                                  BRAZIL
DRAFT

SSSI 1/87

YUKIDORI VALLEY, LANGHOVDE, LUTZOW-HOLM BAY

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Yukidori Valley (lat. 69°14'30" S, long. 39°46'00" E), is situated in 
the middle part of Langhovde, on the east coast of Lutzow-Holm Bay,
Greater Antarctica. The Japanese Station, Syowa, is situated on East 
Ongul Island about 30 km north of the site.  (Note: "Yukidori" is the 
Japanese for snow petrel, Pagodroma nivea).

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The Site encompasses an area of 3 km by 0.5-1.5 km, the 
boundaries of which are shown on the accompanying map, located 
between a tongue of the ice cap and the east end of the valley.
It includes a prominent stream and two lakes, and extends up to 
50 m offshore near the mouth of the stream.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site has a prominent fauna and flora which are 
representative of the terrestrial ecosystems of continental 
Antarctica. It has been chosen to satisfy the logistic needs of 
a continuing scientific study.
- 2 -

A preliminary biological survey was undertaken by the 15th and 
16th JARE (1973-75). Taxonomical and ecological studies of moss 
and lichen vegetation along the stream and the lake margin were 
carried out, with particular reference to the relationship 
between this vegetation and water supply. The area has been 
chosen for an on-going biological research programme and for 
long-term monitoring studies. It is therefore necessary to 
afford protection to the Site so as to minimize human impacts.

(iii) Outline of research

A three year intensive study of the ecosystem commenced during 
the 1985-1986 season. This project consists of several 
ecological studies on fauna and flora in relation to the 
climatic and edaphic environmental conditions. Long-term 
monitoring of fauna and flora in some selected areas has also 
been conducted from the early stages of the investigation.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

Initially 5 years from the date of designation, and thereafter 
subject to review.

(v) Access points

None specified.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Pedestrians should enter the Site only in connection with 
research activities. The operation of surface vehicles and the 
landing of helicopters within the Site are not permitted.
- 3 -

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Research of other disciplines that might affect the biological 
studies should be avoided.

(viii) Scientific sampling

This should be restricted to the minimum required in connection 
with the programme.  No rock samples may be obtained unless 
authorized in the entry permit.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified.

3. MATRIX CODE: Terrestrial: B1, C1, D1, E1, L1
       Inland waters: L1, M11
       Marine: not known

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography.  The valley is about 3 km in length from east to west 
and 0.5 to 1.5 km in width.  The head of the valley, about 200 m 
above sea level, abuts the edge of the ice cap.  A melt stream 
flows from the ice cap towards the sea through V-shaped and 
U-shaped sectors of the valley.  Lake Higashi Yukidori lies north 
of the head of the valley.  The main stream of the valley enters 
Lake Yukidori, in the middle of the valley, 125 m above sea level. 
It flows from the south-west corner of the lake and runs through
- 4 -

the lower valley formed by relatively steep cliffs. Fluvioglacial 
terraces which consist of rather fine sand and gravel in the lower 
part of the valley. There is a dissected deltaic fan formed at the 
mouth of the stream.  Detailed information on the geomorphology of 
the valley is given in the geomorphological map of Langhovde 
(Hirakawa et al. 1984).

(b) Geology and soils.  The Yukidori Valley area is underlain by 
well-layered sequences of late Proterozoic metamorphic rocks.  They 
are garnet-biotite gneiss, biotite gneiss, pyroxene gneiss and 
hornblende gneiss with metabasite.  The foliation of the gneisses 
strikes N 10°E and dips monoclinically to the east at a moderate 
angle (Ishikawa et al. 1976, Matsumoto et al. 1979).

(c) Meteorology.  A continuous climatic record has been maintained 
since 1957 at Syowa Station (published as "Antarctic Meteorological 
Data" by the Japan Meteorological Agency).  Local climatic 
observations were occasionally carried out by field parties.

5.  BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial.  Almost all of the plant species recorded from the 
Langhovde area occur within the Site.  They include the mosses 
Bryum pseudotriquetrum (= B. algens), B. argenteum, Ceratodon 
purpureus, Pottia heimii, Grimmia lawiana, and the lichens Usnea 
sphacelata (= U. sulphurea), Umbilicaria antarctica, U. decussata, 
Alectoria (= Pseudephebe) minuscula, Xanthoria elegans.  There are 
no liverworts or vascular plants (Kashiwadani 1970, Nakanishi 1977, 
Kanda 1981).  The invertebrate fauna of the moss-water communities 
was studied by Sudzuki (1964, 1979), and two species of free living
- 5 -

mites (Nanorchestes antarcticus and Tydeus erebus) were also
reported by Ohyama (1977) and Ohyama and Matsuda (1977) from the
Site.

(b) Inland waters.  A study of the freshwater algae in the Site was
carried out by Hirano (1979):. Sixty-four species of microalgae,
including cyanobacteria and green algae, were reported from Lake
Yukidori and the adjacent area.  Among them, one new species of
Cosmarium (C. yukidoriense) and three new varieties of C. clepsydra
have been described.

(c) Marine.  Detailed studies have not been made and no data are
available.

(d) Birds and seals.  Several pairs of the south polar skua (Catharacta
maccormicki) and numerous snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) breed in
the Site.  The excrement of snow petrels is especially important as
a major supply of nutrients for lichens and mosses.  There is no
information on seals.

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Yukidori Valley is representive of the typical continential Antarctic
fellfield ecosystem.  With more extensive expeditions in the ice-free
areas, pedestrian traffic is increasing in the vicinity of the
exceptional stands of vegetation.  In order to achieve the project
commenced by the 27th JARE 1985, a biological research hut was
constructed near the beach at the mouth of the valley.  This beach is
approximately 250 m from the western boundary of the Site.  However, it
is intended to minimize Man's impact on the fauna, flora and terrain of
- 6 -

the Site. Therefore, limited pedestrian and no vehicular access has 
been permitted since the construction of the hut. The valley has not 
been subjected to any environmental disturbance, with the exception of 
carefully controlled small-scale biological sampling of lake water, 
soil, lichens, mosses, invertebrate and sea birds.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

Field surveys of geoscience and biological science have been carried out 
in the Langhovde area, including the Site, since the first Japanese 
Antarctic Research Expedition in 1957. Geological results for the 
region have been summarized by Ishikawa et al. (1976).

A preliminary biological survey was made during JARE 15 and 16 
(1973-75). This study aimed to obtain information on the pristine state 
of the terrestrial ecosystem to compare with that influenced by Man 
around Syowa Station on East Ongul Island. The research studies were 
mainly undertaken in summer, and terminated after two seasons. The 
present programme is planned to gain a deeper understanding of the 
terrestrial ecosystems in this Site.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hirakawa, K., Ono, Y., Hayashi, M., Aniya, M., Iwata, S., Fujiwara, K., 
Moriwaki, K. & Yoshida, Y. 1984. Langhovde. Antarct. Geomorphol. 
Map Ser., 1 (with explanatory text, 49 p); Tokyo, Natl Inst. Polar 
Res.

Hirano, M. 1979. Freshwater algae from Yukidori Zawa, near Syowa 
Station, Antarctica. Mem. Natl Inst. Polar Res. Spec. Issue 1, 
1-26 with 9 pls.
- 7 -

Ishikawa, T., Tatsumi, T. Kizaki, K., Yanai, K. Yoshida, M., Ando, H., 
Yoshida, Y. & Matsumoto, Y. 1976 Langhovde. Antarct. Geol. Map
Ser., 5 (with explanatory text, 10 p).  Tokyo, Natl. Inst. Polar
Res.

Kanda, H.  1981. Flora and vegetation of mosses in ice-free areas of
Soya Coast and Prince Olav Coast, East Antarctica.  Hikobia,
Suppl. 1, 91-100.

Kashiwadani, H. 1970. Lichens of the Prince Olav Coast, Antarctica.
JARE Sci. Rep., Ser. E (Biol.), 30, 1-21.

Matsumoto, Y. Yoshida, M. & Yanai, K.  1979. Geology and geologic
structure of the Langhovde and Skarvsnes regions, East Antarctica.
Mem. Natl Inst. Polar Res., Spec. Issue, 14, 106-120.

Nakanishi, S. 1977. Ecological studies of the moss and lichen
communities in the ice-free areas near Syowa Station, Antarctica.
Nankyoku Shiryo (Antarct. Rec.), 60, 47-56.

Ohyama, Y. & Matsuda, T.  1977. Free-living prostigmatic mites found
around Syowa Station, East Antarctica.  Nakyoku Shiryo (Antarct.
Rec.), 59, 172-176.

Nakatsubo, T. & Ino, Y.  1986. Nitrogen cycling in an Antarctic
ecosystem.  I.  Biological nitrogen fixation in the vicinity of
Syowa Station.  Memoirs of National Institute of Polar Research,
Ser. E, No. 37, Biology and Medical Science, 1-10.
- 8 -

Suzuki, M. 1964. On the microfauna of the Antarctic region. I.
Moss-water community at Langhovde. JARE Sci. Rep., Ser. E (Biol.),
19, 1-41.

Suzuki, M. 1979. On the microfauna of the Antarctic region. III.
Microbiota of the terrestrial interstices. Mem. Natl Inst. Polar
Res., Spec. Issue, 11 104-126 with 10 pls.
39°30'E

- 69°00'S

East Ongul Island
SYOWA STATION

West Ongul Island

LÜTZOW-HOLM BAY

Yukidori Valley

B[?]eidvågnipa

Skarvsnes

Ice-free ground
0         10
km

          C
          O
          A
          S
          T
          S
L a n g h o l m e 
          Y
          O
          S
39°44'E                                         39°48'
69°14'S                          
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
Hut    Yukidori Valley            
69°15'                          
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
Depression        Lake
~ Stream        Contours in metres
0        1   
km
DRAFT

SSSI 2/87

SVARTHAMAREN, MÜHLIG-HOFMANNFJELLA, DRONNING MAUD LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

The mountain Svarthamaren (lat. 71°53'S, long. 5°10'E) is situated in 
Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. The distance from the ice 
shelf barrier is about 200 km.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The Site consists of the mountain Svarthamaren with extensive 
screes at an elevation of about 1600 m a.s.l., about 3.9 km² in 
area.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site provides exceptional opportunities for research on the 
Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), snow petrel 
(Pagodroma nivea) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki), 
and the study of different types of adaptation in seabirds 
breeding inland on the Antarctic continent.
- 2 -

(iii) Outline of research

A study of the breeding biology and ecophysiological adaptations
in the Antarctic petrel was initiated in 1985. This is planned
to continue during future Norwegian Antarctic Expeditions. The
accessibility of the Site is limited by its location far inland,
and this may hinder frequent research visits.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

10 years from the date of designation.

(v) Access points

The Site may be entered from any direction but access should
cause minimum disturbance to the bird colonies.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site. Pedestrians should not move
through the populated areas except in the course of scientific
investigations. Helicopters and low-flying aircraft should
avoid the bird colonies in accordance with the Agreed Measures
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which will not cause
harmful interference

Any scientific investigation which will not cause significant
disturbance to the biological programmes for which the Site has
been designated.
- 3 -

(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of the bird population by killing, capture, or 
taking of eggs should be done only for a compelling scientific 
purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(ix) Other restraints

None specified

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: H8, G8

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The Svarthamaren mountain is about 6 km long in a 
NW-SE direction, with the highest point being 2195 m a.s.l. The 
northern part of the NE side is dominated by screes, extending 
240 m upwards from the base of the mountain. Above these screes, 
which are sloping 31-34°, are almost vertical cliffs. Beneath the 
slopes is a narrow area of flat ground bordered by glacier ice. 
The major feature of this side are two rock amphitheatres 
inhabited by breeding petrels.

(b) Geology and soils. The main rock types are coarse and medium 
grained charnockitoids and small amounts of xenoliths. Banded 
gneisses, biotite amphibolites and granites of the amphibolite 
facies mineralogy are included in the charnockitoids. The slopes 
are covered by decomposed felspathic sand.
- 4 -

(c) Meteorology. Meteorological data exist only for the period 13
January to 15 February 1985, during which the air temperature
varied mostly between −5°C and −15°C. An automatic weather station
was set up by NARE 1984/85 at Jutulessen, 100 km west of
Svarthamaren, to obtain long term weather statistics.

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. The flora and vegetation at Svarthamaren are sparse,
even compared with other areas in Mühlig Hofmannfjella and
Gjelsvikfjella to the west of the Site (Engelskjøn 1985, 1986).
This is apparently due to the considerable elevation of
Svarthamaren, the prevailing shortage of meltwater, and the
excessive nutrient deposition from the bird colonies. The only
plant species occurring in abundance, but peripherally to the most
manured areas, is the foliose green alga, Prasiola crispa. A
fairly rich cyanophycean and lichen vegetation occurs elsewhere in
the Mühlig-Hofmannfjella area. However, the surroundings of Camp
Norway 5 support only a few lichen species on erratics 1-2 km away
from the bird colonies: Candelariella hallettensis (= C.
antarctica), Rhizoplaca (= Lecanora) melanophthalma, Umbilicaria
spp., and Xanthoria spp. Bryophytes have not been recorded on
Svarthamaren proper, but the moss Grimmia lawiana is frequent on
the peripheral nunatak chains Hamarskaftet and Plogskaftet.

Areas covered with Prasiola are inhabited by Collembola
(Cryptopygus sverdrupi) and a relatively rich fauna of mites
(Eupodes angardi, Tydeus erebus), protozoans, nematodes and
rotifers (Sømme 1985, 1986).
- 5 -

(b) Inland waters. A shallow. pond measuring about 20 x 30 m, lying 
below the middle and largest bird subcolony, is heavily polluted by 
petrel carcasses, and supports a strong growth of a yellowish-green 
unicellular alga, Chlamydomonas sp. Smaller concentrations of 
algae occur on the fringes of a small frozen lake below the 
northern face of the mountain. No invertebrates were recorded.

(c) Marine. Not applicable.

(d) Birds and seals. There are very large breeding colonies of 
seabirds. The north-east slopes of Svarthamaren are occupied by a 
densely populated colony of Antarctic petrels, divided into three 
separate subcolonies. Less than ten breeding colonies of Antarctic 
petrels are described in the literature (Watson 1975), and the 
Svarthamaren colony is by far the largest known. The colony was 
subjected to the first close examination in January/February 1985 
by Norwegian ornithologists participating in NARE 1984/85. The 
total number of breeding pairs in 1985 was estimated to be 
208,000. In addition, 500 - 1000 pairs of snow petrels and 50 
pairs of south polar skuas were breeding in the area in 1985 
(Mehlum et al. 1985). The Antarctic petrels nest in the two rocky 
amphitheatres with a mean density of 0.75 nest per square metre. 
Most of the snow petrels nest in separate parts of the scree 
characterized by larger rocks. The south polar skuas nest on the 
narrow strip of flat, snow-free ground below the screes.

There are no sea mammals at Svarthamaren.
- 6 -

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

The Svarthamarren Antarctic petrel colony is the largest known seabird
colony situated inland on the Antarctic continent, and probably
represents a significant proportion of the world population of this
species.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

The Antarctic petrel colony was discovered by Soviet geologists in
January 1961 (Konovalov 1962, Konovalov & Shulyatin 1964) during the
Fifth Soviet Antarctic Expedition.  The expedition landed in the area
with an AN-2 aircraft and quite unexpectedly encountered thousands of
birds taking off.  The Soviets probably stayed in the area for one day
only.  During the period 9 January to 16 February 1985 ten of the
scientists of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE)
1984/85 worked in Mühlig-Hofmannfjella and Gjelsvikfjella, and
established a main base camp (Camp Norway 5) on the glacier
approximately 500 m north-east of the northernmost slope of the Site.
Three ornithologists visited the colony daily, and the area was also
investigated by a botanist and an invertebrate zoologist.  Researchers
of other disciplines surveyed this and nearby areas using skidoos
(Orheim 1985).  Only one landing by helicopter (a Bell 206) occurred
during the period.  The camp consisted of several tents and one wooden
laboratory hut; the latter was left to be used by potential future
expeditions to the area.
- 7 -

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Engelskj?n, T. 1985. Botany of Gjeisvikfjella and
Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 43-54 in Orheim, O.
(ed.): Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE
1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

Engelskj?n, T. 1986. Botany of two Antarctic mountain ranges:
Gjeisvikfjella and Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. I.
General ecology and development of the Antarctic cold desert
cryptogam formation. Polar Research, 4 n.s., No. 2, 205-224.

Konovalov, G.V. 1962. Observations of birds in Queen Maud Land. Sov.
Antarctic Exped. Inform. Bull, 4, 156-158.

Konovalov, V.I. & Shulyatin, O.G. 1964. Unique bird colony in
Antarctica (in Russian). Priroda, 10, 100-101.

Mehlum, F., Bech, C. & Haftorn, S. 1985. Ornithological investigations
in Muhlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 27-34 in Orheim,
O. (ed.): Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition
(NARE 1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

Orheim, O. (ed.) 1985. Report of the Norwegian Antarctic Research
Expedition (NARE 1984/85). Norsk. Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.

S?mme, L. 1985. Terrestrial invertebrates of Muhlig-Hofmannfjella,
Dronning Maud Land. Pp. 55-62 in Orheim, O. (ed.): Report of the
Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE 1984/85). Norsk.
Polarinst. Rapport, 22, 138 pp.
- 8 -

S?mme, L. 1986. New records of terrestrial arthropods from Dronning
Maud Land, Antarctica. Polar Research, 4 n.s., No. 2, 225-229.

Watson, G.E. 1975. Birds of the Antarctic and Subantarctic. American
Geophysical Union, Washington.
4°40'E         5°00'         5°20'         71°45'S
□ Ice-free ground
0    5    10
km
Contours in metres

          Plogskaftet        
Cumulusfjellet      2333 m
Høgsenga
Basb?k?en        
Svarthamaren      2195 m
Breplog?        
72°00'
5°05'E                                  5°15'

Ice-free ground
Scree
0     1     2
km
Contours in metres

                   Svarthamaren

71°55'S         1800      
                   2195 m
                   2000
DRAFT

SSSI 3/87

SUMMIT OF MT. MELBOURNE, NORTH VICTORIA LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Mt. Melbourne, North Victoria Land (lat. 74°21'S, long. 164°42'E) is 
situated between Wood Bay, on the west side of Ross Sea, and Campbll 
Glacier, about 20 km to the west.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The Site comprises all terrain above the 2200 m contour on the 
main crater of Mt. Melbourne.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Site is of exceptional interest because of its extensive 
ice-free ground, at high altitude, which possesses several 
geothermal areas supporting a unique cryptogamic flora and 
microbiota. It also possesses unusual glaciomorphological and 
geomorphological features, and accumulations of organic matter.
- 2 -

(iii) Outline of research

There has been little previous research activity in the Site.
The studies that have been undertaken have involved
investigations of geothermal and volcanic activity and a survey
of the plant and microbial communities.  Future research is
likely to include studies of soil microbiology and microfauna,
vegetation, volcanology and the geophysics of the area.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

Initially ten years from the date of designation, and thereafter
subject to review.

(v) Access Points

Access to the Site is normally by helicopter and landings should
be made only in the caldera, thereby avoiding any of the
vegetated or other sensitive areas.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

No vehicle should be used within the Site.  Pedestrians should
avoid, whenever possible, walking on any obvious areas of warm
ground or disturbing any vegetation.  Entry to the "Cryptogam
Ridge" area of the Site should be made only from either end of
the ridge.  Entering the ridge directly up its slopes should be
avoided.
- 3 -

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

        Low impact studies which have a minimal effect on the 
environment of the Site are permitted.

(viii) Scientific sampling

        Samples should be acquired only for compelling scientific 
reasons and should not be taken to the detriment of the 
environment or of further scientific investigation.  Sampling 
should be undertaken without causing the introduction of any 
foreign organisms.

(ix) Other restraints

        Sterile protective overclothing should be worn and footwear 
should be sterilized before entering the Site to minimize 
contamination.  Sterilized sampling equipment should also be 
used.  All wastes should be removed from the Site.

3. MATRIX CODE

        Terrestrial: B8, F8, (?)G8

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography.  In profile, Mt. Melbourne is an almost perfect 
low-angle cone rising to 2732 m a.s.l., showing only slight 
dissection and little or no glacial erosion.  Many basaltic cones
- 4 -

and mounds occur near the base and on the flanks of the mountain.

The summit caldera is about 1 km in diameter and forms a névé for a
glacier flowing westward.  The two main areas of ice-free ground (A
- "Cryptogam Ridge" - and B on the accompanying map) are on the
edge of the caldera, with a third area (C) 250 m lower on the
northern slopes.

"Cryptogam Ridge", on the southern side of the main crater, is an
area of geothermal activity. About 300-400 m of this ridge is
ice-free with the remainder covered by numerous ice hummocks.
These hummocks are hollow and are 1-6 m in diameter and up to 4 m
high. The warmest areas of ground support the growth of patches of
yellow-green moss, liverwort and brownish crusts of algae.

(b) Geology and soils. Mt. Melbourne is part of the McMurdo Volcanics
which are a line of extinct volcanoes running along the coast of
Victoria Land. The Mt. Melbourne area is more likely to be late
Quaternary than late Tertiary in age, and the most recent eruption
may have been only about 150 years ago.

The mountain is a large low-angle strato-volcano containing basalt,
trachyandesite and trachyte flows and including pyroclastics.
Small basalt scoria cones are scattered around the base, some of
which appear to be very recent as they are undissected. Several
older slightly dissected cones occur on the summit caldera.

Surface ground temperatures vary markedly over distances of
centimetres on ice-free warm ground, up to a recorded maximum of
47°C. Random probing to depths of 1 m and detailed temperature
transects to depths of 15 cm indicate substrate temperatures of up
- 5 -

to 60°C. Within the ice pinnacles soil surface temperatures range 
from 10°C to over 40°C.  Frost heave occurs at some warm areas.

Although the substratum is classified as azonal, there are two 
distinct soil zones within some areas of hot ground.  These may 
have been formed by natural processes caused by heat, moisture and 
gases from below.  A typical profile comprises an upper 0-5 cm 
layer of dark sandy soil with a lower 6-30 cm horizon consisting of 
large lighter coloured scoria gravels.  The upper layer contains 
organic matter in which there is microbiological activity, 
including cyanophaecean nitrogen fixation.  No clay minerals have 
been detected.

(c) Meteorology. No detailed data are available for the Site.  Field 
party records, during one week in late November 1984, indicate 
summer air temperatures in the caldera area of -6°C to -20°C, with 
an absolute minimum of -32°C.

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial. The Site contains an unique bryophyte community 
comprising the moss Campylopus pyriformis and the liverwort 
Cephaloziella exiliflora. C. pyriformis is not known elsewhere in 
the Antarctic biome, and C. exiliflora is known from three other 
(low altitude) areas of continental Antarctica.  Other than at a 
similar geothermal site at the summit of Mt. Erebus (protonemata 
only) this is the highest altitude at which bryophytes have been 
found in Antarctica.  The unusual occurrence of shallow peat is 
evidence of bryophyte growth having taken place over at least 
several decades.
- 6 -

Algae grow over wide areas of the warm ground and on the surface of 
warm rocks in some fumaroles.  The microflora comprises a range of 
unicellular and filamentous algae, including the green Chroococcus 
sp., Tolypothrix sp. and Stigonema sp. and the cyanobacteria 
Mastigocladus laminosus and Pseudococcomyxa simplex.

Thermotolerant and thermophilic micro-organisms have been isolated 
from the soils.

A single unidentified lichen has been observed as a component of 
black crusts over small areas of warm soil.  The only invertebrate 
reported is a testate amoeba, Corythion dubium, amongst the 
vegetation.

(b) Inland waters. It is possible that a sub-surface reservoir of 
liquid water may be present below the hollow near the ice-fall 
outlet from the Mt. Melbourne summit caldera to the sub-surface 
melt of ice.  However, there are no data confirming this.

The occurrence of plant life is made possible only by the water 
droplets formed by the condensation of steam.  Very small 'pools' 
up to c. 50 cm2 and about 1 cm deep have been observed on occasions 
where dripping condensate gathered in small depressions.

(c) Marine. Not applicable.

(d) Birds and seals. No observations of birds have been made near the 
summit of the volcano.  In the adjacent, low-lying coastal regions 
there are breeding populations of south polar skuas, snow petrels 
and Adelie penguins.
- 7 -

6. SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Certain areas within the Site support unique plant communities on 
steam-warmed ground; all lie above the 2200 m contour.  The closest 
documented fumarolic ground is 400 km to the south at the summit of Mt. 
Erebus, but there the organisms differ significantly from those on Mt. 
Melbourne.  However, recent evidence suggests that geothermal activity 
also occurs near Mt. Melbourne close to the coast.  Elsewhere in 
Antarctica vegetation on steam-warmed ground is known only in low 
altitude maritime areas of the Antarctic Peninsula region where, again, 
the vegetation differs significantly from the Mt. Melbourne community. 
The Site is of extreme interest to botanists, microbiologists, 
volcanologists and geophysics.  Uncontrolled human activity within this 
area could cause severe damage by trampling of plants, compacting soil 
and altering soil temperature gradients, changing rates of steam release 
and possibly causing the introduction of alien micro-organisms and 
cryptogamic plants.  In 1984 geothermal area B (see map) experienced 
minor impact.

7. HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

Mt. Melbourne was first sighted in 1841 by James Ross and first climbed 
in January 1967 by a New Zealand party.  Since then the summit area has 
been visited by New Zealand parties in December 1972 and November 1984. 
The 1984 party surveyed the biota on "Cryptogam Ridge" (Area A on the 
map).  Brief visits were also made in January 1983 by a United States 
party and more recently by West German (1984/85) and Italian (1985/86) 
parties.
8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Broady, P.A.  1984  Taxonomic and ecological investigations of algae 
on steam-warmed soil on Mt Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica.
Phycologia, 23(3), 257-271.

Broady, P.A.  1985  A preliminary report of physiological studies in 
Northern Victoria Land and on Ross Island during 1984/85.
Melbourne University Programme in Antarctic Studies, Report No. 66,
145 p.

Broady, P.A., Given, D., Greenfield, L. & Thompson, K.  1987  The 
biota and environment of fumaroles on Mt Melbourne, northern 
Victoria Land. Polar Biology, 7, 97-113.

David, T.W.E., Priestley, R.E.  1914  Glaciology, physiology, 
stratigraphy, and tectonic geology of South Victoria Land.  Reports 
of the British Antarctic Expedition 1907-1909, Geology 1, 319 p.

Gair, H.S.  1967  The geology from the Upper Rennick Glacier to the 
coast, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica.  New Zealand Journal of 
Geology and Geophysics 10(2), 409-444.

Holdsworth, G. & Ugolini, F.C.  1965  Fumarolic ice-towers on Mt 
Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica.  Journal of Glaciology 5, 878-879.

Keys, J.R., McIntosh, W.C. & Kyle, P.R.  1983  Volcanic activity of 
Mt Melbourne, northern Victoria Land.  Antarctic Journal of the 
United States, 18(5), 10-11.
- 9 -

Lyon, G.L. & Giggenbach, W.F.  1974  Geothermal activity in Victoria 
Land, Antarctica.  New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics,
17(3), 511-521.

Nathan, S. & Schulte, F.J.  1967  Recent thermal and volcanic activity 
on Mt Melbourne, northern Victoria Land, Antarctica.  New Zealand 
Journal of Geology and Geophysics, 10(2), 422-430.
72°S                                                
160°E                                 170°

V
I
C
T
O
R
I
A
L
A
N
D

Wood Bay
Mt Melbourne
Terra Nova
Bay

Ross Sea

McMurdo
Sound
Mt Erebus
Ross Island

Glaciers and shelf
ice

0         100         200
       km

Ross Ice Shelf

78°
N
↑

ICEFALL

CALDERA

"Cryptogam
Ridge"

0                1
km

Areas of rock and scree not
geothermally heated and in
places heavily snow-drifted.

Ridge lines
Steep slopes
and cliffs

Ice-free steaming ground
(Dec. 1984)

Crevasses

o Fumaroles inside ice-hummocks
and ice towers
DRAFT

SSSI 4/87

MARINE PLAIN, MULE PENINSULA, VESTFOLD HILLS, PRINCESS ELIZABETH LAND

1. GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Marine Plain (23.4 km2) opens into an arm of Crooked Fjord on the
southern side of Mule Peninsula, the southernmost of the three major
peninsulas which comprise the Vestfold Hills.  The Vestfold Hills
comprise an essentially ice-free oasis (approx. 400 km2) of bedrock,
glacial debris and water at the eastern side of Prydz Bay on the eastern
coast of Princess Elizabeth Land.

2. MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i) Description of site

The boundary of the Site is as follows:

commencing at lat. 68°36'30"S, long. 78°09'00"E it runs
south-easterly to lat. 68°36'45"S, long. 78°10'30"E; thence
south-easterly to lat. 68°37'30"S, long. 78°10'30"E, then
south along the parallel of long. 78°12'30"E to its
intersection by the low water mark on the northern shore of
Crooked Fjord; from here it follows the low water mark of
the northern shore of Crooked Fjord to its intersection
- 2 -

with the meridian of long. 78°03'00"E; thence north along
the meridian of long. 78°03'00"E to its intersection with
the parallel of lat. 68°37'30"S, then north-easterly to
lat. 68°37'00"S, long. 78°05'00"E, and finally
north-eastwards to the point of commencement.

All co-ordinates are expressed in terms of the World Geodetic
System, 1972.

(ii) Reason for designation

The site contains Pliocene marine sediments principally in the
area below 20 m a.s.l. In addition to the dominant important
fossils such as molluscs and diatoms, which define the age, the
site has yielded well-preserved vertebrate remains of a new
species, genus and probably family of fossil dolphin, plus at
least one other vertebrate species.

Burton Lake, as a hypersaline lake which is still in seasonal
connection with sea, presents the opportunity for important
limnological research. It represents a unique stage in the
biological and physico-chemical evolution of a terrestrial water
body from the marine environment.

Davis (68°85'S, 77°58'E), a permanently occupied Australian
scientific station, is located on Broad Peninsula, the central
peninsula of the Vestfold Hills, 6 km to the north-west of the
Site.  It is the focus of continuing biological, including
limnological, studies within the Vestfold Hills.  As a result of
its proximity, the scientific value of the Site could be
diminished by accidental interference.
- 3 -

(iii) Outline of research

A palaeontological research programme has commenced following 
the initial discovery of vertebrate fossils at the site in 
1985.  The programme consists of the collection of 
well-preserved fossil molluscs and diatoms and, in particular, 
fossil vertebrates, with the aim of documenting the fauna of the 
epoch.  Oxygen isotope studies on the well-preserved bivalve 
fauna will be employed to help quantify water temperature at 
that time.

Burton Lake is the subject of detailed year-round research as 
part of a programme aimed at understanding the evolution of the 
hydrological system in the Vestfold Hills, by looking at various 
stages of isolation from the marine environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

10 years from the date of designation, and thereafter subject to 
review.

(v) Access points

Access should, where possible, be from the sea ice in Ellis 
Fjord or Crooked Fjord, or by helicopter at places where no 
disturbance can be caused by the aircraft to water bodies, 
vegetation or sediment deposits.  If these means of access are 
not possible, access by land, either by vehicle or on foot, 
should be via Ellis Rapids at the eastern end of Ellis Fjord.
- 4 -

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not be used within the site except for over-snow 
travel by motorized toboggan.  Pedestrians or vehicles must not 
damage areas of vegetation, or disturb steep inclines marking 
sediment outcrops or the lake margins near these outcrops.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause 
harmful interference

Other research likely within the area is a study of the ecology 
of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), snow petrels 
(Pagodroma nivea), mosses and lichens, and other biota, and 
investigation of water bodies other than Burton Lake.  Other 
scientific investigations which do not disturb the 
palaeontological, ecological and limnological programmes 
described are also permitted.

(viii) Scientific sampling

Scientific sampling should be restricted to that required for 
the programmes described in (iii) and (vii) above.

(xi) Other restraints

All waste materials taken into, or generated within the Site 
should be removed as soon as practicable.  No fuel depots should 
be made within the Site, nor should refuelling operations be 
undertaken. No permanent buildings should be erected within the 
site.  Power boats should not be used on Burton Lake and use of
- 5 -

other boats should be restricted to the minimum necessary to
support programmes consistent with this plan.

3. MATRIX CODE

Terrestrial: None
Inland Waters: P6 (and seasonally Q6), and probably M1 and/or L1
Marine: None

4. PHYSICAL FEATURES

(a) Topography. The site includes Burton Lake (surface at sea level)
as a major component of the western part of the region. An
extensive low level (less than 20 m above sea level) area occupies
the centre of the site with a north-south orientation. In the
north-east is another area below 20 m. Areas above 20 m are mostly
low hills of Precambrian rock acting as divides between the
shallower parts. They are quite rugged and separated at their base
by a marked change in their slope, probably representing an old
(Holocene?) shoreline, from the much lower areas below 20 m. The
surface of the lower areas below 20 m is marked by a series of
concave-to-the-south recessional moraine ridges leading to the
present "iceberg graveyard" in Crooked Fjord, at the southern end
of the central low area. The geomorphology of this region has been
reviewed by Pickard (1986).

(b) Geology. The Precambrian rock consists basically of 3000 Ma
gneisses both from igneous and metamorphic protoliths (Collerson
and Sheraton, 1986) intruded by numerous metabasalt dykes (intruded
in at least three intervals between 1800 and 1375 Ma) with a
roughly north-south orientation, a major feature of the Vestfold
- 6 -

Hills.  Low lying areas consist of at least 8 m of early Pliocene 
(40-46 million years) diatomites and less common lenticular 
sandstone (Pickard et al. 1986, in press, Quilty in press) 
overlying the Precambrian rock and occupying the sites of what were 
embayments in the early Pliocene.  In the western lobe (central 
area of the map, below 20 m a.s.l.), the Pliocene deposits are 
ovelain by a thin veneer of Holocene (6490 ± 130 y BP) glacial 
debris covering an area of 8-10 sq km, in places containing a few 
molluscs (Laternula elliptica King and Broderip) in situ.

Low scarps in the Pliocene adjacent to small lakes have yielded 
remains of a new genus, species and probably family - all extinct - 
of dolphin and there is evidence of another larger form.  This 
vertebrate fossil fauna is the reason for the designation of the 
Site.

The geology of the Neogene is described in more detail by Quilty 
(in prep) and Pickard et al. (1986, in press) and the Precambrian 
has been reviewed by Collerson and Sheraton (1986).

(c) Meteorology.  No data are available from the area, but conditions 
for Davis station, 6 km to the north-west, are similar (Burton and 
Campbell, 1980).

5. BIOLOGICAL FEATURES

(a) Terrestrial.  No detailed studies have been made of plants within 
the Site, but Seppelt et al. (in press) have reported few species 
and no significant stands of vegetation.
- 7 -

(b) Inland Waters. There are many small lakes and ponds which have
neither been studied nor named.  The largest water body, Burton
Lake, is more marine in character because of its summer daily tidal
flow.

(c) Marine.  Burton Lake opens to Crooked Fjord at its south-western
corner.  It has been the site of biological research for several
years (e.g. Burke and Burton in press, Bayly 1986) (For the
purposes of the Matrix Code, Burton Lake appears to better fit into
the Inland Waters classification).

(d) Birds and Seals.  No bird or seal surveys have been conducted in
the area, but it is relatively devoid of birds and sea mammals,
although Wilson's storm petrels and snow petrels occur sporadically
and nest in the Precambrian hills.

6.  SPECIAL FEATURES OF CONSERVATION SIGNIFICANCE

Apart from the area's prime significance as a site of fossils, Burton
Lake and several of the small lakes are important as examples in a
spectrum of lake types in the Vestfold Hills.

7.  HISTORY OF IMPACTS AND PREVIOUS KNOWLEDGE

The area lies on the pedestrian route to the Mule Peninsula lakes
(Clear, Laternula, Cemetery and McCallum) from Ellis Rapids, and many
field parties have walked through the area in the 33 years of Australian
occupation at Davis station.  However, as the area is arid and barren
(as is much of the Vestfold Hills), no biological work has been
undertaken, apart from surveying the distribution of moss and lichen
- 8 -

vegetation (found to be largely absent, Seppelt et al. in press) and 
research on Burton Lake, and there has been little or no impact on the 
area.  Since the recent (1985) discovery of vertebrate fossils in the 
Pliocene marine sediments in the area, a research programme involving 
further visits to the area has commenced.

8. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J. 1983. Late Quaternary ice movement across 
the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica (ed. R.L. Oliver, P.R. James & J.B. 
Jago).  In: Antarctic Earth Science, pp. 465-469.  Australian 
Academy of Science, Canberra.

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J. 1986. Cainozoic history of the Vestfold 
Hills.  In: Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), pp. 63-97.  Academic 
Press, Sydney.

Adamson, D.A. & Pickard, J. 1986. Physiography and geomorphology of 
the Vestfold Hills.  In: Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), pp. 
99-139. Academic Press, Sydney.

Bayly, I.A.E. 1986. Ecology of the zooplankton of a meromictic 
Antarctic lagoon with special reference to Drepanopus bispinosus 
(Copepoda Calanoida). Hydrobiologia, 140, 199-231.

Burke, C.M. & Burton, H.R. in press. The ecology of photosynthetic 
bacteria in Burton Lake, Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. 
Hydrobiologia.
- 9 -

Burton, H.R. & Campbell, P.J.  1980.  The climate of the Vestfold Hills,
Davis station, Antarctica, with a note on its effect on the
hydrology of hypersaline Deep Lake.  ANARE Scientific Reports,
Series D, Meteorology, No. 129, 1-50.

Collerson, K.D. & Sheraton, J.W.  1986.  Bedrock geology and crustal
evolution of the Vestfold Hills.  In:  Antarctic Oasis (ed. J.
Pickard), 21-62.  Academic Press, Sydney.

Fordyce, R.E. & Quilty, P.G. in prep.  A new family of fossil whales
from the Pliocene of East Antarctica.

Franzmann, P.D., Skyring, G.W., Burton, H.R. & Deprez, P.P. in press.
Sulphate reduction rates and some aspects of the limnology of four
lakes and a fjord in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.
Hydrobiologia.

Harwood, D.M.  1986.  Early Pliocene marine diatom floras from Marine
Plain, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica.  In:  Diatom 
biostratigraphy and paleoecology with a Cenozoic history of
Antarctic ice sheets.  Ph.D. Dissertation, Ohio State University,
316-342.  [Unpublished].

Johnstone, G.W., Lugg, D.J. & Brown, D.A.  1973.  The biology of the
Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.  ANARE Scientific Reports, Series B
(1), Zoology, No. 123, 1-62.

McMeekin, T.A. in press.  Preliminary observations on psychrotrophic and
psychrophilic heterotrophic bacteria from Antarctic water samples.
Hydrobiologia.
- 10 -

Pickard, J. 1986. The Vestfold Hills: a window on Antarctica. In:
Antarctic Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), 333-351). Academic Press,
Sydney.

Pickard, J., Adamson, D.A., Harwood, D.M., Miller, G.H., Quilty, P.G. &
Dell, R.K. 1986. Early Pliocene marine sediments in the Vestfold
Hills, East Antarctica: implications for coastline, ice sheet and
climate. South African Journal of Science, 82, 520-521.

Pickard, J., Adamson, D.A., Harwood, D.M., Miller, G.H., Quilty, P.G. &
Dell, R.K. in press. Late Tertiary marine sediments and coastline
of East Antarctica. Geology.

Pickard, J., Selkirk, R.M. & Selkirk, D.R. 1984. Holocene climates of
the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica and Macquarie Island. In: Late
Cainozoic paleoclimates of the Southern Hemisphere (ed. J.C.
Vogel), 173-182. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.

Quilty, P.G. in prep. The geology of Marine Plain, Vestfold Hills, East
Antarctica. [Paper submitted to 5th International Symposium on
Antarctic Earth Sciences, Cambridge, August 1987.]

Seppelt, R.D. 1986. Lichens of the Vestfold Hills. In: Antarctic
Oasis (ed. J. Pickard), 247-274. Academic Press, Sydney.

Seppelt, R.D., Broady, P.A., Pickard, J. & Adamson, D.A. in press.
Plants and landscape in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica.
Hydrobiologia.
76°00'E                                  78°00'
Ice-free areas
0          50
         km
Vestfold Hills
DAVIS STATION          S?rsdal Glacier
Prydz Bay                  Rauer Group
69°00'S                Svenner Is.      Ranvik Bay
                                      Ranvik Glacier
                                Brattstrand Bluffs
Lichen I.                  Steinnes
                      Larsemann Hills
                      Stornes Peninsula
INGRID CHRISTENSEN COAST
78°00'E                                 78°10'
       Lake
       Ice cliffs
0        2         4
     km
Contours in metres
Mule Peninsula                        Broad Peninsula
                Ellis Fjord
Burton
  Lake
                Marine Plain
Crooked Fjord
                Sørsdal Glacier
68°36'S
68°40'
