TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 OCTOBER

ANT/XIV/INF/47
(Australia)

ITEM 6: THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY:
      COST SHARING

(AUSTRALIAN DISCUSSION PAPER SUBMITTED TO ATCM XIII
AND RECIRCULATED TO ATCM XIV)

To be made publicly available at the
conclusion of ATCM XIV
COST SHARING (Paper submitted by Australia)

Australia foreshadowed at the April Preparatory Mee-
ting that it would raise the question of the sharing of costs
of Consultative Meetings during discussion under this agenda
item.

2. For some time, Australia has been concerned that the bur-
den of hosting and financing Consultative Meetings is not
falling evenly on all Consultative Parties. While
Australia respects the decision of any Consultative Party,
for whatever reason, not to offer itself as host to a Con-
sultative Meeting, Australia considers that this should
not result in other Consultative Parties being required
to shoulder an unequal share of the costs of hosting such
meetings.

3. The costs of hosting a Consultative Meeting are signifi-
cant. Furthermore, the presence of new Consultative Par-
ties as well as invitation to NPC's to the Antarctic
Treaty since 1983 to attend Consultative Meetings have
increased considerably the financial burden of hosting
Consultative Meetings. If more states accede to the
Antarctic Treaty in the future, as we assume they will,
the costs associated with hosting Consultative Meetings
will increase further.

The relative frequency of Consultative Meetings (inclu-
ding Special Consultative Meetings) is also relevant. In
recent years, with regular meetings being held in connec-
tion with the Antarctic minerals negotiations, the frequen
cy has increased noticeably. Furthermore, there have
been suggestions made from time to time that Consul.tative
Meetings might be held more frequently in future,
annually rather than biennially. In addition, the host
of a Conslutative Meeting may be required to undertake
additional activities in preparation for and following
the Consultative Meeting e.g. the preparation and prin-
ting of publications, wich are ancilliary to the work of
-2-

the meeting and which are designed to satisfy the growing 
interest of the international community in Antarctica and 
the Antarctic Treaty system.  Finally, with rising 
demands on resources, both staffing and financial, Consul-
tative Parties may show greater reluctance to offer them-
selves as host government in the future.

4.  Australia, therefore, proposes that consideration be gi-
ven to an arrangement enabling the financial costs asso-
ciated with hosting Consultative Meetings to be shared 
amongst Consultative Parties in future.  Australia propo-
ses that Consultative Parties continue to host Consultati-
ve Meetings on a rotational basis where possible, but 
costs for individual meetings be shared amongst all Con-
sultative Parties, perhaps by reimbursing the host govern-
ment following the meeting, when costs are known.

5.  Such a system of cost-sharing would involve only a mini-
mal change from existing arrangements:
- It would remain a matter for individual Consultative 
Parties to decide whether or not to offer to host a Con-
sultative Meeting.
- Consultative Party hosts would continue to undertake 
the organisation of the meeting including follow-up ac-
tion arising out of the recommendations of the meeting, 
making the most effective and efficient use of 
their own resources.
- Some generally accepted means would need to be found 
calculating and verifying the final cost of hosting  a 
Consultative Meeting (costs in some states will be higher 
than in others).

6.  It is suggested that the most appropriate method for cal-
culating individual Consultative Parties' contributions 
to the cost of a Consultative Meeting would be one based
-3-

upon equal sharing of costs. This is in keeping with an 
approach which recognises Consultative Parties equal 
rights and equal responsibilities.

7. It is submitted that the method chosen to ensure that the 
costs of hosting Consultative Meetings are shared between 
Consultative Parties should apply also to Preparatory 
Meeting and Special Consultative Meetings.
