TRATADO ANTÁRTICO 
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                                RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                                1987

05 - 16 October

ANT/XIV/INF/43

Effects of Tourism and Non-Governmental
Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area
As early as ATCM IV Consultative Parties have recognized
potential problems posed by visits of tourists to Antarctica,
including the effects of such visits on Antarctic Stations.
Concern has especially been expressed about the impact  of
tourist visits on scientific activities and the Antarctic
environment.  Consultative Parties have adopted a series  of
Recommendations dealing with this problem, most recently at
ATCM XIII.

Many Consultative Parties face this problem, particularly
those with stations accessible to coastal areas.

It is clear that in the past few years the number and
amount of tourist visits has increased rapidly. It has reached
a level at which the US feels action is warranted to minimize
the impact on stations, scientific activity and the Antarctic
environment.

Current projections indicate Palmer Station  could be
visited by tour ships as many as thirty days during  its
twelve week season. Such a volume of tourist visits clearly
would inhibit or eliminate scientific research and cannot be
permitted. The U.S. further estimates that some 7,000 -
8,000  tourists will visit the Antarctic Peninsula this
austral summer. This number is greater, we believe, than the
number of all program-sponsored personnel from all Antarctic
countries combined.

Based on its experience during the 1986-1987 austral
summer and projections of tourist ship visits for 1987-1988,
the  United States has decided  to limit  the frequency of
tourist visits to Palmer Station and to restrict the manner
in which such visits are conducted.
This decision has been taken following extensive dis-
cussions with scientists whose research projects take place
in and around Palmer, station operators and the two U.S.
tour companies active in Antarctica.

Each U.S. tour company will be restricted to 400
passenger visits each season. No visits will be permitted
inside station buildings.

The Consultatives Parties should consider seriously
the potential impact of such tourist volume on the Antarctic
environment, as well as the implicit dependence on program
assets for search and rescue.

The attached letter describes the U.S. position as
communicated to U.S. Antarctic tour operators.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
WASHINGTON, D.C.  20550
DIVISION OF POLAR PROGRAMS
COORDINATION AND INFORMATION SECTION

October 2, 1987

Mr. Werner Zehnder
Vice President, Planning
and Operations
Society Expeditions, Inc.
3131 Elliott Avenue, Suite 700
Seattle, Washington  98121

Dear Werner:

Thank you for taking the time to discuss in person with us the
restrictions on Palmer Station visits we are developing.  Between our
several telephone conversations and our all day meeting on September 25th,
I believe we have achieved an extensive understanding of one another's
interests and responsibilities.

We fully understand the desire of your travelers to see Palmer Station.
However, the impact of visits in prior years and the prospect of some
thirty visits during the approaching twelve-week season have forced some
restrict the number of landings at Palmer and the manner in which they are
conducted.  We are establishing these restrictions within the Antarctic
Treaty, relevant U.S. law and our responsibility as manager of the U.S.
Antarctic Program.  To help assure that your passengers learn about the
activity of our scientists working at Palmer, we are prepared to provide
briefings to passengers onboard trips which arrive in the vicinity of
Palmer Station.

We are prepared to allocate to Society Expeditions 400 passenger visits to
Palmer Station/Torgersen Island during the coming season.  Within this
limitation, you are free to identify which trips will make the stop.  You
have tentatively identified four visits this season:  Cruises EX-183B,
EX-184, WD-272 and WD-274.  We would like to be kept continually informed
of changes in these plans, with a final confirmation from the cruise to
the station no later than 72 hours prior to arrival.  Should weather or
ice conditions prevent your use of a tentatively designated visit, you are
free to replace it with a later cruise.

Visits at the station will include a look at the external fish tank and a
limited opportunity for photographs.  To prevent disruption of scientific
experiments and station operation, no visitors will be permitted inside
the buildings.  Cruise management will be responsible for landing and
embarking passengers.  We trust your cruise directors will communicate our
reasons for this change to help assure that passengers understand why it
is necessary.
Mr. Werner Zehnder                                                    Page 2

An NSF employee will be available to provide a briefing onboard the ship
before passengers actually land.  The briefing will present information
about the U.S. Antarctic Program, Palmer Station activitites and krill.  In
addition, the speaker will lend the Palmer Station cachet to your purser.
The sale of items from the Palmer store will take place onboard ship, if
at all, and will be arranged directly with our station contractor.  The
lecture, cachet and sale of items will also be available to cruises which
arrive in the vicinity of Palmer but which are not among the four you
choose to have visit.

Enclosed with this letter is a letter to President Kirkpatrick, which we
hope you will make available to your passengers.

While Society Expeditions has conducted its trips to the Antarctic in a
generally exemplary manner, we are concerned about the potential impact on
the Antarctic environment of the impending explosion of tourism.  We are,
therefore, providing to you and other tour operators the first version of
a video tape on the Antarctic Conservation Act.  We have also provided you
with a copy of the Act and forms you must use to apply for permits under
it.

The prospect of 7,000-8,000 tourists in Antarctica each season is of grave
concern to those who wish to keep the continent and its surrounding waters
pristine, as well as those who seek to do scientific research there.  I
appreciate your extensive Antarctic experience and your cooperation as we
work together to assure responsible behavior below 60o South.

Sincerely yours,




John B. Talmadge
Section Head

Enclosure
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20550

DIVISION OF POLAR PROGRAMS              FOR POSTING

October 2, 1987

Mr. Patrick Kirkpatrick
President
Society Expeditions, Inc.
3131 Elliott Avenue, Suite 700
Seattle, Washington  98121

Dear Mr. Kirkpatrick:

The National Science Foundation is responsible for managing the United
States Antarctic Program.  This responsibility includes operation of
Palmer Station, a United States research station on the Antarctic
Peninsula, and implementation of relevant recommendations under the
Antarctic Treaty System and derivative United States law.

In the past, occasional visits by tour ships have been accommodated at
Palmer Station.  During the 1986-1987 austral summer, such visits had a
clearly inhibitive impact on the capacity of scientists in and around
Palmer Station to conduct their research.  Information provided by you and
other organizers of tourist trips to the Antarctic Peninsula indicates an
explosion of visit frequency and passenger capacity will occur during the
1987-88 austral summer. Up to one half the working days available for
scientific research could thus be lost due to tourist visits.

Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Recommendations IV-27, VI-7 and X-8
require tourist compliance with local station procedures in order to
foster safety and environmental protection and to minimize disruption of
scientific research and station operations.

The National Science Foundation has consequently decided to restrict the
number of tourist visits to Palmer Station and the manner in which the
permitted visits are conducted. These restrictions have been developed in
consultation with a senior executive of your company.  We believe they
will allow your passengers the full benefits of their Antarctic voyage
while simultaneously permitting United States scientists to complete their
research projects.

I look forward to working with you during the coming season.

Sincerely yours,




for Peter E. Wilkniss
Division Director
