TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 October

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/INF/32
(Australia)

AGENDA ITEM 9

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

DRAFT GUIDELINES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
OF AUSTRALIA'S ANTARCTIC STATIONS
(submitted by the Australian delegation)

This document may be released at the conclusion of the Meeting.
The attached draft guidelines for the environmental 
management of Australia's Antarctic Stations have been 
developed by the Australian Antarctic Division to draw 
together the various instructions and guidelines given to 
members of Australian National Antarctic Research 
Expeditions ( ANARE), which relate to the effect of their 
activities on the Antarctic environment.

The draft is being used in the briefing of members 
of the 1988 ANARE, and will be used by them during the year 
after some further editing.

It is intended that the guidelines will be updated 
as new matters require attention and improvements are 
developed.

The draft might be of assistance to delegates in 
considering the issues raised under Agenda Item 9, Man's 
Impact on the Antarctic Environment, in particular Waste 
Disposal.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
OF
AUSTRALIA'S ANTARCTIC STATIONS

CONTENTS

1    INTRODUCTION
2    AUSTRALIA'S ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
3    CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FLORA AND FAUNA
4    SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, PERMITS
5    STATION OPERATIONS
6    FIELD ACTIVITIES
7    SHIPPING OPERATIONS
8    AIR OPERATIONS
9    QUARANTINE REGULATIONS

APPENDICES

A    AT(EP) Act and Regulations
B    Management Plans for Australian SSSIs
2

PURPOSE

This document is to be incorporated in the Operations Manual for Australia's Antarctic 
program.

1.  INTRODUCTION

1.1.  These guidelines are designed to ensure minimal interference with the ecology of the 
Antarctic Continent and Southern Ocean during Australia's Antarctic operations. A 
conservation ethic is the guiding principle. They describe policies and practices to 
ensure sound environmental management in accordance with requirements arising 
from Australia's international obligations, Australian laws and the policies of the 
Antarctic Division.

1.2.  Since 1981 the Antarctic Environment Committee has monitored operations, 
researched solutions to environmental problems and advised the Division's 
Executive on appropriate ways to minimize the environmental impacts of 
Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions (ANARE). Many of the 
Antarctic Division's policies on environmental aspects of its operations derive from 
the work of the Environment Committee. These guidelines incorporate the work of 
the Committee as well as Australia's legal and international obligations and are 
based upon practical experience in Antarctic operations.

1.3.  Although the immediate vicinities of Australia's Antarctic Stations bear 
unavoidable signs of environmental disturbance, the places where ANARE normally 
operates are still relatively unspoiled. There is an increasing recognition of their 
vulnerability and of the means of avoiding harmful environmental impacts. This 
Manual details current policies and practices in accordance with these concerns.

1.4  These guidelines cover all aspects of Australia's activities in Antarctica, including 
scientific research, station and field operations, shipping and air transport. They 
will evolve as the emphasis of research and methods of operation change. Please 
draw any omissions or problems with the guidelines as you see them to the attention 
of Policy Section.
3

2.    AUSTRALIA'S ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES

2.1.  Australia's main international obligations for protection of the Antarctic 
      environment are derived from :

      •the Antarctic Treaty and measures which have been agreed to by the 
      Antarctic Treaty Consultative Nations;
      •the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals; and
      •the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
      and measures agreed to by meetings of its commission.

2.2.  Australia, as a signatory to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted the Agreed Measures for the 
      Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna as law in the Antarctic Treaty 
      (Environment Protection) Act (AT(EP) Act)1980. The Antarctic Seals Conservation 
      Regulations 1986 implement the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
      Seals. The full text of the Act and Regulations can be found in the Appendix to this 
      Manual.

2.3.  Marine organisms in the Southern Ocean are protected under the Antarctic Marine 
      Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 which implements the CAMLR Convention 
      Under this Act a permit is required to harvest or conduct research on any marine 
      organism (including mammals and birds) south of the Convention's boundary, 
      which is roughly approximate to the Antarctic Convergence.

2.4.  The Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 makes it an offence for 
      Australians, and Australian vessels (including those under charter to Australia) to 
      dump waste at sea except under specific circumstances. The Act also applies to the 
      loading of waste and the incineration of wastes at sea.

2.5.  The Australian Antarctic Territory Act (AAT) specifies that the laws of the 
      Australian Capital Territory, insofar as they are applicable, should apply to the AAT 
      as well as other laws which specifically include the AAT in their scope. Those Acts 
      applying to all Australian Territories but which have particular relevance to the 
      AAT include :

      • the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) 
        Act 1975 (WP(REI)Act),
      • the Whale Protection Act 1980,
      • the Environmental Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act
      • the Quarantine Act 1908,
      • the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975, and
      • the World Heritage (Properties Conservation) Act 1983.
3.    CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FLORA AND FAUNA

3.1.   The AT(EP)Act

3.1.1.  In this section the provisions of the AT(EP) Act are examined, along with
        administrative procedures and policies derived from it. The Act applies to all 
        Australians on land or ice shelves south of 60° South.

3.1.2.  The aim of the Act is the conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna and the 
        protection of the Antarctic environment. It defines a list of offences, all being 
        actions which would have a harmful impact on the Antarctic environment, and 
        makes them illegal except in cases of extreme emergency, or in some cases, if they are 
        reasonably necessary for the establishment, supply or operation of a station.

3.1.3.  The Act also sets up a permit system to allow certain of these actions for purposes of 
        scientific research or specimen taking for museums.

3.1.4.  The AT(EP) Act also provides at present for two categories of reserve to apply to areas 
        which have been identified by an Antarctic Treaty meeting as particularly worthy of 
        protection. These are Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific 
        Interest (SSSIs).

3.2.    Protected Areas

3.2.1.  The fundamental difference between SPAs and SSSIs is that SPAs are designated to 
        exclude all visitors to the maximum reasonable extent, while SSSIs have 
        Management Plans which allow specific scientific investigations over a limited 
        period of time and other activities that do not adversely affect the scientific studies 
        being conducted there. SPAs are thus designated to protect their ecosystems while 
        SSSIs are designated to protect the scientific activities occurring there.

3.2.2.  Permits are required to enter SPAs and are only issued for a compelling scientific 
        purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, and if the visit and proposed activities 
        will not jeopardize the natural ecosystem existing in the area.

3.2.3.  It is also forbidden to drive any vehicle within an SPA, although a permit may be 
        granted to land a helicopter under strictly controlled conditions. The three SPAs in 
        the AAT are Taylor Rookery and Rookery Islands near Mawson; and Ardery Island 
        and Odbert Island near Casey.

3.2.4.  Permits are also required to enter SSSIs and to conduct any activity within it other 
        than as authorised in the Management Plan for the site. For this reason, we have 
        included the Management Plans for the SSSIs near ANARE stations as an Appendix 
        after this document. There are two SSSIs near Casey, one near the Station on Bailey 
        Peninsula and the other on Clark Peninsula near Wilkes. At Davis, the area of 
        Marine Plain on Mule Peninsula is under consideration as a SSSI and is being 
        managed accordingly.

3.2.5.  Both categories of protected areas are marked by poles at points of entry. In the 
        yellow canisters on the poles are details of the area and a log book.

3.2.6.  Some other areas may also be managed as protected areas pending future designation 
        as SPAs or SSSIs. Refer to particular Station information for details.

3.2.7.  Applications for Permits to enter SPAs or SSSIs should be made by the person 
        responsible for the program to the Policy Section, Antarctic Division. Permits are 
        granted by the Minister for the Environment and the Arts or his /her delegate.
3.3.  Offences

3.3.1.  The following list summarizes the offences under the AT(EP) Act and Regulations.
         For further details, see Section 19 and Regulation 11 of the Act. Offenders are liable
         to prosecution and penalties :

         a. killing, taking or injuring a native bird or mammal in the Antarctic without a
         permit;
         b. gathering, collecting or injuring a native plant in the Antarctic without a permit;
         c. importing an organism that is not indigenous to the Antarctic without a permit;
         d. entering a SPA without a permit;
         e. driving a vehicle in a SPA;
         f. landing or driving an aircraft in a SPA without a permit;
         g. entering a SSSI without a permit;
         h. doing anything in a SSSI except in accordance with its management plan;
         i. flying helicopters or other aircraft in a manner which would disturb a
         concentration of birds or seals;
         j. landing or driving aircraft or vehicles within 200 metres of a concentration of
         birds and seals;
         k. detonating explosives or discharging firearms within 300 metres of
         concentrations of birds and seals;
         l. while on foot, disturbing a concentration of birds and seals during any period while
         they are breeding;
         m. causing or permitting a dog to run free;
         n. letting any non-indigenous organism escape into the Antarctic environment.

3.3.2.  This list is provided as an indication of the kinds of actions which are offences,
         please read Sections 19 and Regulation 11 of the Act for the exact wording. If you
         have any queries regarding the interpretation of the offences, contact the Policy
         Section.

3.3.3.  Interference with native animals includes making them the subject of games, feeding
         them, teasing skuas and kicking or running on Elephant seals or any other
         disturbance irrespective of how harmless or good-natured the activity appears to be.
         All forms of interference are prohibited.

3.4.  Export of plant and other material to Antarctica

3.4.1.  Under the AT(EP) Act, a permit is required to bring into the Antarctic any animal,
         plant, virus, bacterium, yeast or fungus that is not indigenous to the Antarctic, except
         if it is to be used for food. It is also an offence to allow an organism brought in under
         permit to escape from control. For this reason the Environment Committee has
         made strenuous efforts to ensure that the chances of accidental introduction of
         non-indigenous species to the Antarctic environment are reduced.

3.4.2.  Horticultural activities have in the past been allowed on Antarctic stations under
         permits. However it has become increasingly apparent that fumigation and
         sterilisation procedures are not completely successful in ensuring that soil-living
         and other insect pests are not introduced along with organic growing media. This,
         combined with inadequate facilities for hydroponics on Stations, has led to a review
         of this policy.

3.4.3.  Organic media, plant material and ornamental plants will not be permitted at
         Australian Antarctic stations. For further information regarding this policy, please
         contact the Policy Section.

3.4.4.  Organic material could be introduced accidentally in other ways, such as in treads of
         vehicles or on field equipment. Such items should be fumigated, hosed or scrubbed as
         appropriate before transport to Antarctica.
3.5.  Responsibilities of Station, Voyage and Field Leaders

3.5.1  Responsibility for implementing the Operations Manual lies with the person in 
      charge of a particular program namely, Station Leaders, Field Leaders and Voyage 
      Leaders. They are responsible for the environmental management of Antarctic 
      regions under their control in accordance with these guidelines.

3.5.2.  Whilst all efforts must be made to educate and encourage expeditioners and other 
      visitors to care for the Antarctic environment, there are legal safeguards to ensure 
      that the policies and practices outlined in these guidelines are adhered to. All 
      individuals are legally responsible for their own actions in relation to the 
      environment in Antarctica.

3.5.3.  Station Leaders are appointed Inspectors under the AT(EP) Act to ensure that the 
      requirements of the Act are met. See 3.7. below.

3.5.4.  In the monthly status report, the Station Leader should indicate :

      a.  visits to SPAs and SSSIs
      b.  environment related incidents (eg. oil spills, injury to wildlife etc.)
      c.  remedial action taken
      d.  new programs introduced
      e.  any other information related to impacts on the Antarctic environment.

3.6.  Station Environment Officers

3.6.1.  Successful nature conservation and environment protection depends to a great extent 
      on a continual awareness of the potential environmental consequences of decisions 
      and activities rather than on the use of the legal powers of inspectors. In order to 
      maintain this awareness and to relieve the task of the Station Leader in this regard, 
      Station Environment Officers are appointed at each station.

3.6.2.  The role of the Station Environment Officer is:

      a.to provide a source of advice on the environmental implications of activities, 
      both to the Station Leader and to station personnel generally.

      b.to provide early warning of developing environmental problems and to alert 
      the Station Leader to these as well as preparing appropriate documentation for 
      the Antarctic Division.

      c.  to carry out on the ground investigations, or to coordinate such investigations, 
      of environmentally significant situations that may arise.

3.6.3.  It is emphasised that the Station Environment Officer's role is to provide advice and 
      assistance to the Station Leader and to carry out ad hoc follow-up of environmental 
      situations should the need arise. Responsibility lies with the Station Leader and the 
      Station Environment Officer reports to and through the Station Leader.
3.5.     Responsibilities of Station, Voyage and Field Leaders

3.5.1  Responsibility for implementing the Operations Manual lies with the person in 
       charge of a particular program namely, Station Leaders, Field Leaders and Voyage 
       Leaders. They are responsible for the environmental management of Antarctic 
       regions under their control in accordance with these guidelines.

3.5.2  Whilst all efforts must be made to educate and encourage expeditioners and other 
       visitors to care for the Antarctic environment, there are legal safeguards to ensure 
       that the policies and practices outlined in these guidelines are adhered to. All 
       individuals are legally responsible for their own actions in relation to the 
       environment in Antarctica.

3.5.3  Station Leaders are appointed Inspectors under the AT(EP) Act to ensure that the 
       requirements of the Act are met. See 3.7. below.

3.5.4  In the monthly status report, the Station Leader should indicate :

       a.    visits to SPAs and SSSIs
       b.    environment related incidents (eg. oil spills, injury to wildlife etc.)
       c.    remedial action taken
       d.    new programs introduced
       e.    any other information related to impacts on the Antarctic environment.

3.6.     Station Environment Officers

3.6.1  Successful nature conservation and environment protection depends to a great extent 
       on a continual awareness of the potential environmental consequences of decisions 
       and activities rather than on the use of the legal powers of inspectors. In order to 
       maintain this awareness and to relieve the task of the Station Leader in this regard, 
       Station Environment Officers are appointed at each station.

3.6.2  The role of the Station Environment Officer is:

       a.to provide a source of advice on the environmental implications of activities, 
         both to the Station Leader and to station personnel generally.

       b.to provide early warning of developing environmental problems and to alert 
         the Station Leader to these as well as preparing appropriate documentation for 
         the Antarctic Division.

       c. to carry out on the ground investigations, or to coordinate such investigations, 
          of environmentally significant situations that may arise.

3.6.3  It is emphasised that the Station Environment Officer's role is to provide advice and 
       assistance to the Station Leader and to carry out ad hoc follow-up of environmental 
       situations should the need arise. Responsibility lies with the Station Leader and the 
       Station Environment Officer reports to and through the Station Leader.
3.7.  Inspectors

3.7.1. AT(EP) Inspectors are issued with an identity card and should become fully 
conversant with the powers the position embraces. Details are issued when 
appointed as an Inspector. It is a statutory responsibility for an Inspector to report 
any breaches of the Act.

3.7.2. An inspector may arrest any person whom they believe has committed or is 
committing an offence against the Act.

3.7.3. An inspector may search a vehicle, sled, aircraft or vessel where they suspect there is :
      a. any animal, plant, virus, bacterium, yeast, fungus or article in respect of 
          which an offence against the Act has been committed; or
      b. anything that will afford evidence as to the commission of an offence 
          against the Act,

and for that purpose stop or detain that vehicle, sled, aircraft or vessel. This does not 
apply to a foreign vehicle, sled, aircraft or vessel.

3.7.4. An inspector may seize any article reasonably believed to have been involved in an 
offence. Such offences may incur a penalty of up to $2000 or imprisonment for 12 
months or both.

3.7.5. Specific procedures for arrest, detention and seizure apply; see details in the full text 
of the Act in the Appendix. Offences relating to the environment are listed in 3.3.1.

3.8.  Environmental Education

3.8.1. Station Leaders, Voyage Leaders, expeditioners and roundtrip passengers are made 
aware of Australia's environmental responsibilities in Antarctica and the code of 
conduct expected of all visitors to the Continent and surrounding oceans prior to 
departure.

3.8.2. The booklet, 'A Visitors Introduction to the Antarctic and its Environment', written 
by SCAR and produced by the Antarctic Division, is distributed to all expeditioners. 
By providing information about the Antarctic ecosystem and the importance of its 
conservation as well as guidelines for appropriate behaviour, it is intended to appeal 
to the sensitivities and appreciation of expeditioners to the Antarctic environment 
and engender a feeling of personal responsibility for its preservation and 
conservation.

3.8.3. It is the responsibility of Station Leaders, Field Leaders, and Voyage Leaders to 
ensure that briefing is adequate for their group. In particular, Voyage Leaders should 
ensure that roundtrippers are aware of the environmental guidelines before 
disembarking at stations. They should be reminded not to enter SPAs and SSSIs and 
areas proposed for protection. From time to time there may need to be additional 
sessions conducted by the relevant leader or other personnel. These may take a 
variety of forms, including illustrated slide lectures, group discussions conducted by 
scientists or simply directives.
4.    SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, PERMITS

4.1.  A permit is required for the collection of all biological specimens, whether for
      ANARE or for outside research workers, museums and other institutions. This also
      covers specimens found dead through natural causes, or parts thereof, and items such
      as lichen on rocks. Opportunistic collection of specimens found dead should be
      provided for in advance by a suitable application for permit. Collection of biological
      material for personal use is prohibited.

4.2.  Programs requiring collection of geological samples do not require a permit other
      than for Quarantine purposes if they are approved by the Antarctic Science Advisory
      Committee (ASAC) except insofar as the collection may involve entry to a protected
      area or affect concentrations of animals. Applications to collect geological
      specimens in other circumstances must be made to Policy Section for consideration
      by the Assistant Director, Science.

4.3.  All applications for permits for the Antarctic and Heard Island and the McDonald
      Islands must be made through the Antarctic Division Policy Section, which is
      responsible for administering the legislation. Inquiries with regard to permits for
      research at Macquarie Island should be directed to the Tasmanian National Parks
      and Wildlife Service. Applications should be made well before any collection is
      planned and would normally be arranged before departure for Antarctica. Should
      the need arise for additional collections of material or for variations to the
      conditions of permits after departure from Australia, Policy Section should be
      contacted by telex.

4.4.  All bird banding must be covered by an AT(EP) Permit and the number, sex and age of
      the birds banded in each location should be included in the Permit Holders Report on
      Activities for the Treaty Exchange Information.

4.5.  All intended use of radio-active isotopes must be notified to the Policy Section of the
      Antarctic Division before departure.

4.6.  Quarantine Permits are required for all collections of biological specimens as well as
      water, ice, sediments, and so on. Refer to Section 9 for details of Quarantine
      procedure.
5.    STATION OPERATIONS

5.1.  Introduction

5.1.1.  Since most activity takes place at the Stations, there is great concern for their
         effective environmental management. Scientific programs, people, cargo handling,
         re-fuelling, vehicle movement and waste disposal are concentrated at Casey, Davis,
         Mawson and to a lesser extent the Field Stations.

5.1.2.  Most instances of disturbance to the environment are caused not by any intention to
         do harm, but by carelessness. It is vital to encourage sensitivity in expeditioners and
         visiting personnel to the possible impacts their activities may have.

5.1.3.  Vehicle re-fuelling, garbage runs, operating vehicles and machinery and
         photographing wildlife are common activities around Stations and in the field that
         can have high impact on the environment if conducted carelessly.

5.1.4.  The dust from concrete-batching can be a particular hazard to wildlife and
         vegetation, and should only be conducted well away from sensitive areas. Depending
         upon wind strength and direction, the Station Leader may decide that it is necessary
         to curtail concrete batching on a particular day.

5.1.5.  Before alterations such as new roadworks, quarry activity, addition or removal of
         buildings, siting of field huts and the like are made to Stations and their local
         environment, approval must be obtained from Head Office. Every effort should be
         made to assess possible environmental impacts when proposing an alteration. There
         is a procedure for consideration of the effects on the environment which involves
         both Station personnel and the Antarctic Environment Committee.

5.1.6.  The Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have agreed to a 'Code of Practice for
         Expedition and Station Activities' as a guideline to specific operations. In many
         instances Australia's policies and practices are more stringent than those included
         in the 'Code' and these practices should be seen as the minimum acceptable standard.

5.2.  Tidiness

5.2.1.  It is easy to allow Station sites to become an untidy 'hotch-potch' of timber, food and
         building supplies. Stations have large indoor storage areas available; all efforts
         should be made to ensure general tidiness so that littering and loss of valuable
         resources by wind and snow drift is minimized.

5.2.2.  Litter can be avoided by encouraging expeditioners to take pride in their Station and
         by organizing periodic clean-up programs as 'Station Duties'. The best opportunity
         for cleaning up is in late summer when the ice and snow have melted. If rubbish is not
         cleaned up at this time it will be 'lost' again with the first snowfall to be left until the
         following summer when it re-appears.

5.2.3.  To reduce the problem of litter during re-supply, contractors have been required to
         package goods with minimal loose material which should also be of a bio-degradable
         nature. Unpacking of supplies should occur indoors to minimize the dispersal of
         packaging materials which should then be disposed of properly and immediately.

5.3.  Re-fuelling Operations at Stations

5.3.1.  All efforts must be made to minimize the risk of fuel spillage. Prior to the arrival of
         the ship all fuel lines must be air pressure tested and repaired to ensure their
         integrity against fuel leakages. Coupling compatibility to the ship's fuel system
         should be confirmed by reference to the Logistics Section and also pressure checked
         on arrival of the vessel.

5.3.2.  Re-fuelling by barge is the preferred method for ensuring minimal risk of spillage,
         however, depending upon sea-ice conditions and other factors the fuel line from ship
         to shore may be required. If a fuel line must be used, the re-fuelling operation is best
         conducted over fast ice. Over water in the presence of wind or ice floes there is real
         danger of oil spillage due to pressure on the line.
5.       STATION OPERATIONS

5.1.    Introduction

5.1.1.  Since most activity takes place at the Stations, there is great concern for their 
        effective environmental management. Scientific programs, people, cargo handling, 
        re-fuelling, vehicle movement and waste disposal are concentrated at Casey, Davis, 
        Mawson and to a lesser extent the Field Stations.

5.1.2.  Most instances of disturbance to the environment are caused not by any intention to 
        do harm, but by carelessness. It is vital to encourage sensitivity in expeditioners and 
        visiting personnel to the possible impacts their activities may have.

5.1.3.  Vehicle re-fuelling, garbage runs, operating vehicles and machinery and 
        photographing wildlife are common activities around Stations and in the field that 
        can have high impact on the environment if conducted carelessly.

5.1.4.  The dust from concrete-batching can be a particular hazard to wildlife and 
        vegetation, and should only be conducted well away from sensitive areas. Depending 
        upon wind strength and direction, the Station Leader may decide that it is necessary 
        to curtail concrete batching on a particular day.

5.1.5.  Before alterations such as new roadworks, quarry activity, addition or removal of 
        buildings, siting of field huts and the like are made to Stations and their local 
        environment, approval must be obtained from Head Office. Every effort should be 
        made to assess possible environmental impacts when proposing an alteration. There 
        is a procedure for consideration of the effects on the environment which involves 
        both Station personnel and the Antarctic Environment Committee.

5.1.6.  The Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have agreed to a 'Code of Practice for 
        Expedition and Station Activities' as a guideline to specific operations. In many 
        instances Australia's policies and practices are more stringent than those included 
        in the 'Code' and these practices should be seen as the minimum acceptable standard.

5.2.    Tidiness

5.2.1.  It is easy to allow Station sites to become an untidy 'hotch-potch' of timber, food and 
        building supplies. Stations have large indoor storage areas available; all efforts 
        should be made to ensure general tidiness so that littering and loss of valuable 
        resources by wind and snow drift is minimized.

5.2.2.  Litter can be avoided by encouraging expeditioners to take pride in their Station and 
        by organizing periodic clean-up programs as 'Station Duties'. The best opportunity 
        for cleaning up is in late summer when the ice and snow have melted. If rubbish is not 
        cleaned up at this time it will be 'lost' again with the first snowfall to be left until the 
        following summer when it re-appears.

5.2.3.  To reduce the problem of litter during re-supply, contractors have been required to 
        package goods with minimal loose material which should also be of a bio-degradable 
        nature. Unpacking of supplies should occur indoors to minimize the dispersal of 
        packaging materials which should then be disposed of properly and immediately.

5.3.    Re-fuelling Operations at Stations

5.3.1.  All efforts must be made to minimize the risk of fuel spillage. Prior to the arrival of 
        the ship all fuel lines must be air pressure tested and repaired to ensure their 
        integrity against fuel leakages. Coupling compatibility to the ship's fuel system 
        should be confirmed by reference to the Logistics Section and also pressure checked 
        on arrival of the vessel.

5.3.2.  Re-fuelling by barge is the preferred method for ensuring minimal risk of spillage, 
        however, depending upon sea-ice conditions and other factors the fuel line from ship 
        to shore may be required. If a fuel line must be used, the re-fuelling operation is best 
        conducted over fast ice. Over water in the presence of wind or ice floes there is real 
        danger of oil spillage due to pressure on the line.
10

5.3.3.     In either situation a constant watch must be maintained during the entire period of 
           fuel transfer. Over fast ice this can be by a person on foot, skis or oversnow 
           transport; over open water, a boat is essential with sufficient power to keep large 
           floes from the fuel line. At the sign of any potential risk to the integrity of the fuel 
           line, re-fuelling must cease and all fuel pumped from the line.

5.3.4.     Experience has shown that in the case of an oil spill, fuel that cannot be retrieved by 
           pumps should be left to dissipate rather than applying chemical dispersants which 
           may contribute to a more adverse effect on the Antarctic environment.

5.3.5.     In the interests of improving future fuel handling operations, oil spills in excess of 
           200 litres should be reported to Operations Section.

5.4.       Vehicle use and re-fuelling 

5.4.1.     In addition to the restraints on operating vehicles near wildlife (see section 3), they 
           should only be driven on established roads in the Station areas. Where oversnow 
           vehicles are permitted, they should only be operated on snow or ice that is thick 
           enough to ensure no damage to or impact on the underlying terrain. Stations have 
           policies in this regard which apply to their particular environment.

5.4.2.     Re-fuelling should not occur near lakes, vegetation or wildlife. Wherever possible it 
           should be carried out at one fixed site, and hand nozzles with a trigger valve should 
           always be used to minimize spillage. Special re-fuelling areas with a drainage sump 
           are planned for each Station.

5.5.       Waste Disposal 

5.5.1.     Garbage dumps at the Stations are no longer used. The existing deposits are being 
           disposed of by a combination of returning to Australia (RTA'ing) and burial. At Davis 
           this has been completed; at Mawson and Casey the process is due for completion in 
           the near future.

5.5.2.     Likewise, the former practices of 'sea-icing' and dumping at sea are no longer 
           permitted in Australian Antarctic operations. The Stations are equipped with high 
           temperature emission controlled incinerators. Casey and Davis have combustion 
           pits for larger items.

5.5.3.     Personnel should be instructed in loading containers to ensure that the weight 
           remains within the safe limits of equipment used to transport them to the ship.
11

5.6.  Separation

5.6.1.  As the Antarctic Division's policy is to minimize the accumulation of waste 
        materials in Antarctica, decisions need to be made by the SL as to whether items 
        should be disposed of by:

        i.      Re-cycling
        ii.     Incinerator
        iii.    Combustion Pit
        iv.     RTA for dumping
        v.      RTA for re-sale or re-deployment

        Note:   All RTA waste materials for dumping must be marked for Quarantine. See 
                section 9.

5.6.2.  All rubbish must be separated into the following categories :
        •   FOOD (tinned, bottled, boxed, including 'empty' tins)
        •   METALS
        •   WOOD
        •   OILS, FUELS, OTHER LIQUIDS
        •   OTHER MATERIALS

        Careful separation of waste is necessary.

        This requires establishment and maintenance of a Waste Disposal System to ensure 
        appropriate disposal on the Station and for RTA. Provision of rubbish bins, methods 
        of collection suitable for summer and winter and storage for RTA items are to be 
        defined for each Station and the current System notified to the Operations Section.

5.7.  Re-cycling

        Many items can be re-used; for example, packing crate timber for shelving, 200 litre 
        drums either with the lid part opened (for metal waste, incinerator ash) or intact for 
        RTA'ing chemical waste (photographic chemicals, Hydrogen generation sludge). 
        Expired meat, meat products, some tinned food and the carcasses of dead seals can be 
        sent to Mawson for consumption by the dogs if this is practicable.

5.8.  Incineration

5.8.1.  Combustibles include wood, wood products and paper, lubricating oils, food, tin cans, 
        and some plastics. Wherever possible, these items should be burned in the 
        incinerator in preference to the combustion pit. Emissions from the incinerators 
        should be checked periodically. This simply means adjusting the controls until little 
        or no smoke is exhausted.

5.8.2.  Plastics which are definitely known NOT to be PVC may be incinerated. Thus, most 
        domestic plastic packaging may be burnt, with the exception of all glass-clear 
        containers, such as fruit juice bottles, which should all be RTA. Where there is doubt 
        about the composition of a plastic item for disposal, it should be RTA.

5.9.  Combustion Pits

5.9.1.  For use only to burn items that are too large for the incinerator, these are designed so 
        that rubbish being dumped and burnt will not be blown from the site. They should be 
        checked at each use to ensure that the mesh is effective in this function. Care should 
        be taken in deciding when materials should be dumped and burnt.

5.9.2.  A light wind provides ideal conditions for efficient combustion, the dissipation of 
        smoke and minimal wind blown loss of material. Waste should only be deposited 
        when it can be burnt immediately thus avoiding loss by scavenging birds and the 
        wind.
12

5.10.  R.T.A.

5.10.1.The following should specifically be RTA'd : radio-active materials, PVC plastics and 
polystyrene products, bottles, chemicals, batteries, metals, surplus machinery and 
components. Where there is doubt about the composition of a plastic item for 
disposal, it should be RTA.

5.10.2.Care must be taken that valuable but redundant items on Station are not simply 
destined for dumping in Australia. Refer to the Stores and Equipment Manual for 
details of categories of surplus materials.

5.10.3. All waste materials for RTA must be marked for Quarantine. See Section 9.

      Waste for Quarantine must not be mixed with other RTA goods. The requirements in 
      section 10 are critical.

5.10.4. To ensure safe packaging for shipping of items for RTA refer to the Logistics Section, 
Antarctic Division.

5.11.  Kitchen Waste

5.11.1. Tins and food scraps should be incinerated; this is particularly important in the case 
of poultry products (see 5.12). Tins should be RTA'd after they have been incinerated.

5.11.2. Bottles and all PVC plastic and polystyrene products should be RTA'd. PVC plastic 
can be readily identified as it is principally used for glass-clear containers for 
packaging fruit juices.

5.12.  Disposal of poultry products

5.12.1. Investigations by the Department of Agriculture suggest that Antarctic and 
sub-Antarctic penguins are at risk from infection with the disease-causing agents of 
domestic poultry.

5.12.2. Stations and re-supply vessels are required to dispose of all poultry products 
including egg powder in incinerators. It is important to ensure thorough 
incineration. Scavenging birds should not have access to poultry products or to 
incompletely burnt poultry wastes.

5.12.3. No poultry products are to be taken into the field with the exception of Traverse 
parties who should be careful to incinerate waste away from wildlife. Surplus or 
waste poultry products are to be returned to the Station for incineration.

5.13.  Sewage, bathroom and kitchen sullage

5.13.1. At Davis, human waste is incinerated by gas fired burners, the residual ash being 
dissipated into the air. Mawson and Casey have sewage treatment plants, the scum 
from which should be incinerated as the need arises. The heavy sediment or sludge 
should be RTA'd in heavy duty 200 litre drums.

5.13.2. Although unsightly at the outlet, bathroom and kitchen liquid waste does little harm 
to the environment. Future modifications will upgrade the facilities at Davis to 
incorporate sullage into the liquid waste disposal system as exists at Mawson and 
Casey.

5.14.  Chemical waste

All waste chemicals from laboratories, photographic waste, the sludge from the 
production of Hydrogen in the meteorological section and any other chemical waste 
must be RTA'd and marked for Quarantine (see Section 9). 200 litre drums loaded onto 
pallets and stacked into shipping containers is the best method subject to weight 
restraints. For cautionary notes on the use of 200L drums for RTA consult the 
Logistics Section, Antarctic Division.
5.15.  Waste oils

Oils from engine and floor sumps, flushing tanks and other sources may be re-cycled 
into the Station fuel supply or burned in the incinerator after filtering. Substances 
such as anti-freeze coolant and oil/water mixtures like that collected from workshop 
pits should be RTA'd if they cannot be safely incinerated.

5.16.  Radio-active Isotopes

Refer to Laboratory Manager, Antarctic Division for details of handling and RTA of 
radio-active materials and wastes.
14

6.  FIELD ACTIVITIES AND TRAVERSES

6.1. When engaged in field journeys away from the support services of Stations, and 
      especially if involved in interaction with wildlife, expeditioners must adhere to the 
      policies and practices of environmental care prescribed in this Manual.

6.2. Since they are less frequently visited, special care must be taken to keep field 
      campsites, huts, depots and their adjacent sites tidy to avoid dispersal of materials 
      by wind and wildlife.

6.3. The same guidelines as for Stations apply in considering waste disposal in the field. 
      Where appropriate 200L drums should be used as incinerators to dispose of burnable 
      rubbish at the site, being careful to avoid excessive pollution (see 5.9 'Combustion 
      pits'.) in the vicinity of wildlife and vegetation. The burned residues should be 
      returned to the Station or supply ship for RTA.

6.4. Waste oils from machinery and all non-burnable rubbish must be returned to the 
      Station.

6.5. Human waste should be returned to the Station for disposal by either incineration or 
      waste treatment plant. Where this is impractical, as on long traverses and some 
      remote field camps, it should be disposed of in a tide crack or crevasse or into the sea. 
      As a last resort, it should be burnt with diesel fuel in a drum.

6.6. Care must be taken in re-fuelling or working on vehicles in the field to ensure that 
      spillage of fuel or lubricants are minimized. Empty drums should be returned to the 
      Station.

6.7. Before a field party sets out, the Station Leader must ensure that the group is aware of 
      local rules and restrictions such as SPAs, SSSIs applying to the area to be visited.

6.8. When operating vehicles or walking in the field particular care should be taken to 
      avoid damage to vegetation or prominent landforms, and disturbance to wildlife, ie. 
      stop vehicles well away from sensitive areas and approach carefully on foot.

6.9. Refer also to section 8 on Air Operations.
15

7.    SHIPPING OPERATIONS

7.1.  The Voyage Leader is to ensure that passengers and crew do not dump rubbish or other 
      contaminants overboard during voyages to and from Antarctica.

7.2.  The following practices should be adopted :

      i.    no material to be loaded for later dumping at sea

      ii.   material loaded as cargo to be dumped at sea only in an emergency

      iii.  all waste plastics generated on board to be RTA'd

      iv.   all other non-biodegradable waste material generated on board to be stored for 
            RTA or later treatment at Stations

      v.    no food, untreated sewage or domestic liquid waste to be dumped closer than 12 
            nautical miles from the nearest land or ice edge

      vi.   no treated sewage to be discharged closer than 4 nautical miles from the 
            nearest land or ice edge.

7.3.  In summary, the only material to be dumped at sea from Australian chartered 
      Antarctic re-supply vessels is bio-degradable waste (including kitchen waste) under 
      the conditions in iv above. Note specifically that such material should not be 
      dumped in plastic garbage bags.

7.4.  A Waste Disposal System for the ship in keeping with these guidelines should be 
      agreed upon by the Voyage Leader and the Captain. In most cases, the ship's crew will 
      handle waste disposal during a voyage.
16

8.   AIR OPERATIONS

8.1. In order that minimal disturbance from aircraft to flora and fauna due to noise and 
     air pollution from exhaust gases occurs, maps of each Station and Field study area     
     should indicate the location of bird, seal and plant colonies and appropriate flight 
     paths.

8.2. There are several offences under the AT(EP) Act related to operating aircraft near 
     wildlife; see section 3.

8.3. Overflying colonies of animals should be avoided at all times but if it is necessary for 
     scientific purposes, the lowest altitude at which it is permitted to fly over penguin     
     colonies is 300 metres (1000 ft). In the breeding period overflying is forbidden.

8.4. Great care must be taken to confine lower flying to areas away from penguin colonies. 
     This means that counting of seals near bird colonies must be conducted on the ground 
     or from at least 300 m. altitude.

8.5. It is the responsibility of the Station and Voyage Leaders to ensure that aircrew are 
     properly briefed in this regard.

8.6. The same caution in refuelling ground vehicles applies to aircraft.
17

9.  QUARANTINE REGULATIONS
    For Antarctica, Sub-Antarctic Islands and Southern Ocean.

9.1.  All biological material, including human specimens (such as throat swabs, blood
      samples etc.), animal and plant specimens, soil, water, ice and geological samples as
      well as returned rubbish and expired food stuffs are subject to quarantine regulations
      upon entry into Australia.

9.2.  Plant material

      All plants or parts of plants, whether living or dead, as well as timber and all articles
      made of wood, which it is proposed to import into Australia are subject to quarantine
      and must be submitted to a plant quarantine officer for inspection. They may, at the
      discretion of a plant quarantine officer or as a condition on a 'Permit to Import
      Quarantinable Material', be heat treated or fumigated with Methyl Bromide. Soil is a
      prohibited import and any goods found contaminated with soil are subject to
      quarantine and will not be released until plant quarantine officers are satisfied that
      the risk is removed.

9.3.  Animal material

      Importation of animal products, parts of animals and related material is controlled
      by quarantine authorities. No animal products may be imported without a 'Permit to
      Import Quarantinable Material'.

9.4.  Other material

      Importation of water, snow surface samples, Antarctic lake water samples, and ice is
      also controlled by quarantine authorities (Department of Primary Industry). Human
      samples - blood, saliva, urine etc. also require a 'Permit to Import Quarantinable
      Material'.

9.5.  RTA Rubbish and foodstuffs

      Quarantine officers (Port Authority) require notification of the type, volume and
      Container number of all returned rubbish and foodstuffs so Quarantine entry of this
      material can be arranged. All rubbish must be separated into the following
      categories :

      ·   FOOD (tinned, bottled, boxed, including 'empty' tins)

      ·   METALS

      ·   WOOD

      ·   OILS, FUELS, OTHER LIQUIDS

      ·   OTHER MATERIALS

9.6.  Macquarie Island Samples

      Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service control the issue of Permits for
      specimens collected on Macquarie Island and their movement interstate (Interstate
      Flora/Fauna Movement Permit). The samples are still subject to quarantine
      inspection on return to Hobart. A detailed list of all biological material, including
      soil and geological samples, returned rubbish and foodstuffs, is to be forwarded by
      Antarctic Division to the Department of Agriculture whose Quarantine Inspectors
      carry out the inspection of the material.
9.7.  Quarantine Permits

9.7.1. It is the responsibility of project supervisors, museums, and individual research workers for whom, or by whom collections are to be made to obtain a 'Permit to Import Quarantinable Material'. This Permit must be obtained prior to embarkation with a copy to be sent to the Quarantine Liaison Officer, Antarctic Division who will arrange for Customs and Quarantine clearance of the samples. Collections are not to be made without a Permit.

9.7.2. Permits are issued by :         The Director of Quarantine
                                       Department of Primary Industries and Energy
                                       Australian Quarantine Service
                                       Queen Victoria Terrace Post Office
                                       A.C.T. 2606

Application forms for above Permits are obtainable from the same address.

9.7.3. It is necessary for prospective collectors to have in advance an outline of the conditions of entry under quarantine regulations for certain types of biological material. These may, in some cases, interfere with the scientific use for which certain samples are destined and therefore the collector should consult the quarantine authority in Canberra for this information.

9.7.4. The following is a sample of some of the conditions which were applicable to various 1986 collections -

    i.  Deep frozen Antarctic birds - "This material is for use at Department of Science and shall not be removed from these premises without the prior approval of the Director of Animal and Plant Quarantine".

   ii.  Emperor Penguin eggs (to be blown) - "Contents of egg to be incinerated. Eggshells to be swabbed with 5% formaldehyde solution and fumigation with formalin gas after being blown".

  iii.  Live specimens of Chitons and preserved invertebrates - "This material is for use at Museum of Victoria Dept. Invertebrate Zoology and shall not be removed from these premises without the prior approval of the Director of Animal and Plant Quarantine. Safety precautions shall be maintained during shipment and handling to prevent dissemination of pathogens".

   iv.  Living and dried mosses, dried vascular plants, peat- "Living mosses and dried mosses must be free of soil. Dried vascular plants must be subjected to heat treatment. Peat must be free of partially decomposed plant material. This material must be inspected by a Plant Pathologist on arrival and prior to release".

    v.  Herbarium specimens and pollen, soil, geological samples- "Herbarium specimens subject to fumigation of heat treatment. Soil subject to heat treatment. Rocks to be free of soil".

   vi.  Volcanic soil - "This material must be heated to 121° Celsius for 2 hours on arrival prior to export".

9.8.  Action required of expeditioners

9.8.1. In order to comply with the quarantine regulations, the Antarctic Division must be informed by Telex at least a week before departure of the ship in the case of Macquarie Island, and on the day of departure for material collected at the Continental stations, of all Human, Water, Plant, Animal, and Rubbish materials which are being brought back to Australia. A copy of this Telex must be given to the VL. The Division will then arrange for Quarantine and Customs entry of this material. Unless this notification is received by the Division before the ship reaches an Australian port the clearance of the material will be unnecessarily delayed.
19

9.8.2. The information required by the Division for this purpose is as follows:

·   Nature of specimen(s)

·   Number

·   Method of preservation

·   Proposed Destination (including name of research worker if relevant)

·   Case Markings

9.8.3. This information should be transmitted under five separate headings:

i.  Human material

ii. Water and ice

iii. Plant material

iv. Animal material

v.  Rubbish & expired foodstuff

9.8.4. A list of RTA Quarantine material is to be prepared and handed to the Deputy VL or Cargo Supervisor for each voyage. Please consider that from the telex information supplied, the amount of deep freeze and other storage space and the labour required immediately the ship arrives, must be assessed.

9.8.5. All collections must be packed for RTA in numbered crates or other containers, with a Packing Note attached outside listing the contents and proposed destination. Each crate should (if possible) contain samples in one of the five categories - human, water and ice, plant, animal, or rubbish.

N.B. When a seatainer is used for RTA of quarantine material, the seatainer should contain quarantine material only as release by customs and quarantine officers is sometimes delayed

9.8.6. In order to identify quarantine material it is to be packed in bright yellow cartons, drums or other containers with "QUARANTINE" stencilled in black around the top of flour drums, and on the sides and ends of other containers and the following numbering system used:

1. every container will be marked Q; followed by

ii. the letter H, W, P or A indicating whether it contains human, water, plant or animal material:

QH - Human

QW -Water

QP - Plants and geological specimens (soil, sand, rocks).

QA - Animal, then,

iii. the initial letter(s) of the station:

MI = Macquarie Island

C = Casey

D = Davis

M = Mawson

ED = Edgeworth-David

LB = Law Base

HI = Heard Island

CB = Commonwealth Bay

ND = Nella Dan (Marine Science).

Other field localities may be identified as required), and
iv.  numbers in sequence 1, 2, 3, etc, in which they are packed; and finally
v.  the year of collection.

9.8.7.  If the container cannot be painted yellow, a yellow adhesive 'QUARANTINE' label is      
      to be attached to it. Paint, stencils, brushes and Quarantine labels are sent to each      
      main and field Station.

9.8.9.  A separate Packing Note book is to be used solely for RTA quarantine material. A      
      Packing Note describing contents must be attached to the outside of the container.      
      Thus, for example, a crate of lichens from Davis might carry the marking      
      QP/D/14/86 and a crate of seal tissue from Casey QA/C/2/86.

9.8.10. Individual jars, boxes etc. in each container must be clearly labelled with the type of      
      specimen, preservation etc. On arrival in Australia all containers are held in bond      
      until the contents have been inspected and treated (if necessary for clearance) and can      
      be released to the Division.

9.8.11. All specimens requiring cool storage should be clearly marked "COOL ROOM DO NOT      
      FREEZE". Deep frozen samples should be marked "KEEP FROZEN". "COOL ROOM" &      
      "KEEP FROZEN" stencils have been sent to each Station. Because of limited cool      
      room and freezer space items requiring very specific temperatures must be brought to      
      the attention of the Voyage Leader, Deputy Leader and Cargo Master.

9.8.12. The Australian port of entry of quarantine material will normally be Hobart.      
      A copy of the quarantine list is sent to:                   Human Material and      
      Quarantine Inspector                  Department of Primary Industry   Water Products      
      Kir[?]sway House, Kir[?]sway Place      
      Hobart

      The Port Authority                  Plant and Animal      
      Department of Agriculture          Samples, Rubbish      
      Macquarie No. 1 Wharf              Expired Food      
      Hobart

      Where the port of entry is not Hobart, lists will be sent to appropriate authorities in      
      the relevant State.

      Where the port of entry is Hobart a copy of each of the lists will also be sent to      
      Australian Customs Service and the Shipping Agent to inform them of the arrival of      
      all material requiring release.

9.8.13. Quarantine material must not be removed from the ship until Customs and      
      Quarantine clearance has been received.  Penalties may be incurred under the      
      Quarantine Act for non-compliance with directions in relation to movement of      
      goods. The Antarctic Division will be responsible for ensuring that adequate deep      
      freeze space is available, for arranging suitable transport for the specimens from the      
      ship together with the necessary labour, and for all liaison with quarantine      
      authorities.

      All specimens belong to the Antarctic Division until cleared by Customs and      
      Quarantine authorities. Dispatch of cleared specimens will be arranged by the      
      Antarctic Division.
