TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/INF/40

REPORT OF THE BELGIAN ACTIVITIES AT ARCTOWSKI STATION,
KING GEORGE ISLAND, ANTARCTICA - SUMMER 1986-1987

Participants: Dr. Claude DE BROYER (Invertebrates Dpt), Dr.
Pierre SCHALTIN (Invertebrates Dpt), Mr. Jacques FAIRON
(Vertebrates Dpt).

Institution: Institut royal des Sciences naturelles de Belgique,
Brussels, Belgium.

Dates of stay: J. FAIRON: from December 30, 1986 to January 29,
1987. C. DE BROYER & P. SCHALTIN: December 30, 1986 to March 9,
1987.

Program: 1. "Life history and nutrition of the benthic Amphipod
Crustaceans in the Coastal Antarctic Ecosystem, Admiralty Bay,
King George Island".
2. (accessory program) Sampling of Invertebrates and
Vertebrates for the I.r.Sc.n.B. Museum of Natural History.

Results: 1. Amphipod program

After surveying the bottoms of Admiralty Bay in the vicinity of
Arctowski Station, appropriate stations and species were
selected. One littoral station (shore of Arctowski Cove, between
Bio-lab and Meteo-lab) and two transects 0-250 or 300 m were
sampled several times (Transect I: Shag Pt -  Polish Navy Pt at
15-30-80-150-300 m. Transect II: in front of the rookeries from
Rakusa Pt in the direction of Zygmund Bell at 15-30-80-250 m.

Sampling depths selected in accordance with the benthos studies

- 1 -
of Jazdzewski et al., 1986).

A total of 76  baited trap samples were taken at 26 stations as 
well as 20 Agassiz trawl or dredge samples and 13 littoral 
samples. Several tens of thousands of Amphipods were collected 
and, also, a series of representative  samples of the 
co-occuring benthos. In addition, the design of the baited trap 
sampling program allowed the study of the vertical distribution 
above the bottom of the suprabenthic Amphipods.

The species abundant enough to permit life history studies are:

- in the medio -- and infralittoral zone (0-30 m): Cheirimedon femora-
tus, Hippomedon kergueleni, Orchomenella rotundifrons, Ecn?ogeneia 
sp A & sp B, Eusiridae gen. sp., Bovallia gigantea, Jassa sp., 
Eurymera monticulosa

- in the circalittoral zone (50-80 m): Waldeckia obesa, Djerboa 
furcipes.

- in the bathyal zone (150-300 m): Abyssorchomene plebs, 
Pseudorchomene coatsi.

In addition to the Amphipod populations and co-occuring benthos 
sampling, the laboratory work permitted:

- to identify (or pre-identify) about 50 different species of 
Amphipods after preliminary sorting.

- to check the target-species population structure, particulary 
the ovigerous females component and their broods.

- to examine and to take photographs in vivo of the target-
species embryos to check the developmental stages and to 
establish a scale of these stages.

- to undertake some preliminary nutrition experiments on 
Waldeckia obesa, Abyssorchomene plebs, Cheirimedon femoratus, 
Hippomedon Kergueleni and Orchomenella rotundifrons, which are 
nevertheless to be recommenced with better aquaria system.

- To observe the burrowing behavior of the Lysianassoids in a 
morpho-functional perspective.

- 2 -
- to take photographs in vivo of most of the collected Amphipods.

2. Fauna and flora collection program

Vertebrates collected

Cetacea: A whole skeleton of Balaenoptera acutorostrata male,
      7 m (found floating dead in the bay).

Pinnipeds: 1 Leptonychotes weddelli male, 1 Lobodon carcinophagus
      male.

Birds: 42 specimens of different species mainly Pygoscelis.
      (n.b. the Belgian government will declare these catches
      according to the regulations of the Antarctic Treaty).

Fishes: demersal species.

Marine Invertebrates

Porifera (numerous), Hydrozoa and Anthozoa, Plathelminthes,
Nemertea, Nematoda, Polychaeta, Bryozoa (numerous), Brachiopoda;
Mollusca (numerous: Polyplacophora, Gastropoda, Scaphopoda,
Bivalvia, Cephalopoda); Pycnogonida; Crustacea (numerous:
Ostracoda, Mysidacea, Cumacea, Tanaidacea, Isopoda, Amphipoda,
Euphausiacea, Decapoda); Echinodermata (numerous: Crinoidea,
Asteroidea, Ophiuroidea, Echinoidea, Holothuroidea). Urochordata:
Ascidiacea.

Freshwater Crustacea: Branchiopoda and Copepoda.

Botanical samples: marine algae. Lichens, some Mosses and some
      specimens of the vascular plants Deschampsia
      antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis.

In accordance with the plans presented in the research proposal
and the preliminary results, a second summer stay at Arctowski
Station is requested to - undertake the monthly Amphipod
sampling program 1988 with the collaboration of a Polish wintering
biologist.

      - make nutrition observations and
      experiments in the laboratory as well as eco-ethological and
      distributional observations of Amphipods in the field.

      - collect data on the role of Amphipods
in the food webs.

- 3 -
