TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

ANT/XIV/INF/20

Report of the Belgian Delegation

Address to the ATCM-XIV meeting on behalf of the Chair of the
CCAMLR-Commission

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources - the CCAMLR Commission -
I wish to thank You for the invitation extended to our Chairman
to inform the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the activities of our
Commission, on the occasion of the 14th Antarctic Treaty Consulta-
tive Meeting (ATCM-XIV).

As it is the first time that such an exchange of
information takes place in this formal manner, my Delegation is
particularly pleased being charged with this responsibilities.

The origin of the Convention for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources lies with the Antarctic Treaty
Parties' concerns, when dealing in their Consultative Meetings,
with the conservation of Antarctica as a whole. The CCAMLR Conven-
tion, concluded in Canberra on the 20th of May 1980 and in force
since the 7th of April 1982, currently comprises 19 Members of
its Commission together with 4 other Acceeding States. It forms
an integral part under its own rights of what is commonly known
as the Antarctic Treaty System. This is to say that our successes
are also yours, and that your strength will also be ours.
2.

The noble task of the conservation of marine living
resources in Antarctica, taking into account their rational use,
has been entrusted with a Commission, which is assisted by a Scien-
tific Committee. The first meetings, begun in 1982, were for obvious
reasons dealing mostly with matters of internal structure and
organisation. Since 1985, however, the Commission and its Scien-
tific Committee have begun to tackle more intensively the basic
conservation issues for which they were created, and some 7 conser-
vation measures and 4 resolutions have already been adopted with
the view of preparing the ground for the long term objectives.

To date CCAMLR's achievements have been modest and
progress has been slow, but one should not forget that Antarctic
waters have been harvested for generations while concepts of scien-
tific management and conservation schemes for fisheries are of
recent date. In fact - to my knowledge - the CCAMLR-Convention
is the first and only one that tries to combine and to reconcile
two traditionally opposite goals : that is harvesting and conser-
vation. In performing its duties the Commission is almost always
breaking new ground and, in doing so, lack of precedence and expe-
rience has to be taken into account.

The Scientific Committee has already done a good
job in specifying the data it needs for its work, and further
improvements are in hand. All the Members of the Commission are
aware of the importance of this task, and of their responsibilities
in this field. It can be said that the gap is closing between
     
./.
3.

what becomes available and what is needed, and the Commission 
is moving towards formulating specific measures for specific cases,
and also towards the formulation of long term programs and strate-
gies.

I am happy to report that the spirit of cooperation
among the Members of our Commission is very high, and that the
mutual understanding of each others' problems has greatly improved
over the years. I say so, because we should not forget that this
Commission is composed of Members with differing perceptions,
and that the identification of a common starting point is not
easy : some have been traditionally associated with fishing only,
while others with conservation. In bringing both sides closer
together the Commission has indeed made significant progress.

Mr Chairman, in all matters of Antarctica and in
all our dealings with this continent Mother Nature is more than
ever perceived as a necessary Partner. This perception indeed
has been, and still is, the "raison d'être" of our Antarctic Treaty
System. The preservation of this "raison d'être" is our collective
responsibility. The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources wants to assure You of its full collabo-
ration in the implementation of this common goal.
