TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                ДOГOBOP OБ AHTAPKТИKE
                                                            XIV KOHCУЛЬТАТИВHOE COBЕЩAHИE


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 OCTOBER

ANT/XIV/W.P/8
(United States)

U.S. ANTARCTIC INSPECTIONS
U.S. ANTARCTIC INSPECTIONS

The United States places great importance on the 
inspection provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. Under 
Article VII of the Treaty, observers "shall have complete 
freedom of access at any time to any or all areas of 
Antarctica." The United States has sent observer teams to 
Antarctica eight times since the Treaty entered into 
force. It intends to continue to conduct inspections as a 
regular practice.

Inspections allow for monitoring of compliance by 
Treaty Parties with all aspects of the Treaty, including 
its arms control, nuclear and scientific research 
provisions and with the agreed recommendations adopted 
pursuant to the Treaty, including those relating to 
scientific research and logistics, environmental 
protection and special areas. They are an important 
element of U.S. Antarctic policy, because they demonstrate 
the openness and cooperation of the Treaty system, 
encourage the direct exchange of information, and permit 
one Party to learn from the experiences of another.
- 2 -

Inspections also serve as a system to alert both the
observing nation and that of the station being inspected
to potential problems or matters that need correction or
improvement.  Inspections can provide a means for the
exchange of ideas and practices among Treaty Parties whose
stations face similar problems.  In the 1985 U.S.
inspection report, for example, the sewage treatment plant
at one station is described as a model which other
countries may wish to follow.  Similarly, the report
points out several areas which warrant attention -- for
example, that hydrocarbon seepage is a problem at all
stations, and that Sites of Special Scientific Interest
and Specially Protected Areas are not well marked.  By
visiting a number of stations within a short time period,
inspection teams are in the unique position of being able
to compare efforts and activities of stations and
therefore to suggest improvements or to provide warnings
of potential problems.

Planning for a U.S. inspection begins about eighteen
months before it takes place.  Previous inspection reports
are reviewed to determine which stations have not been
visited recently.  New stations or stations which have had
new construction are accorded priority.  The nature of
activity at stations is also an important factor in
- 3 -

selecting possible sites from the overall list.  Stations
which are centers of national Antarctic effort or which
are conducting new activities rank high on the list.  In
this regard, the annual exchanges of information providen
for under the Treaty serve an important function in
helping to determine inspection priorities.

The logistical difficulties of transporting the
inspection team to the various sites also is an important
factor in determining which stations will be visited.
Unless there is capability of circumnavigating Antarctica,
the inspection teams must confine their efforts to certain
regions, such as the Antarctic Peninsula.  U.S. inspection
teams also seek to visit stations representing as wide a
cross section of Treaty Parties as possible.

Selection of the membership of the team requires
careful consideration.  It is important that at least one
team member have diplomatic experience, including complete
familiarity with the Antarctic Treaty.  Another team
member should be a competent expert in military and arms
control issues.  The team should also contain members with
scientific expertise, especially in those areas likely to
be encountered in the Antarctic, such as meterology,
glaciology, ecology, geology, physics and  oceanography.
- 4 -

The membership should also include someone familiar with
the support, construction and logistics of polar
facilities. Finally, team membership should include
persons capable in the languages of the stations to be
visited.

The types of observations which the inspection team
will carry out should be clearly defined to allow complete
coverage during the inspection.  The overall goal, as
stated in Article VII, is to "ensure the observance of the
provisions of the present Treaty . . ."  While this allows
the observers a great deal of flexibility in determining
what to observe, the United States instructs its observers
to concentrate on the following general items:

1.  Relationship of the logistic support and princinal
activities at the station to the information providen
in the annual exchanges.

2.  Matters prohibited by the Treaty, such as militarv
exercises, nuclear explosions, disposal of
radioactive waste, and weapon testing;

3.  The quantity of small arms present;
- 5 -

4. Preservation and conservation of living resources and
environmental protection (including waste treatment,
waste disposal, air and water pollution, or
disturbance of habitats through noise or
construction);

5. Observance of measures to protect historic sites,
Specially Protected Areas, and Sites of Special
Scientific Interest, as designated in recommendations
adopted at Antarctic Treaty consultative meetings;

6. Scientific research activities and equipment;

7. Logistic support and construction activities; and

8. Any new or unusual activities and/or construction.

These general items are elaborated in greater
specificity in the form of a checklist by the inspection
team. These checklists have changed over the years,
reflecting new developments and problems, as well as
greater emphasis on evolving issues. For example, with
greater numbers of visitors and increased activities on
Antarctica, greater attention now is being paid to the
impacts and environmental effects of these activities.
- 6 -

U.S. observers are also paying more attention to the 
concentration in and the cumulative impacts of activities 
in the various areas of Antarctica.

A number of other Treaty Parties have conducted 
inspections.  The United States welcomes the inspections 
by other Treaty nations, and views the inspection 
provision as one of the most important elements of the 
Treaty.  It demonstrates the openness of the Treaty system 
and fosters the unhindered exchange of information which 
is the hallmark of Antarctic cooperation.
