TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

05 - 16 October

AGENDA ITEM XI

ANT/XIV/WP/33
(New Zealand)

The following is a suggested revision of the draft
recommendation proposed by the United Kingdom in ANT/XIV/6

Non-Governmental Activities

The Representatives,

Recommend to their governments that:

(1) they adopt the Code of Practice with regard to
non-governmental activities annexed to this Recommendation;

(2) until such time as this Recommendation becomes
effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty, it should be considered, as far as is feasible,
as a guideline. At such time as it becomes effective
Recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8 shall
be deemed to have lapsed. The Statement of Accepted
Practices and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic
Treaty shall be annexed to the Code of Practice in the
Annex to this Recommendation.
- 2 -

ANNEX

CODE OF PRACTICE WITH REGARD TO NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

I

The relevant responsibilities of all Contracting Parties

The responsibilities of all Contracting Parties are:

(i) in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty,
to give notice in advance of "all expeditions to....
Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and
all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding
from its territory"

(ii) in accordance with Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, "to
exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, to the end that no one engages in any
activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles or
purposes of the present Treaty".

II

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a
non-governmental activity organized in its territory

1. The Contracting Party shall consult with the organizers of
the non-governmental activity at the earliest possible
opportunity for the purpose of discharging its obligations
under this Code of Practice.

2. As soon as possible, and in any case not later than 30 of
November, the Contracting Party shall provide such
information called for in the Annex to Recommendation
VIII-6 as is relevant to the activity in question.
- 3 -

3. Where it becomes apparent that the organizers of a non-governmental activity have approached or intended to approach another Contracting Party for assistance or advice in connection with the activity or intend to proceed to Antarctica from the territory of  another Contracting Party, or plan to visit the station of another Consultative Party, the Contracting Party in whose territory the activ ity is organized should consult with the affected Party as soon as possible provide such information about the activity as may be requested out where appropriate seek from the other party information as to the conditions upon which it would grant permission for its Antarctic stations to be visited.

4. The Contracting Party shall take appropriate steps to monitor the non-governmental activity including the use of official observers and shall circulate to Consultative Parties the reports of such monotoring.

5. The Consultative Party in whose territory a non-governmental activity is organized should inform the organizers:

(i)    of the Statement of Accepted Principles and the Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty;

(ii)   of "A Visitor's introduction to the Antarctic and its environment" prepared by the Conservation Sub-Committee of the SCAR Working Group on Biology;

(iii)  that there is no automatic right to visit stations maintained by another Consultative Party and that any approval to visit may stipulate such conditions and restrictions on the movements of visitors for their safety or to safeguard scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the station;

(iv)   that subject to approval being granted and to any applicable conditions, final arrangements to visit any station should be made with that station between twenty-four and seventy-two hours in advance of the expected time of arrival;
- 4 -

'(v) Compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic 
Treaty, Recommendations made under it including in 
particular the agreed measures on the Code of Conduct 
on Waste Disposal and any special conditions 
applicable at stations to be visited is essential 
and assurances to that effect will be required;

(vi) that the organizers of the activity will be required 
to provide to the Consultative Party in whose 
territory the activity is organized notifications and 
reports covering their proposed and actual activities 
in the Treaty Area including:

a) the name or call-sign and nationality of the ship 
or aircraft;

b) the name of the commanding officer;

c) itinerary of the ship or aircraft while in the 
Treaty Area;

d) number of persons in the ship or aircraft;

e) places and dates at which landings were made in 
the Treaty Area, the purpose for which such 
landings were made, together with the number of 
persons landed on each occasion;

(vii) that evidence of careful and thorough planning so as 
to ensure self-sufficiency in their operations and 
the safety of persons, ships and aircraft and 
adequate insurance cover against the risk of their 
incurring financial charges or material losses in 
the Antarctic Treaty Area will be expected. In this 
regard all ships should normally be ice capable 
vessels and all ships and aircraft should be 
equipped with emergency beacons and VHF and HF 
radio equipment;

(viii) that all commercial tour operators should carry tour 
guides with experience of Antarctic conditions, who 
are aware of the considerations which underlie  the 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora and Recommendations regarding the 
protection of the Antarctic environment; and

(ix) that environmental impact procedures should be 
followed and evaluators supplied well in advance of
- 5 -

the commencement of the proposed activity for submission 
to the Contracting Party;

(x)  that commercial overflight activities:

a) are likely for the forseeable future to exceed
existing capabilities for air traffic control,
communications and search and rescue in the
Antarctic;

b) may interfere with normal operational flights in
support of governmental expeditions engaged in
ongoing scientific programmes in the Antarctic;

c) may exceed the capacity of governmental Antarctic
operations to respond adequately to an unplanned
emergency landing;

(xi) that any organizers of non-governmental activity
involving the use of aircraft or helicopters should
consult with other parties conducting air operations
in the area to be visited so as to coordinate
communications, flight, information and safety
procedures.

III

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a
non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from its
territory but which is organized in the territory of another
Contracting Party.

1. If the Contracting Party from whose territory a
non-governmental activity is proceeding to Antarctica is a
Consultative Party, it should:

(i) with respect to a non-governmental activity organized
in the territory of another Consultative Party, assure
itself that the steps required of a Consultative Party
under Part II of this code have been taken and
otherwise to act in consultation with the relevant
Consultative Party in accordance with Article X of the
Antarctic Treaty, to the end that the expedition is
aware of its responsibilities;
- 6 -

(ii) with respect to a non-governmental activity organized in 
the territory of a Contracting Party which is not a 
Consultative Party, act in accordance with Part I of 
this Code and should take such practicable steps as may 
be open to it, mutatis mutandis, to give effect to Part 
II of this Code.

2. If the Contracting Party from whose territory a 
non-governmental activity is proceeding to Antarctica is not 
a Consultative Party, it should act in accordance with Part 
I of this Code.

IV

The responsibilities of a Contracting Party in respect of a 
non-governmental activity proceeding to the Antarctic from its 
territory but which is organized in the territory of a State 
which is not a Contracting Party.

1. If the Contracting Party concerned is a Consultative Party 
it should act in accordance with Part I of this Code and 
should take such practicable steps as may be open to it, 
mutatis mutandis, to give effect to Part II of this Code.

2. If the Contracting Party concerned is not a Consultative 
Party its responsibility is to act in accordance with 
Part I of this Code.

V

The responsibilities of the organizers of a non-governmental 
activity  in  the  planning phase and while in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area.

1. Such activities are to be self-sufficient in all respects.

2. They should comply with the provisions of the Antarctic 
Treaty system as contained in the Antarctic Treaty itself, 
Recommendations made under it and associated instruments.
- 7 -

3. They should comply with any conditions or restrictions on their movements on the ground or in the air which a station commander of a station maintained by a Consultative Party may stipulate for their safety or to safeguard scientific programmes being undertaken at or near the station.

ANNEX

(Statement of Accepted Practices and Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty).
