TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE




RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 October

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/WP/17
(AUSTRALIA)

ITEM 9

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENTS

(Working Paper submitted by the Australian delegation)

Paper may be made publically available at the
conclusion of the meeting
- 2 -

INTRODUCTION:

1. Australia believes that the issues the Report of the SCAR ad hoc Group on Additional Protective Measures addresses require the urgent and serious attention of this meeting, both in order to properly meet our responsibilities under Article IX of the Treaty, and to respond to international concern over the adequacy of our care for the Antarctic environment.

2. The recommendations of the Report are based on the Group's conclusion that "the existing system of protected areas in the Antarctic does not now fully serve the objectives of conservation of the Antarctic environment, its fauna and flora".

3. The deficiencies of the existing system are discussed in appendix 5 to the Report. Briefly, they are that it does not:
      - include representative examples of all Antarctic ecosystems;
      - include provision for determining if the objectives for which sites are designated are being met;
      - have sufficient scope to enable the protection of areas of other than biological or scientific value.

4. The recommendations are intended to offer practical solutions to redress these deficiencies, while at the same time preserving the freedom of research for scientific purposes embodied in the Treaty.

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SCAR REPORT

5. The first recommendation is "that the existing and proposed provisions for Antarctic conservation should be subject to periodic assessment (including site visits) to determine whether the objectives of conservation are being achieved, and the extent to which the existing regulations are being observed".

6. Australia believes that this should be done initially by nations reporting on all designated sites within their area of
- 3 -

operation in a format that could be determined by this meeting.
These reports should then be reviewed by ATCM XV or an expert
group acting on behalf of Treaty Parties, to enable the
assessment recommended by SCAR to be made.

7.  If the review process reveals that there are deficiencies
in particular cases, either in the conservation measures
applied, or the way they are applied, it should be determined
what action is necessary to remedy the deficiency. The
undertaking of this action and the effect it has on the
effectiveness of the particular conservation measure should
then also be the subject of report and review.

8.  Following this process, which should enable a base level
of information on the status of protected areas in the
Antarctic to be compiled, a regular process of reporting,
through annual exchanges of information, and review by ATCM's
or an expert group, should be introduced to ensure the
continuing effectiveness of protection through designation of
areas.

9.  The second recommendation is that "information arising
from such assessments, or in the course of carrying out
scientific research, should be freely available to those
concerned with conservation issues".

10. Initially, this could be provided for by the information
collected, and reviews made as a result of the assessment
process suggested above, being published, either through
SCAR, or as an annex to the report of ATCM XV. In the longer
term, the issue of storage and accessibility of such information
is being addressed by SCAR in response to ATCM XIII-5 (ii).
Their response will be considered at ATCM XV.

11. The third recommendation is that "a management plan for
each existing and all future specially protected areas should
be prepared and agreed".
- 4 -

12. Australia believes that this should be implemented by this meeting by the development of a recommendation which provides for the drafting of a management plan for each existing SPA to be included in Article VIII of the Agreed Measures. Similarly a management plan should be included as part of proposals for SPA's in the future. The management plans would have, as their main purpose the specification of what activity would be acceptable within the SPA which will clarify and refine the management measures inherent in the current definition of SPAs. They could be presented in a form parallel to that required for SSS's.

13. Currently all that is required for SPAs is a description of the site (including a map) and the reason for designation in terms either of Article VIII (i) of the Agreed Measures or of the criteria listed in ATCM VII-2 (i). Australia believes the management plan should also include:

    i) a summary of human activities (including scientific research) which have been,are being, or are planned to be conducted in the area.

    ii) points of access and pedestrian routes within the SPA which would not adversely affect the value for which the area is designated.

   iii) compelling scientific purposes for which entry to the SPA would be acceptable.

   iv) actions in pursuit of the purposes described in iii) above, which would not adversely affect the natural ecological system existing in the SPA.

14. There will be considerable overlap in the work required to develop such management plans, and in preparing the reports on designated sites discussed above.
- 5 -

15. The fourth recommendation is that "Consultative Parties
take measures to encourage the submission of proposals for
additional protected areas to provide for geographically
distributed representative examples of all Antarctic
terrestrial, inland water and marine ecosystems". The
recommendation refers also to ATCM VIII-2 and to the ecosystem
classification matrices developed by SCAR.

16. Australia believes that this recommendation should be
implemented by a recommendation of this meeting encouraging
parties to develop proposals for protected areas which are
examples of those ecosystems of the SCAR classification matrices
not so far included in the series of protected areas under the
Treaty system. The meeting should also request SCAR to develop a
list of priorities of ecosystem types for inclusion in the system
of Antarctic protected areas for consideration at ATCM XV.

17. The fifth recommendation is that "a new category of
protected area be introduced to the system while retaining
the present categories". The report provides some detail on
the objective of such a category, the criteria for designation,
the sorts of protective measures which might be applied within
the area, and the format for presentation and means of
assessment of proposals.

18. Australia remains convinced of the need for, and the
utility of such an additional category of protected area,
which extends the range of values able to be protected, and
allows for multiple land use within areas. Australia believes
that it should be introduced as soon as possible to enable
the deficiencies identified by the Report to be remedied.
To this end, a paper has been submitted giving examples of
how the APA category might be applied. However Australia
recognizes that the concept is not yet fully developed or
understood. Given this, the most appropriate way to address
the recommendation might be for this meeting to recommend
that proposals for protected areas be prepared following
the guidelines given in the Report. This process would
further develop and clarify the concept of the Antarctic
- 6 -

Protected Area. Such proposals could be discussed at SCAR XX 
with the aim of enabling the category of Antarctic Protected 
Area and the first APAs to be formally accepted at ATCM XV.
