TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05 - 16 October


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/WP/27/REV 1

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
submitted by
the United States and New Zealand

Safeguards for Scientific Drilling

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations VIII-13, IX-5, X-7 and XII-3;

Recognizing the knowledge of the tectonic, geochemical and climatic evolution of the Antarctic region that can be obtained from Scientific Drilling;

Bearing in mind the potential risk to the Antarctic environment in cases where such drilling could result in hydrocarbons being released into the Antarctic environment;

Conscious of the need for adequate preparation and planning of such drilling to ensure the best possible scientific results and protection of the Antarctic environment;

Conscious also that planning such drilling will require preparation of a Comprehensive Environmental Impact Evaluation as described in section  of this Report;

Recommend to their Governments that they adopt and use the following Guidelines to assist in evaluating and avoiding the potential risk for significant adverse environmental impacts resulting from such drilling.
- 2 -

Guidelines for Scientific Drilling in the Antarctic Treaty Area

1. Before undertaking any scientific drilling that may have significant adverse environmental effects, adequately detailed geophysical surveys shall be performed of the sites in question to enable any potential hazard associated with any specific drill site within the area of interest to be evaluated along with any other information available about that particular site.

2. All feasible precautions shall be taken to locate drill sites offstructure to reduce the possibility of encountering hydrocarbons.

3. Such planned drill sites and operational drilling plans, including the geophysical survey results and other information, shall be reviewed by a body of appropriate experts to identify potential hazards and to assess the potential risk to the environment resulting from the proposed drilling and how those risks can be minimized.

4. If any significant potential hazard is identified which cannot be avoided by modifying the planned drilling procedure or equipment, the location of the proposed drill site shall be abandoned and any recommendations of the reviewing body shall be considered in connection with the choice of an alternative site.

5. Contingency plans shall be prepared to deal with any problems that may develop during the drilling process.

6. The drilling process shall be continuously monitored for potential hazards and necessary action shall be taken if problems occur.
- 3 -

7. Notification shall be provided to the responsible national
agency by those conducting drilling operations of all
hazards encountered, including the location of the site
at which they were identified, and a description of the
actions taken.
