TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                              ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                         XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                         ДOГOBOP OБ AHTAPKТИKE
                                                         XIV KOHCYЛЬTATИBHOE COBEЩAHИE

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

5-16 October

ANT/XIV/WP/3
5 October 1987
United States

OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM:

MATTERS ARISING UNDER ARTICLE IX OF THE TREATY
1

Article IX, 2. of the Antarctic Treaty provides that:

Each Contracting Party which has become a party to 
the present Treaty by accession under Article XIII 
shall be entitled to appoint representatives to 
participate in the meetings referred to in paragraph 
1 of the present Article, during such times as that 
Contracting Party demonstrates its interest in 
Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific research 
activity there, such as the establishment of a scientific 
station or the dispatch of a scientific expedition.

The First Special Consultative Meeting in 1977 
established procedures for the implementation of this provision. 
These procedures set forth a method for considering a notification 
by an acceding Party that it considered itself entitled to  be 
a Consultative Party.  They did not elaborate specific guidance 
to the acceding party on preparing its notification.

In light of the interest of a number of acceding parties 
in becoming Consultative Parties, the United States believes that 
it would be useful for the 14th Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting to discuss guidance such as guidelines for the preparation 
of notifications on Consultative Party status.  Such guidance or 
guidelines would not be intended as an interpretation of Article 
IX, 2.  They would, however, assist the acceding Party  in 
preparing its notification and providing relevant information, 
and they would also assist the Consultative Parties in carrying 
out their responsibilities under the agreed procedures, i.e., 
in determining whether there is a commitment to substantial 
scientific research activity in Antarctica.  To this end,  the 
United States believes that an acceding Party's provision of 
"information concerning its activities in the Antarctic,  in 
particular the content and objectives of its scientific program", 
pursuant to the procedures would be facilitated if guidance or 
guidelines were adopted.
2

It may be noted that at its Fourth Meeting, the 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources adopted "Guidelines for Acceding States Seeking to 
become Members of the Commission" substantially along these 
lines.  The United States envisions that the guidance or 
guidelines proposed could be adopted as part of the 
report of the 14th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

With respect to the second issue, the United States, 
in its capacity as Treaty Depositary, has noted that there 
have been increasingly longer delays in ATCM recommendations 
becoming effective.  Evidence of this is the fact that no 
recommendations since the Eleventh ATCM have become effective 
and only recently have those of the Tenth ATCM (but not all) 
become effective.  It may be expected that this trend will 
continue in light of the increasing number of Consultative 
Parties.

Moreover, many adopted recommendations have and 
continue to be overtaken by events prior to their becoming 
effective.  A good example of this phenomenon is the routine 
requests to SCAR for advice for purposes of the next Consultative 
Meeting.  Many more examples can be provided.  This situation 
of course would be accentuated if the Treaty were to go to 
Annual meetings.  Thus, the United States believes that it 
would be beneficial for the Fourteenth ATCM to examine this 
issue with a view to consideration of whether in the future, 
ATCMs could make greater use of the reports of the meetings 
to reflect decisions of a more routine and less legally and 
politically significant nature, as well as those issues 
requiring more expeditious action.  Such an approach would not 
rule out the later adoption of a recommendation as appropriate 
to memorialize a decision.
3

The United States believes that an additional item 
on "Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Matters arising 
under Article IX of the Treaty" should be added to the agenda 
of the Fourteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This 
agenda item would encompass two separate issues.

The first concerns discussion and possible adoption 
of guidance, such as guidelines to assist Contracting Parties 
in their preparation of notifications with respect to 
Consultative Party status.  The second concerns an examination 
of ATCM practice with respect to using Recommendations to 
record decisions of ATCMs.

Finally, as part of this examination, the United 
States believes that it would be useful if ATCPs came prepared 
to discuss the procedure by which they approve adopted 
Recommendations.
