TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                            1987                  XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


05-16 OCTOBER

                                                            ATCM/XIV/W.P/12

Item 6: Operation of the Antarctic Treaty
System  : an Antarctic Treaty Infrastructure

DISCUSSION PAPER SUBMITTED BY
THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA

No public release envisaged before ATCM XV
The purpose of this paper is to offer an Australian view on 
the question of creating some sort of permanent infrastructure for 
the Antarctic Treaty, and to suggest a follow-up process to carry 
matters forward.

At the Preparatory Meeting for the XIV th Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, the Delegation of Norway circulated a 
valuable Discussion paper (XIV ATCM/PREP/004) which, following up 
discussion at ATCM XIII concluded that some sort of permanent 
infrastructure was important to the future of the Antarctic Treaty 
System (ATS).

Australia considers that there is an urgent need to consider 
the establishment of a small and cost-effective secretariat to act 
as a servant to the Treaty Parties.  This would significantly 
assist in improving the effectiveness of the Consultative Meeting 
process and in strengthening the Treaty system against outside 
challenge.

Amongst the factors which have led Australia to support a 
small secretariat is our overall experience since the inception 
of the Treaty.  We were among those who participated in the 
negotiation of the Treaty and the original signatories.

Australia has hosted two Consultative Meetings, the first one 
in 1961 and again in 1983.  In fact the experience in 1983 led us 
to conclude that the current arrangemert of responsibility for 
secretariat work, rotating with the host country, could no longer 
be sustained.  It had become too much of a burden to handle on a 
part-time basis by officials who were already fully occupied with 
normal national duties.

In this respect it is important that our arrangements for 
continuity between Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings take due 
account of the pressures on the ATS which have been brought about 
by the expanding level of activity in the Antarctic, and the 
increasing variety and complexity of issues which Treaty Parties 
have to deal with.

Such arrangements should enable the host country of the 
day to exercise proper control and supervision on behalf of Treaty 
Parties, without having to commit scarce national resources on 
what are matters of important but routine Treaty business.  These 
matters are most appropriately delegated to a small body which 
can build up expertise in the continuous discharge of thesefunctions.

Further, Australia's involvement at the UN in New York, 
working with other Antarctic Treaty parties in the common task of 
defending the Treaty against outside challenge, has led us to 
believe that a small but visible permanent infrastructure would 
add to the transparency of the ATS by serving as a central point 
of contact, and a clearing house for exchanges of information with 
outside bodies such as the U N.
The experience of CCAMLR has shown that with foresight and planning a small Secretariat can carry out its functions in a cost-effective manner while at all times under the control of (in this case) the Commission Members.  The staffing level of the small CCAMLR Secretariat has remained unchanged for the past five years since its establishment.  Structural possibilities for any infrastruct?re need further consideration, but as has been suggested to us one possibility might be some sort of common servicing arrangement with  CCAMLR, although this would need to emphasise the specific identity, functions and status of any Treaty infrastructure.

To ensure that any Treaty Secretariat serves the interests of the Treaty Parties exactly as we would want in to, it will be necessary first to define its organisation and functions.  In order to facilitate proper consideration of these important matters, we support the need for the XIVth Consultative Meeting to:

a) agree in principle to establish an appropriate Treaty infrastructure as soon as possible; and

b) convene a Special Consultative Meeting in 1988 to consider in detail the establishment of a permanent Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

To this end, the Government of Australia is prepared to offer to host a Special Consultative Meeting in 1988.  This offer would include provision of secretariat  and other support.
