TRATADG ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                 XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                 XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 October  1987

ANT/XIV/WP/13.
(New Zealand)

AGENDA ITEM 13

HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS
Historic monuments are an important part of the record 
of human activity in Antarctica, which is the only continent 
in which the original buildings constructed for human habita-
tion still stand.  These buildings contain priceless relics 
and records of early exploration and are museums in their own 
right that are of great value to historians, archeologists and 
visitors.

Since the early days of the Antarctic Treaty, the Consul-
tative Parties have recognised the need to preserve and protect 
such monuments. There have been regular consultations on 
methods of restoration and preservation to ensure the survival 
of recognised historic monuments.

Recommendations V-4 and VI-14 provided for the listing 
of historic monuments and for each such monument to be marked 
appropriately with a notice in the four official languages of 
the Antarctic Treaty that the monument is scheduled for preser-
vation in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Recommendation VII-9 listed the monuments that had 
been identified and described by the proposing government or 
governments.

To date, however, no reference has been made to specific 
methods of preserving or protecting the monuments or to de-
limiting the areas around the monuments to ensure against 
damage arising out of human activity.

Most historic monuments are located in the more accessi-
ble areas of Antarctica, which are also the areas of greatest 
scientific and logistic activity.  The monuments, particularly 
historic buildings, are vulnerable to damage arising out of 
human activity.  Among the threats to the monuments are the 
risk of fire, damage from the movement of vehicles and 
incidental damage from visitors who have been known to take 
souvenirs or otherwise to interfere with the monuments.

Given the increasing scale and intensity of human 
activities in Antarctica it is almost inevitable that buildings, 
tombs and other objects of historic interest will increasingly 
be at risk.  Certain steps can be taken at the national level 
to ameliorate the risks of damage, but the best protection is 
through the collective action of the Treaty parties.
It is proposed, therefore, that the Fourteenth Consultative Meeting consider the adoption of measures to give greater protection to historic monuments.  Among such measures would be to provide for the delineation of bounderies around the monuments in order to create protective buffer zones.  The size and management of such zones would vary according to need and would require consideration on a case by case basis.

Accordingly, the following draft recommendation is put forward for the consideration of the Consultative Meeting:

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-9, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16,

Noting the increased scale and intensity of activities in Antarctica, particularly in areas in which historic monuments are located,

Considering the need to ensure that the fullest possible protection is provided for the protection and long term preservation of historic monuments,

Recommend to their Governments that

1. They undertake a survey of those historic monuments they originally proposed and consider the advantages of defining limited areas around the monuments in order to provide additional protection.

2. They propose appropriate details of such areas for consideration at the XVth Consultative Meeting.
