TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV-REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

(5-16 October 1987 )

ATCM/XIV/W.P/14

The working paper submitted by the
USSR delegation

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF MARINE HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
TO NAVIGATION IN THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

ORIGINAL:RUSSIAN
INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF MARINE HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL 
SERVICES TO NAVIGATION IN THE SOUTHERN 
OCEAN 

1. Broadening and deepening of programmes of research of natural 
processes in the Antarctic, the study of the role and place of 
these processes in the climatic system of the Earth, prospects of 
exploitation of biological and mineral Antarctic resources are 
closely related to the intensification of the navigation in the 
Antarctic zone of the Southern Ocean. Utilization of high latitude 
routes linking South America, Africa, Australia and New Zealand, 
( currently not recommended for commercial shipping ) will obviously 
give substantial economic benefits. Effective implementation of 
these measures is possible provided there is a further development 
and expansion of the system of marine hydrometeorological services 
to the navigation in the antarctic waters.

2. Existing national and international Antarctic Programmes are 
somewhat faulty in lacking clearly enough formulated directions of 
international coordination and cooperation in the field of marine 
hydrometeorological services to the shipping in the Antarctic Zone 
of the Southern Ocean, (Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean is an 
area extending southward from 60°S to the coasts of Antarctica). 
Recent events such as sinking of the R/V GOTTLAND II ( FRG ) in 
December 1981 in the area of the Balleny Islands Ice Massif*, a 

* Ice Massif - a concentration of sea ice covering hundreds of 
square kilometers, which is found in the same 
region every summer.(WMO Sea Ice Nomenclature, WMO 
TP.145, 1970).
- 2 -

forced three-month drift of the REV MIKHAIL SOMOV ( USSR ) in the 
winter of 1985 in the area of the Pacific Ocean Ice Massif, an 
incident with the NELLA-DAN ( Australia ) in the vicinity of the 
Bunger Hills in the austral summer of 1986-1987 and other similar 
events demonstrate clearly the utmost danger of antarctic sea ice 
for ships of all types at the present stage of shipping.

3. Putting into effect constructive international measures in 
the Antarctic aimed at further improvement of human life protecting 
at sea and at safe navigation as well as its higher efficiency 
is possible only when a modern uniform international system of marine 
hydrometeorological services to navigation in the Southern Ocean is 
established. All nations - parties to the Antarctic Treaty are using 
their national techniques and procedures of hydrometeorological 
services to shipping in antarctic ice infested waters. To combine 
them all into a single international system  is a timely task. This 
will greatly promote planning and more efficient implementation 
of marine operations in the Antarctic by each country and by the 
international community as a whole.

4. Main objectives and goals of a uniform international system 
of marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in the 
Southern Ocean involve:

    4.1 Timely warnings to users of dangerous and emergency 
meteorological, hydrological and sea ice conditions to allow them 
to take actions preventing possible damage these events might 
otherwise inflict.

    4.2 Providing users with hydrometeorological and sea ice 
forecasts and messages on the real time and expected state of natural 
conditions to be taken into account in planning and shipping 
operations.
- 3 -

4.3 Providing users with advice and recommendations as how to
tackle real time and expected hydrological,meteorological and
sea ice conditions.

5. Such a system might be established in stages, comprising
scientific, technical and organizational measures in the framework
of international cooperation. Probably this uniform international
system of marine hydrometeorological services to the navigation
in the Southern Ocean should be based on the following principles:

5.1 - division of the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean
into areas of responsibility of marine hydrometeorological services t
to navigation. Appendix I illustrates a possible approach to such a
division;

5.2 - appointment of regional hydrometeorological centers
responsible for the services within a zone,(e.g. Marambia,
Molodezhnaya, McMurdo Stations for the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific
zones respectively).These stations are proposed as regional
antarctic hydrometeorological centers on the grounds that they
have already carried out coordinating activity involving collection
and dissemination of Antarctic meteorological data ( para. 4.4 of
the Final Report of the 4-th Session of the WMO EC Working Group on
Meteorology ( Geneva,1-5 September 1986 ). This Final Report was
distributed by the UK Delegation at the Preparatory Meeting of the
XIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as Information Paper,
XIV ATCM/Prep/007).

5.3 - enthrusting of each regional center with a task of
providing free hydrometeorological and sea ice services to ships
belonging to countries - parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
- 4 -

5.4 - participation of representatives of each regional center 
in operations of other regional centers of marine hydrometeorological 
services similarly to exchange scientist principle.

6. As a first step to establishment of the proposed system it 
seems reasonable to invite the WMO to broaden the terms of reference 
of the WMO EC WG on Antarctic Meteorology, including in them the 
tasks of developing marine hydrometeorological services to the 
navigation in the Southern Ocean and to invite SCAR to nominate 
their experts to work in the Working Group. Such joint WMO/SCAR 
Working Group might have additional terms of reference including:

6.1 Development of structural and functional models of a 
uniform international system of marine hydrometeorological servies 
to navigation in the Southern Ocean. The proposals of the 4-th 
Session of the WMO EC WG on Antarctic Meteorology ( Geneva, 1-5 
September 1986 ) together with the changes and additions made at the 
X-th Congress of the WMO ( May 1987 ) can be taken as the basis for 
the development of models.

6.2 Determination of the content, type, volume and quality of 
real time ! hydrometeorological information to be exchanged for the 
purposes of hydrometeorological services to the navigation.

6.3 Development of recommendations for the modification of 
techniques of forecasts and predictions of marine hydrometeorological 
and sea ice conditions in the Antarctic, for establishment of 
information banks on hydrometeorological and sea ice regimes of 
the south polar area, for preparation and publication of appropriate 
handbooks, guidance materials on the hydrometeorological regime of 
the area. Handbook for Marine Hydrometeorological Services to 
Navigation in the Southern Ocean could be one of these, its possible
- 5 -

structure is given in Appendix 2.

6.4 Development of proposals on the implementation of a uniform 
international system of marine hydrometeorological services to 
navigation in the Southern Ocean and of the plan of action for 
making it operational.

7. As follows from the foregoing ( Items 1-6 ) Draft Recommendation 
of the XIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is proposed for the 
discussion under Agenda Item 15 "International System of Marine 
Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern Ocean"
(Appendix 3).
Appendix 1.

Proposed zones of hydrometeorological services to 
navigation.

Note: The Antarctic Stations are shown as of the winter of 
1986 (SCAR Bulletin, No84, 1986).
APPENDIX 2.

SEA ICE NAVIGATION IN THE SOUTHERN OCEAN
( Draft contents of a handbook)

P r e f a c e : goals and objectives of the publication,
the scope of its usage.

1. Description of navigation conditions in the Southern Ocean
   1.1 Physiographic
   1.2 Hydrological and meteorological
   1.3 Sea Ice
   1.4 Ship routing

2. Regular features of spatial and temporal distribution of
hydrological, meteorological and sea ice conditions of
ship routing.
   2.1 Pressure systems, their trajectories and development,
their effects on weather conditions
   2.2 Areas of storm waves
   2.3 Characterization of antarctic sea ice and its spatial
and temporal variations
      2.3.1 Pack ice
      2.3.2 Ice massifs and zones of their divergence
      2.3.3 Fast ice
      2.3.4 Polynyas
      2.3.5 Icebergs

3. Assessment and consideration of hydrometeorological and sea
sea conditions in planning and ship routing operations.
   3.1 Hydrometeorological conditions
   3.2 Sea ice conditions
App. 2. p.2

3.2.1 Quantitative indicators of sea ice effects on ship routing
3.2.2 Types of marine operations
3.2.3 Classification of sea ice conditions of ship routing.
3.3 Location of optimal ship routes and recommended navigation time.
3.4 Recommendations for cargo operations at the Antarctic Coast.
3.5 Techniques of calculation of loading capacity of sea ice.

4. Established international practices of hydrometeorological services to ship routing.
4.1 Sources of hydrometeorological and sea ice information
4.2 Volume and types of information provided to users
4.3 Principles of the usage of real-time and forecasted information by users

5. The list of recommended reference materials for hydrometeorological services to ship routing in the Southern Ocean:
atlases, handbooks, reference-books,and similar publications.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 APPENDIX 3.

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Agenda Item 15: International System of Marine
Hydrometeorological Services to
Navigation in the Southern Ocean

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations
relating to co-operation with regard to Antarctic logistics
( II-V,III-3,IV-25) and Antarctic meteorology and telecommunication
( 1-II,II-3, III-5,IV-26,V-2,VI-1, VI-3, VII-7,IX-3,X-3,XII-1,
XII-2)

Aware of numerous cases when ships have been beset in Antarctic sea
ice for long periods

Aware of increasing interest in the science and operational relevance
of antarctic meteorology and sea ice studies on the part of the
WMO and SCAR as indicated by known research projects of these
international bodies,

- of advances in the satellite monitoring of hydrometeorological
and sea ice conditions in the south polar area, and of improving
quality, realiability and content of their forecasts and pre-
dictions

- of the strides that have been made in predicting optimal ship
routings with respect to hydrometeorological and sea ice
conditions on ship routing

Considering advances in telecommunication and exchange of hydro-
meteorological and sea ice information

Desiring to apply the benefits of these developments for the provi-
sion of users with necessary and sufficiently complete regime-
reference, real time and predicted data on weather, sea ice
APPEN. 3, p.2

and sea-state conditions as well as with optimal ship routings
in the Southern Ocean ( particularly in the sea ice zone) with
a view of further increase of effectiveness and safety of
navigation

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They cooperate towards the development of a uniform international
(co-ordinated) system of Marine Hydrometeorological Services to
Navigation, towards improvement of weather, sea-state and sea ice
forecasting methods for higher safety and effectiveness of ship
routing in the Southern Ocean;

2. They invite WMO and SCAR ( through their Permanent Representati-
ves and their National Antarctic Committees, respectively) as a
first step toward the development of a uniform international
system of marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in
the Southern Ocean to consider a possibilty of inviting appropriate
SCAR experts to the WMO EC Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology
as well as representatives of the WMO CMM Working Groups on Marine
Meteorological Services and Sea Ice and also to broaden the terms
of reference of the enlarged Working Group to include tasks of
hydrometeorological and sea ice services to ship routing in the
Southern Ocean

- to hold a meeting of the foresaid Working Group in the second
half of 1989 in Leningrad together with an international WMO/SCAR
Workshop on the Hydrometeorological Services to the Navigation in
the Southern Ocean. To ask the host-country to invite leading
experts of countries concerned to participate in the Workshop
in their personal capacity.
