TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                        ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987




ANT/XIV/WP/15

(Germany, Federal Republic of)

AGENDA ITEM 14

AIR SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA
- 2 -

Air Safety in Antarctica

Increasing air activity in Antarctica and its consequences for air safety prompted the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany to propose that the question of air s a f e t y be put on the agenda for the 14th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The reasons have already been set out in Working paper XIV ATCM/Prep/015.

At present there is no air space surveillance and no general air safety advice in the Antarctic. The present procedure for flight operations in Antarctic regions consists of obtaining information on weather conditions and landing and approach modalities at the place of destination and of notifying the station of destination by radio about the proposed flight. During the flight radio contact with the airfield of departure and the airfield of destination is maintained as far as possible. Different freqeunges are used for this purpose. Normally, there is no co-ordination of air movements by other ATC countries in the same area of operations. If there is no manned station at the destination no information is available on air conditions there.

In view of the increasing air activity of both programme operators and non-governmental operators, and in view of the growing risk of accidents, the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany propose the adoption of guidelines to reduce the hazards.

In addition to improvements in the present rudimentary measures for safe-guarding flight operations through radio contact with the the agencies and stations concerned, the following steps would appear necessary:

1.      A general assessment of air operation in the Antarctic embracing the types of aircraft, range, technical and safety equipment and their principal areas of operation used by the ATC countries or non-governmental operators.

2.      A general assessment of landing facilities which provides
- 3 -

information on existing facilities for safe flight operations 
(e.g. position of runways, service facilities, approach and 
landing aids).

3.  Early mutual information on proposed operations.

4.  To ensure the medium-term safety of air operations, the 
introduction of satellite radio equipment as well as agreement 
on fixed radio frequencies and standardized weather consultancy.

5.  Search and rescue operations should be co-ordinated among the 
ATC countries as soon as possible and specially determined 
radio frequences used during such operations.

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany propose that the 
development of specific guidelines in this direction be considered 
whose observance might already be recommended for a transitional 
period.  At any rate, it proposes the appointment of a working group, 
perhaps on the basis of recommendation IV-24, to study the questions 
arising in this connection.
