TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  4O[?]OBOP OБ AHTAPK[?]ИКE
                                                            XIV KO[?]CУЛЬ[?]A[?]ИBHOE COBEЩAH[?]E

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

5-16 October

                                                            ANT/XIV/WP/4
                                                            5 October 1987
                                                            United Kingdom

                                                            
ITEM    14

OPERATIONAL SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA

(Working paper submitted by the United Kingdom Delegation)
OPERATIONAL SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA

Introduction

1. Two agenda items, No 14 (Air Safety in Antarctica) and No 15
(International system of Marine Hydrometeorological Services to
Navigation in the Southern Ocean), suggest that the question of
operational safety in Antarctica is a matter of current concern
among the Consultative Parties. Given the increasing level of
scientific and tourist activity it is proper that such matters
should now be discussed, with a view to developing co-ordinated and
comprehensive measures for the safety and survival of personnel
working in and visiting Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  It is
suggested, however, that before committing themselves to definitive
measures to deal with particular aspects of operational safety, the
Consultative Parties should first consider a broader framework
within which such measures might be set.

2. Recommendation I-X about assistance in emergencies, states that:

The Representatives reaffirm the traditional Antarctic
principle, that expeditions render all assistance feasible in
the event of an emergency request for help and recommend to
their Governments that consideration should be given to
arranging consultations among them, and to the matter being
discussed at the appropriate time at any meeting of experts
qualified to discuss it.

The United Kingdom proposes that action should be taken in
accordance with the second part of this Recommendation.  Pending
decisions about definitive measures, the United Kingdom also
proposes that a provisional code of practice be adopted.  It is of
particular concern that within the broader context of operational
safety in Antarctica, appropriate provision should be made forthwith
for increasing the safety of Antarctica air operations.

/Background
Background

3. Weather, sea-ice and terrain have claimed many lives since man first set foot in Antarctica.  The risk to life has been compounded by the remoteness and inaccessibility of areas of the continent where activity is now penetrating.  Yet improvements in meteorological reporting, telecommunications, air capability and co-operation achieved by the Consultative Parties under the Antarctic Treaty, provide a basis for meeting these challenges. Irrespective of whether an emergency arises from governmental or non-governmental activity, the aim should be to ensure that the traditional Antarctic principle of mutual assistance can be served at all times with the minimum of disruption to other Antarctic activities.

4. At its most fundamental level operational safety is about the avoidance of accidents and ensuring the survival of personnel should an accident occur.  Avoidance requires that personnel are appropriately trained and equipped, that inherent risks are taken into account in the planning of operations, and that information necessary for drawing up such plans and against which risks can be measured is available to the operator (which in the context of this paper is intended to embrace any person, organisation or group responsible for Antarctic activity).  Survival requires that personnel are provided with the means to endure non-fatal accidents until a timely search and rescue mission has recovered them.  Given the special circumstances existing in Antarctica there is considerable advantage in framing operational safety and search and rescue procedures in such a way as to embrace land, sea and air expeditions within a single code of practice.  Such procedures should be appropriate both to Antarctica and to the Antarctic Treaty System.

5. It has to be accepted that operations in the Antarctic involve the taking of risks and that, irrespective of how well activities are prepared and carried out, accidents and emergencies will continue to occur in such a hostile and unpredictable environment. Captain Scott wrote "We took risks, we knew we took them; things have come out against us, and therefore we have no cause for

/complaint
complaint....".  He was writing for himself and his party.  The risks he took involved no-one else.  But that is not now the situation. 
Accidents and emergencies will often involve the personnel and facilities of other operators, with a consequent dislocation of 
other activities and possible risk to other personnel.  Safety and rescue procedures should be as much a community issue in Antarctica 
as they are at sea and in the air elsewhere in the world.  In present circumstances it is important to have properly established 
and recognised search and rescue procedures relevant to the Antarctic that can be rapidly and effectively instituted, whilst 
making the most efficient, ie the most effective and the least disruptive, use of the resources available.  Such a system would be 
in the best traditions and the spirit of co-operation that exists within the Treaty System.

A Code of Practice

6.  The drafting of a code of practice for the safe conduct of operations in Antarctica and for an Antarctic search and rescue 
(SAR) system is a necessarily complex matter requiring expert knowledge.  It is suggested that consideration should be given to 
the convening of a meeting of experts under the provisions of Recommendation IV-24 charged with preparing a study of these matters 
and with elaborating a draft operational Code of Practice for Antarctic operations and search and rescue (SAR) procedures.  The 
report of the meeting should be presented to the following Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

7.  The United Kingdom has drafted what it sees as a set of elements that should, in all probability, appear in such a Code of Practice. 
It is proposed that Consultative Parties should (a) operate these elements on a provisional basis pending the adoption of definitive 
measures and (b) use them in the preparation of an agenda for the proposed meeting of experts.

/Elements
Elements of a Code of Practice for Antarctic Operations and for the
Co-ordination of Search and Rescue Procedures in Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean

1. Avoidance

    (i) operators responsible for Antarctica activities to take all
practicable measures to provide for the safety and well-being of
personnel within a reasonable doctrine of self-sufficiency;

    (ii) operators to provide such information, as is within their
technical capabilities and competence, relevant to the safety of
Antarctic operations;

    (iii) ships, aircraft, base stations and field parties to be
provided with emergency rations, medical supplies and shelter;

    (iv) as far as is practicable, and taking account of minimum
obligations arising from existing national and international
standards, Antarctic ships, aircraft, base stations and field
parties to be provided with emergency communications equipment;

    (v) no aircraft movement to, from or within Antarctica to take
place until the airfield of destination has been notified of the
proposed flight and has been invited to comment upon it in the light
of local knowledge, weather conditions and other known air
operations.  (This element would not apply where the aircraft's
destination is to a remote location where no other aircraft
operations are known to be taking place and for which no local
information is available);

    (vi) operators of aircraft to inform any diversionary airfields
of planned operations before the departure of the aircraft in
question and to take account of information from any such
diversionary airfields in flight planning;

    (vii) both the airfield of departure and the airfield of
destination to follow flights throughout their duration.  Primary
responsibility for flight following and the safe navigation of
aircraft to pass from the airfield of departure to the airfield of
destination once the aircraft has passed the mid-point on its
flight;

    (viii) as far as is practicable, diversionary airfields to follow
flights about which they have been notified.  Diversionary airfields
to assume primary responsibility for flight following when a
/diversion
diversion has been notified;

(ix) to facilitate flight following, and to assist with search 
procedures, aircraft to notify their position at intervals not 
exceeding 20 minutes;

(x) operators to co-operate where necessary in arranging and 
maintaining regular radio schedules with field parties;

(xi) operators to co-operate in the development of emergency 
call-out procedures;

2. Search and Rescue

(xii) in the event of an accident or emergency the responsible 
operator to inform all other operators in the vicinity of the 
incident and such other operators as may be able to provide 
assistance;

(xiii) in the event of an accident, responsibility for the 
co-ordination of search and rescue procedures to pass from the 
operator seeking assistance to the operator best placed to provide 
assistance;

(xiv) operators in the vicinity of the incident to maintain 
stand-by communications with the co-ordinating operator to enable 
efficient use of available resources;

8. It is likely that the implementation of appropriate measures 
will require some additional resources.  Any such costs of improving 
operational safety, however, need to be set against the benefits of 
improved safety and the reduced cost of search and rescue through 
the more efficient use of resources.

EP1ADO
