TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA


TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE




ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

4O[?]OBOP OБ AHTAPKТИKE
XIV KO[?][?]CY[?]TATHBHOE COBE[?]ЩAHИE

ANT/XIV/WP/2
5 October 1987
(ARGENTINA)


OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM
AND THE MATTER OF ESTABLISHING A PERMANENT INFRAESTructure
ANT/XIV/WP/2                                                              ARGENTINA


DOCUMENT FOR DISCUSSION

ON THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
SYSTEM AND THE MATTER OF ESTABLISHING A PERMANENT INFRASTRUCTURE

1. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

Ever since the Antarctic Treaty took effect and especially during the last Consultative Meetings, the Contracting Parties 
have agreed on a series of measures geared toward more efficient operation of the System: internally, to coordinate 
and harmonize its different components and, externally, to promote a greater international cooperation and public 
dissemination of its studies, scientific research and its actions.

Among other measures referring to the functions of the host countries and the depositary, Recommendations I-XIV and 
I-XVI established the mechanism for consultation among the Parties on matters of common interest via diplomatic channels.

In our opinion, this communication among the Parties by permitting the fluid and direct communication among them 
has been the basis for the effective operation of the Treaty.

These measures were complemented by the decision formulated in the Final Report of the VII Consultative Meeting on 
administrative arrangements, as well as by Recommendations XII-6, XIII-1 and XIII-2.
2

With all of this, we have been able to act in a 
decentralized and cohesive manner - still open to improvement -
which has served to ensure more efficient internal operation 
and external adaptation without changing the nature  and the 
spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.

From an internal view, we have built a close link between 
one Consultative Meeting and another by assigning tasks  to 
the host countries of the successive meetings (consultations 
on the provisional program, compiling the documents of  the 
Meeting, printing and distributing the Final Report  and 
adopted Recommendations to the Parties, making all documents 
on the Meeting available, forwarding a complete set of the 
circulated documents to the next host country) and to the 
depositary of the Treaty (notification of the approval  of 
the Recommendations by the Parties).

The biannual reports on the activities undertaken within 
the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System (CCAMLR, SCAR, 
Seals Convention and Special Consultative Meetings) as well 
as the possibility of considering reports on other relevant 
aspects, will give an overall view and provide for greater 
coordination among the various components of the System.

In terms of public information and dissemination, we 
have agreed to distribute the Final Report and documents of 
the Consultative Meetings to the Non-Consultative Parties, 
and to send a copy of the Final Report to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations as well as relevant parts of 
said Report or any informative document to those specialized 
organizations or other international organizations  with 
scientific or technical interest in the field.

We have decided to broaden the scope of the Final Reports 
so that they reflect the general orientation of the discussion
3

as well as the correlation between the Recommendations or 
Decisions adopted with the steps taken consequently in 
later Meetings. The annexation of additional pertinent 
documents to these Final Reports has been accepted.

Plans are being made to increase and update  the 
Antarctic Treaty Handbook.  The necessary efforts are being 
made to publish the Handbook in the different working 
languages.

Also under study by the Consultative Parties is the 
proposal to elaborate a White Book on the results achieved 
by the Antarctic Treaty System.

Finally, the Parties have decided to make available, to 
all interested, the Final Reports of the Consultative 
Meetings, the Handbook, the national Reports on Antarctic 
activities, the SCAR reports and to set up  Antarctic 
bibliographies and scientific data centers.

II.  Permanent infrastructure

Although we have adequately managed to make the Antarctic 
Treaty System work by decentralizing its functions through 
the aforementioned series of measures, specific proposals 
have been made so that these tasks may be concentrated  in 
one administrative body.

The Argentine Delegation would like to share some elements 
of judgement with the other Consultative Parties.  They are 
the basis of its reservations to the creation of such  an 
infrastructure.

In the first place, we would like to formulate certain 
general considerations to respond immediately to some arguments 
of a functional nature which favor this proposal.
4

A. - Political considerations

As we underlined at the beginning of this document, we 
think that the consultative mechanism through diplomatic 
channels among the Parties has been one of the keys to the 
efficacy of the Antarctic Treaty.

Ever since it took effect, procedures have been distinguished 
by two essential characteristics: a relative informality  and 
direct communication among the Parties.

The first has worked to further a consensual  style  of 
negotiation, facilitating the adoption of satisfactory 
decisions for all the Contracting Parties.

Direct communication, in turn, has made it possible for 
close ties of international cooperation to be established 
in the technical and scientific field within an atmosphere 
of harmony and understanding which has avoided all possible 
underlying political difficulty.  The accomplishments  of 
the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty since its adoption 
nearly 30 years ago stems almost entirely from the methodology 
agreed upon by the Parties to put the noble aims of  this 
instrument into practice.

The introduction of a new element in this modus operandi 
raises a question mark on the possibilities that would exist 
in such a case of accomplishing this task with the  same 
efficiency.  Whenever not embarking on its own initiatives, 
by definition, an administrative body would be present, in 
one way or another, in all the programs of international 
cooperation to be undertaken in Antarctica.  The Contracting 
Parties would thus find themselves forced to accept  the 
intervention of an intermediary in its mutual relations, which 
in some cases might be useful but in others might interfere 
with this direct communication which has provided  such 
positive results.
5

The Antarctic Treaty is founded on a conjunction of national activities and their harmonious relationship and not on inflexible international institutions which could upset the delicate balance on which it rests.

All of the international organizations in the world have a functional focus to regulate specific activities. On the other hand, the Antarctic Treaty has a territorial content which directly affects the sovereign interests of some States, which impose that the powers given to them by virtue of this instrument cannot be delegated - not even in their formal aspects - to an administrative body.

In the same way, the special juridical-political condition of Antarctica makes that the majority of the topics have high sensitivity for the States Parties, which imposes a direct control by them over the activities undertaken on this continent. In this context, the intervention of a third party might provoke difficulties of interpretation which might, instead of bringing the Parties closer together, serve to make them more distant.

Finally, and not less important, we must underline the intrinsic difficulty of electing the appropriate person for this role, bearing in mind the different groups of Contracting Parties of the Antarctic Treaty.

B. - Considerations of an administrative nature

In terms of the internal operation of the Treaty, we would like to point out that this pragmatism and flexibility, when considering topics of common interest, so characteristic of and favorable to its success, have been possible due to the lack of a central bureaucracy.
6

We are convinced that a Secretariat - as small as it 
may be in the beginning - will grow with the corresponding 
diminution of efficiency that such growth implies,  and 
that a brief look at the history of some international 
organizations allows us to suppose.

As a consequence, it would also mean a substantial 
increase in spenditure by the Parties, a fact which cannot 
go unheeded, particularly when everyday an increasing number 
of developing countries accceed to such a condition.

C. - Considerations on the proposed functions to be assigned 
to the permanent infrastructure

1) Archives

As an argument in favor of the creation of a permanent 
infrastructure, insistence has been made on the need  to 
maintain central archives of documentation on the Antarctic 
Treaty System.

We believe that during current times, due to the advances 
made in the field of data processing,  archives do not 
pose a problem. The archives might be placed under the 
responsibility of a country which offers to assume this 
role or of a University or a Governmental Institute 
interested in this area, with the means to undertake it. 
They might also charge for the services required  to 
maintain it.

2) Preparation of the Consultative Meetings

Another proposal intends to establish a Secretariat to 
prepare the agenda of the Consultative Meetings.  Our delegation
7

does not find this convenient. The identification of the 
points to be included on the agenda of our meetings is 
an emminently political topic, which lies within  the 
competence of the Contracting Parties and they need no 
assistance on this matter.

Within this context, it is mentioned the need to gather 
documentation prior to the Meetings, which in practice 
would result in the alteration of the relative informality 
and consensual style, so characteristic of the operation 
of the Antarctic Treaty.

3) Assistance to the authorities of the Consultative 
Meetings

We do not consider this function an imperative necessity. 
The practice of our past meetings has shown us that they have 
developed adequately with the assistance of personnel assign-
ed by the host government.

4) Preparation and Distribution of the Final Reports and 
Updating of the Antarctic Treaty Handbook

We have already shown in the first part of this document 
how the various recommendations and decisions adopted, 
adequately cover these functions in a decentralized manner.

If concern in this respect, however, stems from  the 
expenses that printing and distribution of these documents 
mean for the host countries, the Argentine delegation  is 
willing to undertake a serious study on the possibility  of 
adequately distributing these costs among the Parties.

5) Public Information Center on the Antarctic Treaty 
System

We have already mentioned the various measures which have
been taken to disseminate knowledge on the Antarctic Treaty 
System to the general public.

To establish a Secretariat to serve as a focal point of 
information for the general public seems unnecessary to us,
due to the existence of national contact points which were 
agreed upon by Recommendation XIII-1. It furthermore would 
be particularly inconvenient within this framework to turn 
it into a liaison forum with nongovernmental organizations,
since relations with the latter can have a high degree of 
political connotations. Consequently its handling should 
not be delegated to an administrative body.

III.  Conclusions

It has been said with all exactness that the Antarctic 
Treaty is one of the most efficient instruments with the 
most foresight created during this century.

The Argentine Republic adheres steadfastly to this 
affirmation and has directed all its efforts to contribute 
to the successful continuance of the Treaty.

It is within this spirit that it has desired to share 
with the other Contracting Parties its concerns about 
establishing a permanent infrastructure as well as its 
serious doubts about the effective contribution that such 
an infrastructure can make to reinforce the Antarctic Treaty 
System.
