TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

October 05-16

ANT/XIV/WP/19
Chilean Delegation




THEME 11: EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS
- 1 -

CHILEAN ANTARCTIC TOURISM PROGRAMME

Pursuant to the tourism recommendations and as compatible with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, in 1984 the Chilean Government formulated a programme aimed at divulgation of knowledge on the Antarctic, organizing tours to that territory that took place in certain times of the year and were controlled by that country.

Supervised and coordinated by the Chilean National Tourism Service, the programme is supported and backed by the Chilean Air Force which transports small groups comprised, at most, by 40 people per 4-day/3-night trip to the King George Island, located in the South Shetland Islands. The trips are scheduled to take place so as not to interfere with the scientific tasks and the supplying of Antarctic stations, the best months being October, November, March and April of each year.

According to tourist recommendations in the Antarctic Treaty Zone, the visitors are previously instructed by specially invited scientists receiving, as well, an explanatory leaflet drafted by the Chilean National Tourism Service upon a request by the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, so as to be acquainted and comply with all requisites aimed at conservation of the ecosystem, particularly the Antarctic fauna and flora, as well as advice on how to act during their sojourn and on trips to sites located in the Antarctic territory.

Compliance with these norms is enforced locally by specialized guides and scientists who at all times accompany tourists and also deliver audio-visual lectures on the several past, present and future aspects of the Antarctic.
- 2 -

The programme also provides visits to foreign stations
that are, as a matter of course, duly authorized by the
respective governmental station heads and helicopter
trips to Twin Otters organized to overfly animal concen-
trations such as penguin, seal and other colonies.

Given environmental conditions and the up to now
difficult access to the Antarctic, the framework and
logistic support is supplied by the Chilean Air Force,
which is also in charge of rescues and undertakes
liability for any involuntary loss that may be caused by
such trips.

Finally, controlled tourism to the Antarctic is likewise
aimed at the following important targets:

A. - Due to their socio-economic and cultural level, these
tourists who are generally connected with influential
entities or circles, have a multiplying effect on divulgating
the reality of the Antarctic in their countries of origin, not
withstanding their being only a few.

B. - Attracted by the Antarctic, the tourists also visit
some other Chilean tourist attractions.

C. - Thus, Chile contributes to teach those not directly
involved in scientific activities to get better acquainted
with the care and preservation of the Antarctic and of its
future.

D. - As will be explained in a document on Theme 13
(Historical Monuments), Chile also contemplates the
linking of tourist activities to a programme aimed at
divulgation of Antarctic History, so as to imbue tourists
with respect for and understanding of the historical past,
imparting knowledge of the Treaty System and of its
contributions.
