TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                            RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                            1987

05-16 OCTOBER

                                                            ANT/XIV/WP/16
                                                            (AUSTRALIA)

ITEM 9

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENTS

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS -
EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION

(Working Paper submitted by the Australian delegation)

Paper may be made publically available at the
conclusion of the meeting
- 1 -

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS - EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION

Summary

This paper aims to show how the use of a new category of
protected area (the Antarctic Protected Area (APA)
suggested by SCAR) can improve the effectiveness of
protection of areas of value under the Antarctic Treaty.

Hypothetical examples of locations where there are
existing protected areas are used, to show how the
creation of larger protected areas incorporating them can
enhance the protection they offer, and protect additional
values, while not inhibiting operations which would not
affect the values identified.

1.      Introduction

1.1     Australia has maintained a keen interest in adequate
protection of the many features and characteristics
of value that exist in the Antarctic region.  A paper
was submitted by the Australian delegation to ATCM
XIII (ANT/XII/W.P.5) outlining a proposal for the
introduction of a new category of protected area to
improve the capacity of the Antarctic Treaty system
to provide for this protection.  This stimulated
discussion resulting in Recommendation XIII-5 which
provided for national committees to ask SCAR for
advice on the system of protected area generally,
including a possible additional category of area
under a different form of protection.  SCAR
considered this request at its XIXth meeting, and an
ad hoc Working Group was formed to address the
questions raised.
- 2 -

1.2 The SCAR WG prepared a report, entitled 'The
Protected Area System in the Antarctic', which made
five main recommendations which this meeting will
have to consider. The fifth of these recommendations
calls for the introduction of a new category of
protected area; the Antarctic Protected Area (APA),
into the system, while retaining the present
categories.

1.3 The objective of an APA is 'to minimise disturbance
to an area insofar as such disturbance might detract
from the special value or values manifest in the
area, and for which it was designated'. APAs may be
designated if they contain one or more features for
which protection is necessary, including presently
established protected areas, areas of particular
significance 'by virtue of their scenic beauty,
inspirational quality, potential for recreational
pursuits, or their status as wilderness', and areas
on which 'exploitable natural resources are
ecologically dependant'. Establishment of an APA
would require 'the zoning of the whole area for
different levels of protection or use', and proposals
would be presented and assessed in a similar manner
to that currently used for SPAs and SSIs. It is the
introduction of this new category of protected area
that this paper addresses.

1.4 It is Australia's perception that there is not yet
unanimity among Treaty parties in their understanding
of the application of such a new type of protected
area. Without a common understanding on these
matters, it is possible that some Treaty Parties may
not see the need for improvements to the system of
protected area categories available for use under the
Antarctic Treaty system. Australia remains convinced
of the need for, and the utility of, such
- 3 -

improvements. In order to provide a basis for common 
understanding to enable the proposal to be further 
advanced, this paper aims to draw out some elements 
of the SCAR report and show their practical 
application.

2. The Antarctic Protected Area

2.1 The report makes two major criticisms of the current 
categories of protected area;

    - that they do not provide sufficient scope to 
      enable protection of all worthy values;  and
    - that the protection offered by them is not always 
      adequate to minimise disturbance to the site 
      which would adversely affect the values the 
      designation is designed to protect.

The extension of the range of values able to be 
protected under the new proposals is fairly clear( 
2.5.1), but the improvement of the adequacy of 
protection is a little less so.

2.2 In describing the new type of category proposed, the 
report is not explicit about what type of protective 
measures should be applied to, and within, the areas

As explained in Appendix 3(5), this is because the 
measures introduced should be those which will 
adequately protect the values identified from any 
disturbance which would unacceptably diminish them, 
and this must be designed for a particular area.

Two related points mentioned are;

    - that if there are two or more values identified 
      within the same area, then the measures 
      introduced should protect each of them;  and
- 4 -

    that 'the freedom to conduct those activities 
that do not adversely affect those values to be 
protected should be maintained'

Apart from these general parameters, there is no 
detailed discussion of the way in which APAs might be 
zoned, what measures might be applied in each zone, 
and how, in practical terms, existing categories of 
protected area might profitably be incorporated into 
larger protected areas.

3. Practical Application of the APA Category

3.1 Application to Existing Protected Areas.

For some areas to which the designation might apply, 
its utility is easily shown.  For instance, for a SPA 
which is designed to protect an area of mosses, it is 
certainly feasible that some development or activity 
within the catchment area which provides the moisture 
necessary for the plant's survival might have an 
adverse impact on them.  In other words, this 
activity would diminish the value for which the area 
was designated.

The solution under the SCAR proposal might be to 
declare the whole of the catchment area as an APA, 
incorporating the SPA as an inner or core area, and 
apply measures within the outer area aimed at 
limiting any activity which would adversely affect 
the mosses.

3.2 Application to a Historic Site

3.2.1 A similar argument might apply to a historic site. 
To allow an examination of the way in which the APA 
category might work, Hypothetical Example A shows 
the area surrounding a hut from the heroic era
- 5 -

which is an Historic Monument currently identified 
under the Treaty.  The map attached is a sketch map 
only and is not drawn to any standard.

3.2.2  Several structures in varying conditions are in the 
area surrounding the hut.  Another shelter has been 
built near the historic hut to allow visitors to 
stay close by.  A numbe,r of artefacts from the 
heroic era have recently been discovered in the 
area around the hut.  As a consequence of this, and 
a new awareness of the value and vulnerability of 
the site, a new shelter has been built some 
distance away.  Several penguin colonies exist 
close by which were the subject of study by the 
parties occupying the original hut, and it is 
intended that comparative studies be undertaken.  
It is possible to gain access to the plateau from 
the new shelter, and a nearby melt lake has been 
used to supply it with water.

Values

3.2.3  The principal reason for protecting in the area is 
the historic value of the hut, and the wider site.  
There are two aspects to this; the value as an site 
for archaeological investigation, and as an 
educative/cultural feature.  The nearby penguin 
colonies have value scientificaly, as the proposed 
subjects of comparative studies, and historically, 
for their part in the program of the original party.

Threats

3.2 4  Threats are posed to these values by disturbance 
for personnel visiting the area or staying in 
either of the two modern shelters.  This could be 
in the form of displacement or removal of 
artefacts, alteration of the micro-environment
- 6 -

around the various historic structure which could hasten their decay, and disturbance of the penguins themselves or of aspects of scientific 
investigation of them.  Due to the location of the older of these shelters within the area of 
operation of the original party, personnel staying 
there would pose the greater threat.

Zoning

3.2.5 The map shows the way in which the area might be 
zoned.  A rectangular boundary is suggested for the 
APA roughly covering the extent of ice-free land 
around the area and the offshore islands which were 
often visited by the original party.

Four types of zone are suggested;
    the existing Historic Monument;
    a Buffer/Historic Zone;
    a Scientific Zone;  and 
    an Activity Zone.

3.2.6 Within the APA, the existing Historic Monument is 
identified, and is surrounded by a square area 
which includes the associated structures, the 
original water supply and harbour area, and the hut 
built nearby.  This area might be called a 
Historic Site Zone.  Apart from that necessary 
for archaeological work associated with the site, 
access to this area would be restricted to short 
educational visits.  Activity on these visits 
should be restricted to observation, and would be 
subject to conditions to ensure that it posed no 
threat to the maintenance or restoration of the 
structures.  There should be no vehicles used 
within the zone, nor construction work done, and no 
artefacts should be removed except where essential
- 7 -

for archaeological work. The newer shelter within 
the zone should only be used to support 
archaeological parties, or short term visits for 
educational purposes.

3.2.7 A narrow area which contains the summer station is 
also identified. This extends inland along the 
route to gain access to the plateau, and seaward 
along the normal access route to the station, and 
includes the station water supply, but does not 
included any of the penguin colonies. Within this 
area, normal activity associated with the operation 
of the station could proceed with no restrictions. 
The area might be called the Activity Zone.

3.2.8 Two segments of the APA remain, which contain all 
the penguin colonies, and one of which separates 
the Activity Zone from the Historic Zone. This 
might be called the Scientific Zone. Any 
activity which would not disturb the penguin 
colonies or scientific investigation of them or 
adversely affect any of the buildings or artefacts 
within the Historic Site Zone, would be permissible 
within this zone, which would also allow it to be 
used for some recreational pursuits. It might, 
however, be advisable to limit vehicular access to 
that absolutely necessary for support of 
archaeological or scientific programs, to ensure 
that the penguins and microclimates which might 
affect the survival of the historic site are not 
disturbed.

3.2.9 The APA as described would:
-    better protect the existing Historic Monument;
-    protect other aspects of the historic site;
-    allow controlled educational use of the site;
-    facilitate archaeological investigation of the 
     site; and
-    the constructive use of scientific work 
     originally undertaken in the area.
- 8 -

3.3 Application to Larger Areas

3.3.1 The SCAR report also makes it clear that the APA designation could be applied to a fairly extensive area, where it is appropriate considering the values inherent in the area, and the potential or actual threats against them.

It is important to note that a proposal for an area to be designated as an APA would require the clear identification of values and threats. It could only be agreed to if it was accepted by the Treaty system that it needed the protection offered by designation as an APA. Example B is a hypothetical example of such a larger area. Again the attached map is only a sketch map and not drawn to any standard.

3.3.2 The area shown is an area of largely ice free coast, flanked by a glacier, consisting of three peninsulas, separated by embayments. Into two of these, lake systems drain. There is an over-wintering station on the largest and central peninsula, and a field hut on the southern peninsula. The station has a small road system about it, servicing radio facilities, giving access to the station water supply, and marking the beginning of the westerly route to the plateau and across the glacier to the south. The field hut is placed next to a large lake which empties, via a summer waterfall, into a smaller lake, then along narrow bay. There are large areas of mosses and lichens nearby, and access to the northern side of the glacier is possible. There are two currently designated protected areas in the area. A SPA to the north-east of the station contains extensive areas of vegetation and a large penguin colony.
- 9 -

A SSSI to the south-west of the station is designed 
to protect a large lake with a connection to the 
marine environment on which a long term research 
program is being conducted.  There are also 
scientific research programs operating on the major 
lake system, which is located between the field hut 
and the station, on various penguin and seal 
populations located on nearby islands, and on the 
glacier.

Values

3.3.3  The values which the protection recognises are; 
those for which the SPA and SSSI were designated, 
the intrinsic, scientific and cultural values of 
the penguin colonies and seal haul-outs and the 
glacier, and the recreational/cultural value of the 
area around the field hut.

Threats

3.3.4  The threats to them derive from the proximity of 
the wintering station, and the extent of the 
various operations associated with it.

Zoning

3.3.5  The map shows the way in which the area might be 
zoned.  The APA is designed to include the glacier 
to the south, to its western extent, and the SPA to 
the north to its eastern extent with the north 
western boundary being determined by the inclusion 
of relevant offshore islands.  There are five types 
of zone shown; 
        SPA; 
        SSSI; 
        Scientific/Buffer Zone; 
        Recreational Zone;  and 
        Activity Zone.
- 10 -

 3.3.6 The SPA and the SSSI are identified, and 
would continue to be managed according to 
currently apply in management provision.  These 
might be termed the core zones of the APA.

3.3.7 Around these areas, and including the catchment 
area of the lake system between the two 
peninsulas, most of the glacier and most of the 
plateau (east of moraine deposits near the ice 
margin) are areas comprising the 
Scientific/Buffer Zone.

This zone excludes the area around the field 
hut.  Activity in the zone would be restricted to 
that which would not be likely to have an adverse 
impact on the values for which the core zones 
have been designated.  In the case of the SPA 
this might include disturbance of the drainage 
patterns of the areas which provide the flora 
with nutrient, overflight where this may result 
in any disturbance of birds or deposition of 
unburnt fuel on flora, and interference with the 
inshore marine ecosystem upon which the colony 
within the SPA is ecologically linked.  For the 
SSSI this might include disturbance to the 
inshore marine ecosystem in connection with the 
lake being studied.

The zone also includes most of the glacier.  The 
intention here is to distinguish between that 
section of the glacier which should be regularly 
used for recreational/cultural purposes, and that 
which is the subject of study.  To this end 
activity on the section of the glacier in this 
zone should be restricted to that necessary for 
research, or essential station operations.
- 11 -

Also included are most of the penguin colonies
and seal haul-outs, and the major lake system.
Similarly to the glacier, the intention is to
distinguish between areas where the fauna or
lakes are to be primarily for scientific study,
and those where there recreational and cultural
value is given priority.  In this zone, activity
near to concentrations of fauna, and within the
catchment area of the lake system should be
restricted to that necessary for research or
essential station operations.

3.3.8  The areas around the field hut, adjacent to the
station area and inland to the plateau on the
northern side of the plateau access route
comprise the Recreational Zone.  In this zone,
the primary value to be protected is recreational
and cultural, and the thrust of management
measures will be to ensure that features are
accessible, and that information on them is
available, while ensuring that they remain in as
close to an undisturbed state as possible.  Of
course, this would not preclude scientific
research, but it would have to be conducted
within the framework described above.  The zone
allows access to all types of features within the
area; areas of flora and fauna concentration,
the shore and islands, lakes and a lake system,
the glacier and the plateau.

3.3.9  The station area and other areas of high logistic
activity are delimited in what could be called an
Activity Zone.  This includes the road system
surrounding the station, the stations water
supply, and seaward access to the station, and
the route inland along the peninsula, on to the
- 12 -

plateau and across the glacier to the south.
There would be no restrictions on activity within
this zone, except those applying from the Agreed
Measures.

3.3.10    The APA as described would:
          - facilitate and control access of personnel
            at or visiting the station to features of
            interest there to enable the protection of
            those features;
          - better protect the currently designated SSSI
            and SPA;
          - offer some additional but lesser protection
            to other flora and fauna and scientific
            programs;
          - concentrate high levels of necessary
            activity in those areas where it is
            identified as being the most effective; and
          - not unduly affect the normal activity of the
            station.

3.4 Definition of Boundaries

3.4.1    There are two main concerns in the definition of
         boundaries for APAs:  the practical; that they
         are easily identifiable on the ground, and the
         theoretical; that they are determined using
         criteria appropriate to the values they seek to
         protect.  The latter might include:
           - seasonality
           - nutrient input
           - foraging ranges
           - potential impact of designation on the site
             and adjacent areas
           - visibility of biological community relations
           - number of community types desirable for long
             term protection
           - recent and proposed land developments
           - alternative uses
- 13 -

3.4.2   The hypothetical examples above were designed to 
avoid addressing the complexities of applying 
these concerns to actual cases, in order to show 
clearly how the effectiveness of protection can 
be enhanced by the use of the APA category.

3.4.3   However, it should be recognised that, in actual 
cases, complexities will arise when seeking to 
ensure that a boundary defines the area most 
appropriate to protect values, because the lines 
of demarcation appropriate for different values 
within a zone, or in adjacent zones, will 
themselves differ. The operational requirement 
that boundaries are able to be easily determined 
on the ground is a further complication. The use 
of markers of various types can assist, but the 
effect of these on the values to be protected 
must also be taken into consideration.

3.5 Other Applications

3.5.1   The APA designation could be applied to larger 
and more complex areas than these hypothetical 
examples in the same sort of way; by ensuring 
that the zoning and the application of measures 
within zones is determined by the values that are 
to be protected and the threats against them.

3.5.2   Other applications for APAs mentioned in the SCAR 
WG Report are the incorporation of reserves 
established under CCAMLR or the Convention for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS). The 
intent would be to provide additional protection 
for these reserves or to profitably link them 
with protective arrangements made under the 
Treaty. This could be useful in cases where 
there are strong ecological connections, such as
- 14 -

predator prey relationships between the objects
of marine and terrestrial protective measures.
CCAS and CCAMLR have objective which require a
different perspective on the conservation of
aspects of the Antarctic environment than that of
the Treaty, but the specific objectives in
particular cases will certainly overlap the
intersect, and will probably sometimes be very
similar.

4. Conclusion

4.1 The examples give above show the application of the
APA designation to the improvement of the protection
of areas of the Antarctic, both in the range of values
they enable the protection of and the effectiveness of
the protection able to be given.

4.2 The SCAR WG Report addresses other aspects of the role
of Antarctic protected areas which are not covered in
this paper. Two topics of particular importance are
discussed: the collection and review of information
to enable it to be established whether the protection
of an area is effective leading to how to establish
and implement necessary changes in, or addition or
deletion of measures if the protection is not
effective, and; the biogeographical scope of the
network of protected areas in the Antarctic.

4.3 While these are not addressed in this paper, Australia
recognises their importance in ensuring that the
objectives of maintaining a network of protected areas
under the Antarctic Treaty are clear, and that the
system provides the means to be able to achieve those
objectives.
EXAMPLE 'A'


                                                                 Natural features      
                                              Coastline       
                                               Ice Margin       
                                                     Lakes       
                                                        Penguins       
                                                         
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                 Other Historic structures      
                                                                 Old Shelter       
                                                          Historic Monument       
                                                     New Shelter       







                  Natural Features
                  Coastline
                  Ice Margin
                  Lakes
                  Penguins
                  APA Boundaries
                  APA Perimeter
                  Buffer/Historic
                  Zone
                  Activity Zone
                  0km
                  800m
Natural Features
Lakes
Coastline
Ice Margin
Glacier
Moraine
Fauna
Flora
Man-made Features
Buildings
Roads

EXAMPLE 'B'

     5kms      10kms

APA Boundary
Existing Protected Areas
Scientific/Buffer Zone
Recreational Zone
Activity Zone
            SFA
1585
