TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                            RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                            1987

                         05-16 OCTOBER

ANT/XIV/WP/34
9 October 1987
(CHINA)

Item 6:  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
The Question of Establishing a Permanent Infrastructure.

Discussion paper submitted by the Delegation of China.
The purpose of this paper is to present Chinese 
Delegation's view on the question of establishing a certain 
kind of permanent infrastructure for ATCM meetings, together 
with its rough suggestions regarding the functions which the 
proposed permanent infrastructure should have, if there need 
be such an infrastructure.

The Chinese Delegation has no objection in principle 
to considering the desirability and possibility of establish-
ing in the context of ATCM a certain kind of permanent 
secretariat to assist the Consultative Meeting in dealing 
with ever-increasing daily affairs relating to Antarctic 
activities,  in keeping continuity of Consultative Meetings, 
in enabling as timely as possible availability of information 
on the Antarctic activities and their achievements, and  in 
helping the countries or international organizations outside 
the Antarctic Treaty System to understand the operation  of 
the Treaty System. At the same time, in considering this 
matter, it should be noted that the secretariat  to be 
established will be the servant of the ATCM, never  be a 
decision-making institution on the Antarctic affairs and will 
none the less prejudice the balance established in Article IV 
of the Antarctic Treaty.  It would not supersede or weaken 
the position of the ATCM and would not either prejudice the 
working style of the ATCM evolved from its long practice. 
The secretariat, affiliated to the ATCM, will  not  be an 
independent institution and could not intervene the  close 
co-operative relationship among the Consultative Parties.

As there had been a great disparity with regard to the 
matter of creating a certain small secretariat,  and the 
Parties concerned have different approaches to the problem. 
We would suggest here that in discussing this subject, we 
should first of all reach agreement on where to start.  In the 
opinion of the Chinese Delegation, the starting point for our 
discussion is to identify what functions need be carried out 
by the proposed secretariat and what functions could  be 
carried out in other ways.
We could not have a secretariat with broad functions
which might make the secretariat a powerful institution and
more than a servant of ATCM Meetings.  By  creating  a
permanent infrastructure, we aim to help the host government
by shouldering some of its heavy secretary work, and  to
facilitate the direct communication among all the parties.
There should not be any such functions as may infringe the
direct communication among Consultative Parties as that had
been seriously concerned in the Argentine paper ANT/XIV/WP/2.

For all this, the Chinese Delegation would like to
propose as a basis of discussion the following functions to
be assigned to the proposed secretariat:

1. To expedite daily work within the competence of
ATCM, follow developments in the period between two
Meetings and maintain continuity of successive
Meetings;

2. To assist the host country in preparing the
Consultative Meetings;

3. To be a center for information on Antarctic
activities, transmitting or disseminating documents
or information on Antarctic activities  and their
achievements.  In this regard, the infrastructure
should function only like a switchboard.

4. To carry out such other tasks as may be assigned
by the Consultative Parties by way of consensus.

Finally, in discussing the possibility of a certain
kind of infrastructure, we should be very careful in our
steps, as there had been voicing of negative factors from
some delegations which should merit serious and careful
consideration of the present Meeting.  It is hoped that the
discussion would be held in an atmosphere of co-operation
and understanding. Any decisions of the Consultative
Meeting could only be achieved by way of consensus, which, we
would like to emphasize here again, is the foundation of the
Antarctic Treaty System.
