TRATADO ANTÁRTICO 
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE




RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 October

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANT/XIV/WP/25
(UK)

ITEM 9

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENTS

MANAGEMENT PLANS FOR
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS

(Working Paper submitted by the UK Delegation)

Paper may be made publically available at
the conclusion of the meeting.
- 2 -

Management Plans for Antarctic Protected Areas

The preparation and operation of a Management Plan (MP) is 
the key factor in achieving the objectives which are to  be 
fulfilled  by the creation of an Antarctic Protected Area 
(APA).  MPs are essentially site-specific  and although 
information will be needed for each in the  same set of 
categories, the amount of information needed (or available) 
may vary greatly.

In this paper we present an outline of the sort of management 
plan that might be needed in designating a hypothetical Noname 
Island as an APA.  For conciseness, most of the descriptive 
material has been left out.  Explanatory notes are given  in 
square brackets.

Sites such as Arthur Harbour (Anvers Island), Deception Island, 
Ross Island, Signy Island or the Vestfold Hills  would  be 
suitable examples for this sort of treatment.  There are, of 
course, many other areas in the Antarctic for which APA status 
would be appropriate.

EXAMPLE:                  MANAGEMENT PLAN

NONAME ISLAND ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA

1. Description of Area

  1.1. The Area includes the whole of Noname Island, its 
       offshore rocks and islets, including Moss Island 
       (SPA No 101) as shown on the accompanying  map.

  1.2. Physical Features:
       Topography (including associated marine features)
       Geology and soils
       Meteorology

  1.3. Biological Features:
       Terrestrial biota (including freshwater biota)
       Marine biota
       Birds and seals

[Note 1 - The description of the APA needs to be precise
- 3 -

enough for an observer to recognize it on the ground.
For this reason, physical features (shorelines,
catchment areas, etc) are preferable as boundaries to
lines joining coordinates.  It may be difficult to
define areas of water in this way.  Where necessary
recourse must be had to boundaries drawn on a map.  It
is not essential to provide full physical and biological
inventories for an APA, but the more information that can
be provided in a MP, the easier subsequent monitoring of
the success of the APA in achieving its objectives
becomes.]

2. Reasons for Designation

Noname Island is the least glacierised and most vegetated
of its group.  The exposure and contrasting rock types
provide a wide variety of substrates.  This has made the
island a chosen spot for Antarctic biological studies.
Research has been carried out continuously since 1948.
Many field sites have been established and long term
experiments set up.

Antarctic vegetation and soils are physically fragile and
unable to withstand trampling.  Nesting birds may desert
if disturbed.  Hence it is desirable to limit human
activity over parts of the island in order to preserve
its environmental values and its potential to support
research.

The objectives of this management plan are:

2.1. to limit human impact on the Noname Island
environment to a level which will not produce
significant lasting change nor jeopardize existing
or planned research there;

2.2. insofar as is consistent with the pursuit of
scientific research, to preserve the scenic values
of Noname Island, including artefacts associated
with the whaling period and graves on the island.

[Note 2 - This section should be compatible with the
general principles of protection of the Antarctic
environment, as set out by the Antarctic Treaty System
- 4 -

and discussed in the SCAR paper "The  Protected Area
system in the Antarctic" (June, 1987).  The objectives
need to be stated in terms sufficiently precise  to
enable subsequent monitoring of the effectiveness of the
MP.]

3.   History of Previous Human Impacts

     3.1.  Discovery and fur sealing

     3.2.  Whaling

     3.3.  Research station Darwin, 1948 - present

          [NOTE 3 - This account should concentrate on the history of
those impacts most likely to have affected features of the
APA set out in Section 2, Reasons for Designation.]

4.   Details of Present and Planned Activities

     4.1.  Logistic activities        4.1.1.  The station area

                                     4.1.2.  Field huts

                                     4.1.3.  Relief operations

     4.2.  Scientific activities      4.2.1.  Terrestrial and
                                          freshwater biology

                                     4.2.2.  Inshore marine biology

                                     4.2.3.  Bird and seal biology

                                     4.2.4.  Other

4.3.  Research sites

     [Note 4 - Again, in this section it is necessary to give only
a general account with emphasis on those factors referred to
in Note 3.  As on-going research is a major reason for this
designation as an APA a full account is needed of research
sites.  A general account of the station area will suffice.]

5.   Management Measures

     5.1.  The Area shall be divided into the Zones shown on the
accompanying map.  Permanent buildings and station
installations (excluding field huts and temporary
shelters) shall be confined to the Activities Zone.
Within the Recreational Zone all activities shall be
allowed, subject to the Agreed Measures and other
local rules from time  to time in force.  In the
Scientific/Buffer Zone activities shall be restricted
- 5 -

to those which will not disturb the research sites  or
research programmes there. Whithin the SPA Zone the
special measures of the Agreed Measures, Article 7 shall
apply.

5.2.  Outside the Activities Zone and where practicable,
persons crossing bare (i.e. not snow-covered) ground,
shall keep to marked tracks and avoid areas of vegetation
or soft ground.

5.3.  Unauthorized persons shall avoid colonies  of
nesting birds.

5.4.  Unauthorized persons shall not enter or disturb
marked research sites.

5.5.  All waste from field activities shall be returned
to the Activities Zone for disposal.

5.6.  In evaluating the environmental impact of proposed
scientific or logistical activities, regard shall be paid
to the status of the Area as an APA.

5.7.  Artefacts associated with the early history of the
Area shall not be disturbed except in the course of proper
archeological research or conservation.  Graves shall not
be disturbed except to tend them.

5.8.  Where practicable, and where good seamanship allows,
ships shall not anchor within the Area, or if within it,
shall anchor in the Anchoring Zone.

5.9.  Vessels shall not discharge ballast or other waste
in the Area.

5.10. The person who for the time being is responsible for
the local operation of Darwin research station in the Area
shall have authority in applying and interpreting these
rules locally.  He shall be informed of the numbers and
proposed activities of persons visiting the island.  His
advice shall be heeded with regard to precautions to be
taken to avoid damage to the environment of the APA or
to research programmes conducted there.

[Note 5 - The management measures are the operational
instruments of the MP.  They are obviously highly site-
specific.  The concept of zonning, whereby in particular
areas or zones certain rules apply (or others do not), is
- 6 -

of particular importance in an APA.  An APA containing a 
permanent research station will need an Activity Zone 
around the station where stores can be dumped, wastes 
processed, etc. and other activities carried out which 
would not be appropriate elsewhere in the APA.  Ships 
may be encouraged to use special Anchoring Zone  to 
avoid damage to sea-floor experiments.  Research sites 
on land will need special protection.  An SPA Zone is an 
area where the highest level of protection prevails. 
Zoning  is an effective way of providing protection where 
it is needed without unduly restricting activities else-
where.]

6.  Review
This Management Plan shall be reviewed within five years 
of its coming into force and thereafter at intervals of 
not more than five years.  Adequate records shall be kept 
to describe changes in the physical and biological 
environment that can reasonably be attributed to human 
impacts.

[Note 6 - A review process is essential to ensure that 
the measures proposed to attain the objectives of the MP 
are operating effectively.  If not, the MP will need to 
be amended.  The interval between reviews will  vary 
depending on the degree of activity affecting the APA.]
- 7 -

Bird
Colonies

Boundary of APA

Starfish
Bay           11 graves
SCIENTIFIC
BUFFER
ZONE          Hut
              Bay
              Field hut     1

Activities
Zone
              Station

Grave         Lake
              Lake

RECREATIONAL
              ZONE

Ice
Cap

500m

SCIENTIFIC/
BUFFER
ZONE 2

Moss l.
SPA101

SPA
ZONE

NONAME ISLAND
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA
