TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XIV REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                           RIO DE JANEIRO
                           1987

October 05-16

ANT/XIV/W.P./31- Rev. 1
Chilean Delegation

ITEM 13 OF THE AGENDA: HISTORICAL SITES
                        AND MONUMENTS
- 1 -

PROTECTION AND VALUATION OF HISTORICAL SITES

The need to adopt measures for protection of historical sites
and monuments as witnesses to a significant presence of Man
in the Antarctic has been acknowledged by the Consultative
Parties as from their first Meeting; this resulted in the
adoption of Recommendation I-9. To date, this Recommendation
remains as the most comprehensive, encompassing tombs, build-
ings and objects of historical interest, which must be pre-
served and restored and that, as part of a common heritage
require a concerted action. With that aim in view, Recommen-
dation I-9 provides the following:

a) - a recommendation for consultation among interested parties;

b) - the issuance of appropriate reports on the conditions and
restoring of tombs, buildings and objects; and

c) - the adoption of adequate protective measures.

While discussing Recommendation I-9 the French Delegate
remarked that the term "object" should be interpreted ac-
cording to its widest possible scope. This comment was re-
corded in the Final Report on that Meeting.

Recommendation V-4 provided guidelines for the care of his-
torical monuments until the drafting of a list; this sug-
gestion is part of Recommendation VI-14 and regulated by
Recommendation VII-9. Other monuments were later added,
pursuant to an "ad-hoc" recommendation procedure covering
base installation by India, by China and by the Lieutenant
Garlache expedition.
- 2 -

Even so, the last paragraph of Recommendation V-4 once
more stresses the concern for preservation of the monuments
and, Recommendation VI-14, in addition to repeating the
request for adequate measures also proposes that each his-
torical monument should bear a notice in the four languages
of the Treaty, advising that such monument must be preserved
in compliance with the Antarctic Treaty.

The USA and New Zealand expeditions to Ross Island started
a pioneering work by restoring the cabins used by Cap. Scott
and by Ernest H. Shackleton. There are other cabins of his-
torical interest, such as that used by C.E. Borchgrevink, on
Adare Cape, and the Nordenskjold cabin  on Snow Hill Island,
which have also been included in the list of historical mo-
numents.

Additionally to monuments, buildings and objects, there are
tombs and, Recommendation XI-13, while mentioning the plane
accident on Mount Erebus,  recognised  the need to place an
object, or a plaque on the locale and,that it should be de-
clared a tomb to be treated with due regard. However, there
are other tombs, as for instance that of Norwegian biologist
Nicolai Hanson, on Adare Cape, the first of its kind in the
Antarctic, which has been included in the list of historical
monuments.

There exists an incipient, though far ranging concept of
historical site as an "area", such as that of Scotia Bay on
- 3 -

Laurie Island,where the stone cabin built by the W.S. Bruce expedition in 1903 is located; the Argentinian observatory built on 1905; and, a graveyard with tombs dating from 1903.

This concept of historically protected area likewise applies to the Norwe gian graveyard in Deception Island which is unfortunately marked by no more than a commemorative plaque, having been destroyed by the February 1969 volcanic eruption. 
This area should include the graveyard, as well as the remains of the Caleta-Balleneros Chilean-Norwegian settlement; the place where the "Telefon" was wrecked and, in one way or another, the entire island.

It would be convenient if the Proposing Parties should survey compliance with the recommendations aimed at preservation of historical monuments and examine the adoption of some of the measures below:

a) - pursuant to the spirit of Recommendation I-9, to include the relevant precedents requiring preservation of historical sites in the information interchange procedures;

b) - to promote debates on the issue of historical site and monument protection in the XV Consultative Meeting, so as to include divulgation of its significance in symposia and in appropriate publications;

c) - within this context, also consider the inclusion of a chapter on this subject in a coming "White Book" or in a similar publication as the Consultative Parties may seem fit to issue;
- 4 -

d) - likewise, to promote consultation and an interchange 
of experiences among restoration experts, archeologists, 
anthropologists and historians of the Antarctic;

e) - to exact from tourists and visitors  due regard for 
historical sites, while endeavouring to transform 
tourism into a vehicle for the understanding and di-
vulgation of Antarctic Treaty achievements in this 
field;

f) - to analyze the New Zealand proposal for delimitation of 
zones containing historical monuments, actually es-
tablishing buffer zones for their protection;

g) - thoroughly to examine the compatibilty of the present 
concept, and that of "historical area" as above defined, 
with the new category of protected zones proposed by 
Australia under the auspices of the ad-hoc group of 
SCAR.
