TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                            ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 OCTOBER

                                                            ANT/XIV/WP/11

ITEM 9

THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES

Discussion paper submitted by the
United Kingdom delegation
THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN THE ANTARCTIC:
ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES

SCAR'S RESPONSE TO PARAGRAPH (i) OF RECOMMENDATION XIII-5

DISCUSSION PAPER SUBMITTED BY THE UNITED KINGDOM

1. The purpose of this paper is to consider what action might be
appropriate within the ATCM forum in relation to the five
recommendations set out in SCAR's response (paras 2.1 - 2.5).

2. The UK welcomes the identification at the beginning of the SCAR
paper that the Antarctic Treaty Area (ATA) is a Special Conservation
Area (Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora, Preamble). The spectrum of different ways in which
Consultative Parties have given effect to the concept of the ATA as
a Special Conservation Area should be borne in mind. These include:

    (i) definition of environmental and conservation principles
applying throughout the ATA (Recommendations VIII-13 and IX-5);

    (ii) restrictions relating to specific activities throughout
the ATA (including: Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora; Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals (CCAS); Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR); Recommendations relating to
Antarctic tourism; Recommendations relating to station activity and
waste disposal;

    (iii) consideration of the environmental consequences of
Antarctic scientific and logistic activity throughout the ATA
(Recommendation XII-3);

    (iv) protection of areas or objects (Specially Protected Area
mechanism of the Agreed Measures; Recommendations on Sites of
Special Scientific Interest and Historic Monuments, area mechanism
available under CCAS and CCAMLR).
3. Taking account of these environmental and conservation mechanisms already being utilized by Consultative Parties, the United Kingdom considers that the far-reaching proposals made by SCAR need careful consideration.  First steps should be taken at the XIVth ATCM.  In that connection the United Kingdom proposes the following as a possible plan of action relating to the five SCAR Recommendations referred to above:

2.1.  Review of existing provisions and their effectiveness

Reports to be prepared for submission to the Preparatory Meeting for the XVth ATCM on the present status of each Specially Protected Area (SPA) and Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Historic Monument (HM).  The information which it is suggested should be presented in each report is set out at Annex A.  The UK considers it important that the means of preparing these reports should be clearly identified in the Final Report of the XIVth ATCM.

2.2.  Availability of information arising from review and maintenance of up-to-date records

Reports of reviews resulting from action under 2.1. above shculd be collated and should eventually be published as a loose leaf addendum to Bonner, W.N. and Lewis Smith, R.I., 1983, Conservation Areas in the Antarctic  299 pp. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research International Council of Scientific Unions. In order to maintain these records up-to-date it is suggested that at the XVth ATCM a Recommendation should be adopted requiring that relevant information be included each year in the annual exchange of information under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty. Corrections would then be prepared, published and distributed.  It is suggested that data base storage of such information be considered at the XVth ATCM in the light of SCAR's response to Recommendation XIII-5(ii).

2.3.  Management plans for existing and future SPAs

It is suggested that consideration of this recommendation be deferred until the XVth ATCM.  The UK envisages that an addition
may be required to Article VIII of the Agreed Measures setting out the requirement for management plans and listing the matters to be addressed in the preparation of such plans. The United Kingdom notes that the preparation of such an amendment to the Agreed Measures would be facilitated by the results of the review of SPAs suggested under 2.1. above.

2.4. Mechanisms for the submission of new proposals for SPAs

It is suggested that consideration of this recommendation would be better deferred until the results of the SPA review process under 2.1. above are available and until conclusions have been reached regarding the recommendation 2.5. below.

2.5. Antarctic Protected Areas: Introduction of an additional category of area

The United Kingdom is in favour of in-depth consideration of this recommendation at the XIVth ATCM. In the United Kingdom's view the objective of such consideration should be to arrive at a conceptual framework of area protection. Such a conceptual framework should take fully into account, but should not necessarily be restricted to, paragraphs 2.5, 2.5.1 to 2.5.4 of SCAR's response. As a basis for debate the form such a conceptual framework might take is outlined in Annex B.

The United Kingdom hopes that as a result of debate at the XIVth ATCM it will be possible to record in the Final Report of the meeting a provisional consensus as to a conceptual framework for the further consideration of this recommendation at the XVth ATCM.

EP5AA0
ANNEX A

INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE COMPILATION OF REPORTS ON
INSPECTION VISITS TO AREAS, SITES AND MONUMENTS

1. Name and position of area, site or monument visited.

2. Date(s) of visit and composition of visiting party.

3. Existence and condition of any markers, notices, etc. to 
indicate presence of area, site or monument.

A. In the case of SPAs AND SSSIs:

4. Information about the physical environment, soils, vegetation 
and fauna which is additional to or differs from that set out 
in the relevant description or management plan, or in 
Conservation Areas in the Antarctic, Bonner and Lewis-Smith 
(1983).

5. Description of any building or other installation and their 
purpose within the area or site.

6. Evidence of any recent physical or biological change, 
particularly when such change might have been brought about 
by human activities.

7. Evidence of any activity contrary to the Agreed Measures or 
the relevant management plan.

8. Observations on special features of conservation significance.
9. Description of any scientific research that has been undertaken 
in the area (under permit issued in accordance with Articles VI 
and VIII of the Agreed Measures) or in the site.

10. Evidence as to whether the area or site is continuing to serve 
the purpose for which it was originally designated.

11. Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the purpose for which the area or site was 
originally designated.

B.  In the case of Historical Monuments:

4. Information about the monument which is additional to or 
differs from the description given in the Annex to 
Recommendation VII-9 or any other published account.

5. Any other information considered relevant or useful in 
furthering the preservation of the monument.

EP5AA0
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS: A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS


Convention for the                  Convention for the                 Antarctic Treaty
Conservation of                     Conservation of                    Consultative Meeting
Antarctic Seals                     Antarctic Marine                   Recommendations
                                    Living Resources                  


Seal reserves,                      Areas, regions,                    Areas designated in 
Special areas,                      sub-regions,                       accordance with 
Sealing zones,                      special areas                      existing Recommendations:
(designated in                      (designated in                     Specially Protected Areas
accordance with                     accordance with                    (Article VIII of Agreed
Article 3(1)(d)                     Article IX 2(g)                    Measures listed at 
and (e) and                                                             Annex 13)
Paragraph 4 of                                                          Sites of Special 
Annex                                                                   Scientific Interest
                                                                        (Recommendation VIII-3)
                                                                        (Recommendations I-IV,
                                                                        VII-14 and VII-9 and 
                                                                        its Annex)

                                    [Antarctic minerals                 Areas designated for 
                                    convention: Areas                   purposes other than those 
                                    designated in                       covered by existing 
                                    accordance with                     elements of the ATS, eg:
                                    Article 14]                         (i) Buffer zones round 
                                                                        areas designated in 
                                                                        accordance with 
                                                                        existing ATCM 
                                                                        recommendations;
                                                                        (ii) Areas of scenic 
                                                                        beauty,
                                                                        inspirational or 
                                                                        wilderness quality;
                                                                        (iii)Areas in which 
                                                                        human activities 
                                                                        need to be managed 
                                                                        for the purpose of 
                                                                        ensuring that the 
                                                                        status quo, or acti-
                                                                        vities proceeding 
                                                                        within them, should 
                                                                        not be prejudiced.

EP5AAQ
NOTES

1. The United Kingdom sees the concept of Antarctic Protected Areas as an all inclusive designation covering, but not restricted to, areas, sites, monuments, reserves, special areas, zones or regions designated in accordance with elements of the Antarctic Treaty System.

2. The United Kingdom considers that the focus of debate at the XIVth ATCM should be on consideration of what purposes might be served by the development of an additional area protection mechanism which are not already served by existing mechanisms, ie on what should appear in the right-hand of the two boxes in the diagram under "Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Recommendations".  It is in this context that the UK would expect that sub-paragraph 2.5.1 to 2.5.4. of SCAR's response would be considered.

3. Activity specific restrictions of the type referred to in paragraph 2(ii) and (iii) of this discussion paper and area protection are complementary mechanisms for achieving conservation and environmental protection objectives.  It is important that each mechanism should be used for purposes to which it is the better suited.  The area protection mechanism, for example, may assist in the regulation of tourism but it could not replace the need for specific restrictions relating to tourism throughout the Antarctic Treaty Area.

4. The United Kingdom is aware that the Conventions for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) are free-standing agreements and that action taken in the Consultative Meeting forum must not trespass on the competence of these instruments.  But it is also important that area protection action taken in accordance with these instruments should be taken into account in reaching area protection decisions within the Consultative Meeting forum.  The United Kingdom therefore believes it to be justified to include the area protection elements of both CCAS and CCAMLR within the concept of Antarctic Protected Areas.

EP5AA0
