TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                            XIV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

RIO DE JANEIRO
1987

05-16 OCTOBER

ANT/XIV/WP/28
Chilean Delegation

THEME 13: HISTORICAL SITES AND MONUMENTS
- 1 -

EXCERPT FROM THE RECORDS OF THE CHILEAN MINISTRY OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS - 1915-1919.

"Late in July, 1915, the British expedition led by Sir Ernest 
Shackleton, who attempted the crossing of the Antarctic 
Continent through the South Pole, was totally blocked by ice at 
the Weddell Sea, 69o Lat. S.; temperatures were so low that the 
thermometer showed - 46oC. ... 

Having faced innumerable perils, after three long months of 
hardship and toil, they finally arrived at their destination 
on Elephant Island.  The day was April 15, 1916...

On Elephant Island, given the physical exhaustion of his men 
who were in no condition to go on, Sir Ernest Shackleton 
decided to  dig a trench in the wall of ice, so as to proctect 
expedition  members from the waves.

Soon afterwards, on April 24, 1916, a seven foot sloop put out 
to sea with five men, to seek help at the South Georgia whaling 
station, 75 miles away.  21 men of the Endurance crew remained 
on Elephant Island commanded by the second expedition chief, 
Mr. Frank Wild, with victuals for no more than five weeks.

The enterprising explorer required no more than sixteen days 
to arrive at the shores of the South George Island, crossing 
the snowdrifts on foot... There he obtained an 80-ton whaling 
ship that sailed on May 23 to rescue the men who were left 
behind on Elephant Island.  But access to the Southern Seas 
was blocked by a heavy concentration of ice...

By mid-June, the Uruguayan Government made a vessel available 
to Sir Ernest Shackleton; however, this vessel was only able 
to reach a place no more than twenty miles away from Elephant 
Isle.
- 2 -

Early in July, the British Association of Magellan obtained
and provisioned a  72-ton ship for Sir Ernest Shackleton who,
for the third time, attempted to arrive at Elephant Island...
When scant hope was left of saving the expedition men, who must
by then have exhausted all their resources, the Pilot  Pardo
was instructed by the Navy authorities to attempt the
thrice-failed rescue in his cutter.

The "Yelcho" sailed from Punta Arenas on August 23; Sir Ernest
Shackleton was on board.  On the 30th., after sailing through
fog and large ice-floes, the coast of Elephant Island was
sighted.  The men were found in good health, notwithstanding
severe hardships.  All 22 men ordered to remain behind were
rescued..."

BRIEF HISTORY OF ELEPHANT ISLAND

Elephant Island, originally "Elephant Seal", is the largest of
a group that also includes Clarence Island; the Cornwallis
islet located at the Straits between Elephant and Clarence; the
small Rowett islet, just South of Elephant and, more to the
South, Gibbs islet and the adjacent Narrow Cliffs; and, finally,
Southwest  of Gibbs, towards the Shetlands, the Aaland, Eadie and
O'Brien Islets and volcanic Bridgeman Isle.  The archipelago
is currently named the "Piloto Pardo Islands".

Some geographic features are a testimonial to Shackleton's
wreck and rescue by the Chilean Navy.  Among others, this is
the case of the Endurance Glacier, of the 16 km. long Pardo
Ridge,       of Wild and Yelcho Capes, this latter the
first Elephant Island land sighted by the Chilean ship on
the day of the rescue.  Clarence Island's Lopez Head is a
testimonial to Pardo's commanding officer, Counter-Admiral
Luiz V. Lopez.
- 3 -

In 1820, Royal Navy Captain Edward Bransfield of the "Williams" 
became the first man comprovedly to land on Bowles Cape, in 
Clarence Island.

However, the honour of being the first to tread on Elephant 
Island is given to Captain Charles McGregor, of the "Minstrel" 
that sailed together with "Dragon" and "John" from Valparaiso, 
on September 1820, towards the Shetland Islands, to anchor 
North of the Lindsay Cape, near a headland that is now named 
after that vessel.

Captain George Powell, of the "Dove", identified several 
features, such as the West Reef, Table Bay ("Mensa") and Narrow 
Island (Gibbs).

Matthew Brisbane visited Seal Islands aboard the "Beaufoy" and 
James Wedell drafted a chart of the islands, remarking on the 
volcanic smoke seen at Bridgeman in 1821, which other seaman 
would also see in 1839 and in 1909.

The large Bellingshausen expeditions (1819-1821), the Dumont 
d'Urville (1837-1841), Wilkes (1838-1840) and Ross (1839-1843) 
ones, probably sighted the Islands, but did not land on them.

Sealing activitites nevertheless continued and the remains of 
a shipwreck in Stinker Head, on the west coast of Elephant, dates 
from about 1840. As does Charcot, researchers from the Chilean 
Antarctic Institute believe that these remains are the proof 
of fishing and hunting activities that were pursued 
from                     the Chilean seaboard.

When sealing was resumed in the Shetlands, after 1870, the 
"San José", a schooner owned by a Punta Arenas enterpreneur, 
José Nogueira, arrived at Seal Island leaving there a coal 
deposit; that ship floundered in the antarctic seas in 1882.

Norwegian Captain Carl Larsen, of the steamship "Jason" visited 
the Elephant Islands in 1895.
- 4 -

Chilean sealers went on working in that zone and in 1906 the Chilean Government planned an antarctic expedition that specifically aimed at the Elephant Island, but that year's earthquake prevented its realization.

In 1916 Shackleton's men landed on Valentine Cape, a rock headland that rises vertically to 240 meters in height, but dangerous snow avalanches made that explorer move camp to a new site 7 miles to the west, on Wild Cape, which is a low sandy stretch of land 90 meters long  and 30 meters wide, where a capsized boat was used as a tent by the victims of the shipwreck.

Diversely from the opinion expressed by Prof. Rudmose Brown to the Rescue Committee of the Royal Geographic Society of London, after 1914 the whalers no longer went to the Elephant Islands and, were it not for Shackleton's decision to seek help his men would most certainly have died.

On 1922-23, the Quest expedition which, after Shackleton's death in South Georgia was commanded by Frank Wild, landed on Minstrel Point and placed a light at Lookout Cape.

In 1928, a whaler recently acquired at Sandefjord by Soren Christensen, a Chilean-Norwegian whaling company with its siege at San Pedro of Chiloe, took Prof. Holtedahl to the Northwest coast of Clarence Island.

In 1936-37, several landings and scientific tasks were performed at Clarence and at Gibbs, during a trip of the British ship "Discovery".

Between January 22 and 23, 1955, the Chilean Navy vessel "Lautaro" docked at Elephant and two officials tried, in vain, to erect a commemorative plaque. As a homage to the Chilean writer and diplomat Salvador Reyes who proposed the plaque the small strait between Wild and Belsham Capes carries his name.
- 5 -

In the 1964 Antarctic season, Chilean geologists Araya and Hervé carried out geomorphological and geological studies that were later published in the 1966 INACH scientific series.

In 1970 the USA icebreaker "Glacier" docked at Stinker Head, Elephant Island, where geologist Ian Dalziel landed.

The 1970-71 British expedition led by Malcolm Burley, who had already followed the Shackleton route in South Georgia, carried out several scientifc tasks.

In 1972, a Chilean flag was raised on Wild Cape, 13 meters above sea level, together with a plaque to commemorate the occasion, by the men from the "Piloto Pardo" vessel.

In 1976, transported by USA research ship "Hero", Dalziel once again landed and, together with his companions climbed the Endurance Glacier.

On November of the same year, a British expedition commanded by Chris Furse remained in the archipelago for a three-month period and pioneered the climb of Clarence and the canoe crossing of the strait between Elephant and Clarence.

Also in 1976, the Chilean Navy installed the Escampavia Yelcho Light at Punta Lopez, Lloyd Cape, in Clarence Island.

Geologist Hervé, together with Pankhurst, carried out geological research in Bowles Cape, Clarence Island.

A team of the Geosciences Institute of the Rio de Janeiro Federal University established the first permanent refuge in Elephant Island, having published its contribution to geology in the 1986 Yearbook of the Brazilian Academy of Science.
- 6 -

RELICS

Remains of the Shackleton expedition have not been found. The 
boat "James Cairns" is now in the Greenwich Marine Museum and 
the bow of rescue ship "Yelcho" became a monument in a Punta 
Arenas square named after its Commander Luis A. Pardo.
