TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIV REUNION CONSULTIVA                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                            XIV CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIV REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                   XIV KOHCYЛЬТАТИВНОЕ COBEЩAHИE

                                                            RIO DE JANEIRO
                                                            1987

05-16 OCTOBER

                                                            ANT/XIV/W.P/9
                                                            (United States)

THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY :
INSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ASPECTS
THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY:

INSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ASPECTS

Detailed attention to the operation of the Antarctic
Treaty system has become a regular feature of Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings (ATCMs).  Important recommendations were
adopted on this topic at both ATCM XII and ATCM XIII and the
operation of the Antarctic Treaty system has a prominent place
on the agenda of ATCM XIV.

At the previous ATCM - ATCM XIII in Brussels - three
recommendations were adopted bearing directly upon the
operation of the Antarctic Treaty system:
XIII-1 - Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
Information;  XIII-2 - Operation of the Antarctic Treaty
System:  Overview; and XIII-15 - Matters Relating to the
Appointment of Observers at Consultative Meetings.  ATCM XIII
also agreed that there should be further consideration given to
three elements of the subject, both separately and
collectively, at ATCM XIV:  possible cost sharing, permanent
infrastructure and more frequent consultative meetings.
BACKGROUND

The Antarctic Treaty itself does not address institutional 
or administrative matters in any detail.  Article IX of the 
Treaty provides for the system of meetings which have become 
known as ATCMs and take place on a biennial basis.  Article IX 
defines the purposes of these meetings as the exchange of 
information, consultations on matters of common interest 
pertaining to Antarctica and recommending to governments 
measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the 
Treaty.

The Treaty also establishes a number of obligations 
regarding exchange of information among it parties.  There is 
provision for exchange of information among all Contracting 
Parties regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica 
and for scientific observations and results from Antarctica to 
be exchanged and made freely available (Article III).  The 
Treaty obliges each Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 
(ATCPs) to transmit reports of any inspections it carries out 
under Article VII of the Treaty to all other ATCPs.  Each 
Contracting Party is required to give advance notification of 
the other Contracting Parties of expeditions to Antarctica by 
its ships or nationals, and expeditions organized in or 
proceeding from its territory; of all stations it occupies in
- 3 -

Antarctica and of any military personnel or equipment,
permitted under the Treaty, that it intends to introduce into
Antarctica (Article VII).

Finally, the Treaty includes the possibility to a
conference to review the operation of the Treaty at any time
thirty years after its entry into force (Article XII) and makes
provision for the depositary function (Articles XII, XIII and
XII).

DEVELOPMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Based on the provisions of the Treaty, the ATCPs took a
series of initial steps in connection with ATCM I to deal with
administrative support of the consultative mechanism.  The
ATCPs first agreed upon a sequence of hostship of ATCMs.  It
included acceptance of the offer made by the Government of
Australia to host ATCM I combined with an informal
understanding that subsequent meetings should be hosted by
Consultative Parties in alphabetical order in the English
language beginning at ATCM II with Argentina.

Recommendations I-14 and I-16, adopted at ATCM I, dealt
with the preparation and organization of future ATCMs.
Recommendation I-14 called upon the host government of ATCM I
- 4 -

to send to each participating government a certified copy of
the final report and any other documents relative to the
meeting and to comply with any additional request, or answer
any questions on the subject and supply any additional
information on ATCM I requested by participating governments.
These procedures developed for ATCM I, though seen at the time
as interim, have remained ATCM practice since then.

Recommendation I-14 also called upon the host of the next
ATCM to consult with other governments entitled to participate
in regard to the provisional agenda and the dates of the
meeting. In essence, this recommendation establishes a
rotating secretariat since the venue of the meetings alternates
among Consultative Parties.  The country hosting the next
meeting serves as the repository and source for information
regarding that meeting.

Another recommendation from the First Consultative Meeting
(I-16) requests that governments distribute reports, studies
and documentation for the next consultative meetings through
diplomatic channels one month in advance of the meeting.  This
responsibility was broadened at the Seventh Consultative
Meeting, when it was agreed that the country hosting the last
consultative meeting would send a complete set of all documents
of the meeting to the host country of the next meeting, thus
improving the continuity of information.
- 5 -

At the Twelfth Consultative Meeting, a further requirement 
was added to the administrative responsibilities of the host 
government. It was agreed in Recommendation XII-6 that all 
Contracting Parties which were invited to the meeting shall 
receive copies of the final report and other documents of the 
meeting. (This reflects the fact that Parties to the Antarctic 
Treaty that are not ATCPs - the Non-Consultative Parties (NCPs) 
began attending ATCMs at ATCM XII.) The host government is 
also called upon to send a copy of the final report to the 
Secretary General of the United Nations and draw the attention 
of any specialized agency of the United Nations or other 
international organization to any part of the final report or 
other meeting document which might be relevant to that agency. 
Finally, the host government is charged with updating the 
Antarctic Treaty Handbook. Taken together, the above 
recommendations obligate the host government to provide 
considerable information to the increasing number of Treaty 
Parties.

Recommendation XII-6 also addressed the question of the 
public availability of Consultative Meeting documents and 
called upon the depositary government to examine the issue. As 
a result, at ATCM XIII, Recommendation XIII-1 was adopted which 
calls upon the Consultative Parties to designate "national 
contact points" as sources of specific kinds of information
- 6 -

about the Antarctic Treaty system.  In discussion of this
matter, a number of ATCPs noted the magnitude of the effort
involved in dissemination of such information and took the view
that it could best and most effeciently be carried out in
centralized fashion.

At ATCM XIII, the possibility of the establishment of a
permanent infrastructure was also discussed from a number of
other perspectives, and it was agreed to consider the issue
again at ATCM XIV, with particular reference to the need for a
centralized organization, plus the possibility of annual
meetings, and the need for the sharing of meeting costs.

There was another related development at ATCM XIII which
bears on the question of the administrative requirements of the
Treaty's organizational structure.  The meeting agreed that
there was a growing need for greater interchange among the
various components of the Antarctic Treaty system.  This term
is used to describe the Treaty itself and the body of actions
and recommendations from the Consultative Meetings, the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources, and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research.
It would also include the anticipated future agreement on
Antarctic mineral resources.  Recommendation XIII-2 calls for
reports from the components of the system at each ATCM.
- 7 -

DEVELOPMENTS BEARING UPON INSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
REQUIREMENTS

The emphasis which has emerged at recent ATCMs upon 
institutional and administrative requirements reflects a number 
of trends in the evolution of the Antarctic Treaty system. 
First, there is the simple fact that participation in the 
Antarctic Treaty has grown in significant fashion since 1961. 
The number of Contracting Parties to the Treaty has tripled and 
the number of ATCPs has almost doubled. Beginning in 1983, the 
non-consultative parties also attend ATCMs.

Second, the complexity and volume of matters being dealt 
with at ATCMs are increasing.  This mirrors growth in 
activities in Antarctica as well as increased emphasis upon 
multi-disciplinary scientific research aimed at understanding 
global processses.  The body of agreed recommendations and 
other actions taken at ATCMs has expanded concomitantly.

Third, and relatedly, there has been expansion in the 
interaction between matters dealt with at ATCMs and the 
activities of other international bodies.  The presence of 
experts from other international organizations, for the first 
time, at ATCM XIV testifies to the growth in such interaction.
- 8 -

Fourth, the Antarctic Treaty has evolved into a system
which includes two complementary but distinct treaties - one on
seals and the other on Antarctic marine living resources - and
which is likely soon to include a third on Antarctic mineral
resources. These additional agreements incorporate or foresee
permanent institutional structures.

Finally, there has been a significant expansion in
interest in Antarctica, including interest among countries and
organizations outside of the Antarctic Treaty system.

IMPLICATIONS

These trends have a number of implications for the
operation of the Antarctic Treaty system. The preparations for
and organization of ATCMs have become more complex, more
demanding and more costly. This situation is complicated by
the fact that, for reasons external to the Antarctic Treaty
system some ATCPs are not in a position to host ATCMs (lack of
diplomatic relations). This increases the burden on the
remaining ATCPs.

Second, the requirements for direct communication among
the Contracting Parties to the Treaty in fulfillment of the
obligations of the Treaty and agreed ATCM recommendations has
- 9 -

expanded significantly. Again, the lack of diplomatic 
relations among some ATCMs makes discharge of these obliqations 
increasingly difficult. For example, the United States as 
depositary is receiving growing numbers of requests to 
facilitate such communications.

Third, an important objective of recent recommendations on 
the operation of the Antarctic Treaty system has been to ensure 
the availability of adequate and accurate information about the 
system. However, the demand for information about Antarctica 
and the Antarctic Treaty system has grown enormously. 
Individuals and organizations, as well as countries newly 
active and/or interested in Antarctic matters, seek with 
increasing frequency detailed information about activities in 
Antarctica as well as how the Treaty and its related 
instruments function. The debates on Antarctica at the UN 
General Assembly illustrate a wide disparity in understanding 
of Antarctic matters, in part related to the availability of 
information.

Fourth, there is need for improved coordination among the 
Contracting Parties to the Treaty in the periods between 
ATCMs. The pace of activities in Antarctica itself and the 
increased frequency with which Antarctic related issues arise 
on other fora call for closer and more continuous coordination 
among Contracting Parties.
- 10 -

Fifth, there is growing need for coordination among the
components of the Antarctic Treaty system.  The provision for
reports from those components in Recommendation XIII-2 is one
response to this need.  As the nature and scale of activities
in Antarctica increase, it will be important to ensure that the
mechanisms of the Treaty system responsible for managing the
various categories of these activities work in continuous and
complementary fashion to prevent conflict in uses and ensure
achievement of the system's overall objectives.

Sixth, there is growing need to oversee and develop the
cooperative working relationships between the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative mechanism and other international bodies involved
in Antarctic matters.  Increased linkage in the substantive
work of the ATCMs and other international organizations
requires closer and more continuous contact and coordination.

INSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS

Examination of the operation of the ATCMs and the
evolution in their operation makes it possible to identify
several categories of institutional and administrative
functions necessary for the successful working of the
Antarctica Treaty Consultative mechanism.  The following list -
which is not intended to be exhaustive - is designed to
illustrate these categories:
- 11 -

1) Meeting support

--  planning, organization, and reporting of Preparatory,
Consultative, and Special Consultative Meetings.

--  preparation of draft agendas, distribution of
documents, final reports, and revision of the Antarctic
Treaty Handbook.

--  secretariat services at Consultative Meetings
including circulation of meeting documents.

2)  Information/Archive

--  archiving of documents and information about the
Antarctic Treaty system.

--  publication and distribution reports, including Final
Consultative Meeting Reports and the Treaty Handbook.

--  response to requests for information about the
Antarctic Treaty system from participants within the
system, from states and organizations outside the system
and from the interested public.
- 12 -

3) Representation/Coordination

-- communications with other international organizations 
non-parties and the public.

-- monitoring and assistance in the coordination of the 
activities of other components of the Antarctic Treaty 
System.

-- representation of the Antarctic Treaty Parties in 
meetings of other international organizations.

4) Financial

-- costs of the operation of the Consultative mechanism 
(of carrying out the functions identified above).

-- possible sharing of costs, including development of 
Antarctic Treaty budgets and methods of assessing costs.

RECOMMENDATION

We believe that at ATCM XIV there should be a structured 
discussion of the administrative/institutional functions to 
support ATCMs.  The purpose of this discussion would be to
- 13 -

assess how those functions are currently being performed and
which of them need to be performed on a more centralized and/or
continuous basis to properly support the evolving requirements
of ATCMs. If such functions are identified, it should be
possible to develop means of providing the necessary
centralization and/or continuity pending decisions on the
establishment of a permanent infrastructure.
