Page 1 of 2 
XXV ATCM – CEP V 
Warsaw, Poland, 10–20 September 2002 
 
WORKING PAPER 
Submitted by SCAR 
 
CEP Agenda Item 4d 
 
SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES 
 
 
Introduction 
1. 
The Inter-sessional Open-ended Contact Group on Specially Protected Species, co-
ordinated by Argentina, has examined a number of aspects of the case for the 
designation of Specially Protected Species.  It has concluded: 
• 
that there is considerable support for such a designation; 
• 
that the Annex II of the Protocol is at present inadequate in providing clear 
guidelines on how such a designation might be applied and controlled; and 
• 
that the IUCN criteria already in use everywhere else in the world provide a sound 
scientific basis for assessing the conservation status of Antarctic species.   
2. 
To proceed to a more organised application of the designation of Specially Protected 
Species a methodology is required which provides independent, scientifically based 
recommendations to the ATCM for consideration.  SCAR now makes such a proposal. 
 
 
Proposed process for the assessment of conservation status of Antarctic flora and fauna 
3. 
In order to establish a robust system for assessment it is proposed that an initial limited 
approach with well-documented species will be undertaken.  This will be limited to birds 
and seals.   
4. 
SCAR will use appropriate groups to review species currently identified by IUCN as 
globally threatened in the IUCN Red List (ie.  categories of Vulnerable, Endangered and 
Critically Endangered) which meet the Antarctic Treaty criteria for occurring in the 
Antarctic Treaty area, either as breeders or as migrants.  This initial review will assess 
whether the species are also regionally threatened, with respect to the Antarctic Treaty 
area and the CCAMLR area.  The criteria and approach to guide this evaluation will be 
those set out in the Gärdenfors et al (2001) and/or later versions as approved by IUCN.  
For birds and seals SCAR already has appropriate Groups of Experts established. 
5. 
The SCAR groups would then discuss the recommendations with appropriate IUCN Red 
List Authority Groups (through some mechanism yet to be developed with IUCN) to 
ensure consistency of use and interpretation of criteria with the IUCN global assessment 
and/or with other regional assessments. 
6. 
For species considered to meet the criteria for regionally threatened status, 
recommendations would be forwarded for consideration by the CEP.  These 
recommendations would be accompanied by an indicative statement of the kinds of land-
based management actions which might be appropriate to protect, or improve the status 
of, the species concerned. 
Page 2 of 2 
7. 
Once the work on these initial groups has been completed and discussed with the CEP 
SCAR would wish to consider the methodology and the resource commitments implied 
in extending this treatment to other Antarctic groups before proceeding further. 
8. 
At present it is envisaged that the extension of this process would first deal with species 
other than birds or seals identified in the IUCN Red List as globally Near Threatened or 
Data Deficient.  It would follow this with a similar review of all species endemic (or 
near-endemic) to the Antarctic Treaty area. 
9. 
SCAR would consult with appropriate IUCN groups in respect of any taxa which, in its 
opinion, might merit recognition under the IUCN categories of global threat and through 
this process suggest appropriate changes to the revision of the IUCN Red List.  It 
appears that at present new expert groups might be needed for birds, marine mammals, 
marine vertebrates, marine invertebrates, terrestrial invertebrates, plants (this might even 
require separate groups for lichens and mosses).  It is possible that IUCN will not have 
established groups covering all of these fields.  SCAR recognises that, in the longer 
term, the scientific conservation issue needs to be addressed regardless of the competent 
legal authority for some of these groups.  This will clearly have implications for the 
interaction with CCAMLR. 
 
 
References 
 
GÄRDENFORS U.  et al.  2001.  The application of IUCN Red List Criteria at regional levels.  
Conservation Biology, 15, 1206-1212. 
 
