 
 
1
XXV ATCM 
Working Paper WP-010 
Agenda Item: CEP 4g 
UNITED KINGDOM 
Original : English 
 
To be translated soon 
 
 
 
Review of draft Protected Area Management Plans 
Report of the UK-led Intersessional Contact Group 
 
Working Paper 
Submitted by the United Kingdom 
 
 
Introduction. 
 
1. At CEP IV the UK submitted 6 draft management plans for protected areas for the 
Committee’s consideration.  These were: 
 
• Specially Protected Area No 8, Dion Islands 
• Specially Protected Area No 9, Green Island 
• Specially Protected Area No 21, Avian Island 
• Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6, Byers Peninsula (submitted jointly with Chile) 
• Site of Special Scientific Interest No 29, Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights 
• Site of Special Scientific Interest No 31, Mount Flora 
 
2. To review these draft management plans CEP IV decided to establish an open-ended 
intersessional contact group to be led by the UK, with the following terms of reference 
(paragraphs 65 and 66 of the Final Report of CEP IV refers): 
 
• Ensure that each of the draft Management Plans are consistent with the Guide to the 
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas; 
• Ensure consistency of approach of management measures, as appropriate, across the 
Management Plans being reviewed; 
• Report back to CEP V on the results of the contact group’s assessment and provide 
recommendations on how the CEP should proceed with respect to these Management 
Plans. 
 
Intersessional Review Process. 
 
3. The UK initiated the contact group by means of a circular email to all CEP contact points 
on 27 February 2002.  Australia, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, The United, ASOC, 
IAATO, and IUCN responded to say that they wished to participate in the work of the 
group. 
 
 
 
2
4. By the agreed deadline, Norway, the United States, and SCAR had submitted comments on 
the draft plans in accordance with the terms of reference.  The plans were revised on the 
basis of the comments received.  Comments supplied previously by Australia, Spain and 
Uruguay were also incorporated into the revised draft plans. 
 
Key issues. 
 
5. The following key issues arose during the intersessional review process: 
 
• Following the entry into force of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol on 24 May 
2002, all SPAs and SSSIs automatically became ASPAs.  The draft plans under review 
by this group have therefore been renamed and renumbered on the basis of Resolution 
V (1996); 
• Revised and updated maps have been prepared for the majority of the draft plans both 
to take account of the renaming and renumbering of sites as ASPAs, as well as the 
comments received from SCAR; 
• SCAR also suggested that geological maps should be prepared for Ablation Valley 
(ASPA 147) and Byers Peninsula (ASPA 126) as both sites are protected (in part) for 
their geological values.  For Ablation Valley it should be noted that insufficient data are 
currently available to allow such a map to be prepared.  However, a geological map for 
Byers Peninsula will be prepared in due course.  However, it is suggested that the lack 
of this map should not prevent adoption of the Management Plan; 
• On the matter of consistency between plans two particular issues are worthy of note; 
i.e. overflight restrictions, and controls over poultry products.   
o In relation to the first of these, where overflight restrictions have been 
incorporated into the plans identical height / distance limits have been applied.   
o In relation to the latter, the UK recognises that at present there is no scientific 
evidence that Newcastle’s disease has been or can be transferred from poultry 
products to Antarctic avifauna.  Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure 
controls over the use of poultry products within sites protected in part for their 
avifauna have been included.  However, for Avian Island (ASPA 117), a site 
protected solely for its large breeding bird colonies, poultry products have been 
prohibited entirely.  However, such an approach may not be consistent with 
draft management plans for sites elsewhere in Antarctica.  The CEP may 
therefore wish to take a common view on the appropriate standards to apply on 
his matter. 
 
Summary. 
 
6. The revised draft Protected Area Management Plans are attached to this Working Paper for 
the Committee’s further consideration. 
7. The intersessional contact group is satisfied that the plans have been appropriately revised 
and that they are consistent with the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans.  The 
contact group therefore recommends that the CEP forward these draft plans to the ATCM 
for adoption by means of the attached draft Measure (Appendix 1). 
 
 
3
Appendix 1. 
 
Draft Measure nn (2002) 
 
Antarctic Protected Area System: Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected 
Areas 
 
The Representatives, 
Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) allocating responsibility among Consultative Parties for the revision 
of Management Plans for protected areas; 
Noting that the draft Management Plans appended to this Measure have been endorsed by the 
Committee for Environmental Protection and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
(SCAR); 
Recognising that these Areas support outstanding natural features and biota of scientific interest; 
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of Article 6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty: 
 
That the Management Plans for the following sites: 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 107, Emperor Island, Dion Islands; 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 108, Green Island, Bertholot Islands; 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay; 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 126, Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island; 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 147, Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights; 
• Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 148, Mount Flora, Hope Bay; 
and which are annexed to this Measure, be adopted. 
 
 
4
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 147 
ABLATION VALLEY AND GANYMEDE HEIGHTS, ALEXANDER ISLAND 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
 
Ablation Point – Ganymede Heights (latitude 70°48' S, longitude 68°30' W, approximately 180 km2 , 
Alexander Island, was originally designated in 1989 as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 29 
through Recommendation XV-6, after a proposal by the United Kingdom. Included was a largely ice-free 
region between latitudes 70°45' S and 70°55' S and from longitude 68°40' W to George VI Sound coastline. 
The Area comprised several valley systems separated by ridges and plateau of about 650-760 m high.  
The original management plan (Recommendation XV-6) described the Area as “one of the largest 
ablation areas in West Antarctica…[with]…a complex geology, the main rock types being conglomerates, 
arkosic sandstones and shales with subordinate pebbly mudstones and sedimentary breccias.  The base of 
the succession is formed of a spectacular mélange, including large blocks of lava and agglomerate.  This 
outcrops on the valley floors and at the base of several cliffs.  [The Area] possesses a wide range of 
geomorphological features including raised beaches, moraine systems and patterned ground.  There are 
several permanently frozen freshwater lakes and many ice-free ponds supporting a diverse flora (including 
aquatic bryophytes) and fauna.  The vegetation is generally sparse, with the unique moss and liverwort-
dominated community type being restricted to ‘oases’ where water issues from otherwise dry barren 
hillsides.  The terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems are vulnerable to human impact and therefore merit 
protection from uncontrolled human presence”. In summary, the principal values of the Area were 
considered to be the geological, geomorphological, glaciological, limnological, and ecological features, and 
the associated outstanding scientific interest of one of the largest ice-free ablation area in West Antarctica. 
The values noted in the original designation are reaffirmed and expanded in the present management 
plan.  Further values evident from scientific descriptions of Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights, are also 
considered important as reasons for special protection of the Area.  These values are:   
• The presence of exposures of the Fossil Bluff Formation, which is of prime geological importance 
because it is the only known area of unbroken exposure of rocks spanning the Jurassic – Cretaceous 
boundary in the Antarctic, which makes this a critical locality for understanding the change in floras 
and faunas at this temporal boundary; 
• The presence of an exceptional and unique contiguous geomorphological record of glacier and ice-shelf 
fluctuations extending over several thousand years, together with an outstanding assemblage of other 
geomorphological features derived from glacial, periglacial, lacustrine, aeolian, alluvial and slope 
processes; 
• Two perennially frozen freshwater lakes (Ablation and Moutonnée lakes) which have the unusual 
property of contact with the saline waters of George VI Sound; 
• The presence of marine biota, including the fish Trematomus bernacchii, in Ablation Lake, where 
several seals have also been observed, despite the fact that it is almost 100 km from open sea; 
• The Area has the greatest bryophyte diversity of any site at this latitude in Antarctica (at least 21 
species); it also has a diverse lichen (>35 taxa), alga and cyanobacteria biota.  Many of the bryophytes 
and lichens are at the southern limit of their know distributions. There are several species which are 
very rare in the Antarctic; 
• Several mosses occur in lakes and ponds to depths of 9 m. Although these are all terrestrial species, 
they tolerate inundation for several months each year when their habitat floods. One species, 
Campyliadelphus polygamus, has adapted to an aquatic existence, and some permanently submerged 
colonies reach large dimensions, with shoots in excess of 30 cm length.  These are the best examples of 
aquatic vegetation in the Antarctic Peninsula region; 
 
 
5
• Several bryophyte species within the Area are fertile (producing sporophytes), and some of these are 
not known or very rare in this condition elsewhere in the Antarctic (e.g. the liverwort Cephaloziella 
varians, and mosses Bryoerythrophyllum recurvirostrum, Distichium capillaceum, Schistidium spp.); 
• With the exception of one site on the northwestern coast, the Area has the most extensive stands of 
vegetation on Alexander Island.  Many of these occur on seepage areas where the bryophyte and lichen 
communities cover up to 100 m2 or more. In the sheltered seepage area assemblages of terricolous 
species develop communities not known elsewhere in Antarctica, while exposed rock ridges and stable 
boulder fields support a community of locally abundant lichens, usually dominated by Usnea 
sphacelata; 
• Ablation Valley is comparatively rich in the number and abundance of microarthropod species for its 
locality this far south, with representation of the springtail Friesia topo which is thought to be endemic 
to Alexander Island.  Ablation Valley is also the only site on Alexander Island where the predatory 
mite Rhagidia gerlachei has been described, making the food web more complex than other sites at this 
latitude.  
The boundaries of the Area designated under Recommendation XV-6 have been changed, replacing 
the former rectangular-shaped boundary with one that is defined on the basis of prominent geographical 
features and the regional hydrological catchments. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights aims to: 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human 
disturbance and sampling in the Area; 
• 
preserve the Area for its potential as a largely undisturbed reference site; 
• 
allow scientific research in the Area consistent with the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• 
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed 
prominently at General San Martín (Argentina) and at Rothera (UK) scientific stations in Marguerite 
Bay, where copies of this Management Plan shall be made freely available. 
• Abandoned equipment or materials shall be removed to the maximum extent practcable. 
• Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall 
be secured and maintained in good condition. 
• Visits shall be made as necessary (preferably at least once every five years) to assess whether the Area 
continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
maintenance measures are adequate. 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights ASPA No. 147 location map. Inset: Location of Ablation 
Valley on the Antarctic Peninsula 
Map 2: Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights ASPA No. 147 topographic sketch map.   
 
 
6
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights (between latitudes 70°45' S and 70°55' S and longitudes 68°21' 
and 68°40' W, approximately 180 km2, is situated on the east side of Alexander Island, the largest island off 
the western coast of Palmer Land, Antarctic Peninsula (Map 1).  The Area has a central west–east extent of 
about 10 km and a north–south extent of about 18 km, flanked to the west by the upper part of Jupiter 
Glacier, to the east by the permanent ice shelf in George VI Sound, to the north by Grotto Glacier and to 
the south by the lower reaches of Jupiter Glacier.  Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights contains the 
largest contiguous ice-free area in the Antarctic Peninsula sector of Antarctica, with the smaller permanent 
ice fields and valley glaciers within the massif representing only about 17% of the Area. The topography of 
the region is mountainous, comprising steep-sided valleys separated by gently undulating plateau-like ridge 
crests lying generally between 650-750 m, rising to a maximum altitude of 1070 m (Clapperton and Sugden 
1983). The region has been heavily glaciated, although the relatively flat-lying attitude of the sedimentary 
rocks and rapid weathering have contributed to a generally rounded form of topography, coupled with sheer 
cliff ‘steps’ of thickly-bedded sandstones and conglomerates (Taylor et al 1979).   
The Area includes four principal ice-free valleys (Ablation, Moutonnée, Flatiron and Striation), the 
first three of which contain large ice-covered freshwater lakes (Heywood 1977, Convey and Smith 1997).  
The largest of these is the proglacial Ablation Lake (approximately 7 km2), which has been impounded by 
shelf ice penetrating up-valley under pressure from the westward movement of the 100-500 m thick George 
VI Ice Shelf, the surface of which lies 30 m above sea level (Heywood 1977, Clapperton and Sugden 
1982). Biologically, the terrestrial ecosystem is intermediate between the relatively mild maritime Antarctic 
farther north and the colder, drier continental Antarctic to the south. As a “dry valley” area it is extremely 
rich in biota and serves as a valuable contrast to the more extreme and biologically impoverished ablation 
areas on the Antarctic continent (Smith 1988).  For a detailed description of the geology and biology of the 
Area see Annex 1. 
 
BOUNDARIES 
The designated Area comprises the entire Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights massif, bounded in 
the west by the principal ridge dividing Jupiter Glacier from the main Ablation – Moutonnée – Flatiron 
valleys (Map 2).  In the east, the boundary is defined by the western margin of George VI Ice Shelf. The 
northern boundary of the Area is defined as the principal ridge dividing Grotto Glacier from Erratic Valley 
and other tributary valleys feeding into Ablation Valley, immediately to the south. In the northwest of the 
Area, the boundary extends across the mostly-glaciated col separating upper Jupiter Glacier from Ablation 
Valley.  The southern boundary of the Area, from east of the principal ridge on the west side of Flatiron 
Valley to where Jupiter Glacier joins George VI Ice Shelf, is defined as the northern lateral margin of 
Jupiter Glacier.   
As the margin between Ablation Lake and George VI Ice Shelf is in places indistinct, the eastern 
boundary of the Area at Ablation Valley is defined as a straight line extending due south from the eastern 
extremity of Ablation Point to where the ice shelf abuts land, and from where the eastern boundary follows 
the land / ice shelf margin. The physiography is similar further south at Moutonnée Lake, and the eastern 
boundary in this locality is defined as a straight line extending from the eastern extremity of the point on 
the northern side of (and partially enclosing) Moutonnée Lake to the locality of a prominent meltwater pool 
where the ice shelf abuts land, and from where the boundary follows the land / ice shelf margin south to 
where Jupiter Glacier and George VI Ice Shelf adjoin.  The Area thus includes the entirety of Ablation and 
Moutonnée lakes and those parts of the ice shelf behind which they are impounded. 
 
 
 
7
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
There are no structures known to be present in the Area.  A number of cairns have been installed as 
survey markers in throughout the Area (Perkins 1995, Harris 2001).  Nine plastic bright red reflector 
markers (30 cm high, held down by rocks) have been placed to mark the airstrip in Moutonnée Valley. The 
nearest structure to the Area appears to be an abandoned caboose at Spartan Cwm, approximately 20 km 
south of the Area, although in 2001 the structure was reported to be buried by snow. A summer-only 
scientific camp facility exists at Fossil Bluff (UK), approximately 60 km to the south on the eastern coast of 
Alexander Island.  The nearest permanently occupied scientific research stations are in Marguerite Bay 
(General San Martín (Argentina) and Rothera Research Station (UK)), approximately 350 km to the north 
(Map 1). 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
There are no other protected areas within 300 km of the Area.  The nearest protected area to 
Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights is Lagotellerie Island, SPA No. 19, approximately 350 km north in 
Marguerite Bay (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national 
authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, or for essential 
management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural or scientific values of the Area; 
• 
any proposed sampling will not take, displace, remove or damage such quantities of rock, soil, water, 
or native flora or fauna so that their distribution or abundance at Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights 
is significantly affected; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were not 
included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• 
Access to the Area shall be by aircraft, vehicle or on foot. 
• 
Movement over land within the Area shall be on foot. 
• 
Movement by vehicle within the Area shall be restricted to snow or ice surfaces. 
• 
Movement by aircraft within the Area is subject to the restrictions described below. 
 
 
8
There are no special restrictions on the points of access to the Area, nor on the overland or air routes 
used to move to and from the Area. However, access from George VI Ice Shelf may be difficult because of 
pressure ice, and some routes into the Area from the glaciers to the west are steep, crevassed and arduous.  
• 
Landing of fixed-wing aircraft within the Area is restricted to the ice-covered lakes or to a single 
terrestrial site immediately west of Moutonnée Lake, provided landings are feasible.  
Pressure deformation of the ice surface of lakes, meltwater and thinning ice-cover may make landing 
on lake ice impractical later in the summer.  Landings at Ablation Lake and the terrestrial site were carried 
out in November 2000.  The terrestrial landing site near Moutonnée Lake (Map 2) is oriented E–W and 
consists of approximately 350 m of gently sloping coarse gravel on a bench raised approximately 2 m 
above the surrounding valley. The gravel bench was mostly frozen in November 2000, and generally dry 
and well drained in February 2001 (some 50 m was moist and soft at the western end of the strip at that 
time). Red reflective markers at both ends mark the landing site and mid-way on the side, with some red-
painted stones also marking the western (upper) end in the form of an arrow.  Tyre-impressions are evident 
in the gravel. Should helicopter access prove feasible, specific landing sites have not been designated but 
landings are prohibited from within 200 m of lake shores, or within 100 m of any vegetated or moist 
ground, or in stream beds. Access is also possible by aircraft to upper Jupiter Glacier (550 m), immediately 
west of Ablation Valley and outside of the Area, from where access may be made into the Area overland on 
foot. 
 
• 
Pilots, air crew, or other people on aircraft, are prohibited from moving on foot beyond the immediate 
vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorised by Permit.   
• 
Any visitors should move carefully so as to minimise disturbance to soil and vegetated surfaces. Avoid 
walking in stream or dry lake beds, or on moist ground, if practical, to avoid disturbance to the 
hydrology and / or damage to sensitive plant communities.  Care should be taken even when moisture 
is not obviously present, as inconspicuous plants may still colonise the ground.  Visitors should by 
preference and where practical walk on rocky or ice-covered terrain, and avoid sensitive 
geomorphological features such as dunes.  Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent 
with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise 
trampling effects. 
• 
Diving in lakes within the Area is normally prohibited unless it is necessary for compelling scientific 
purposes.  If diving is undertaken, great care should be taken to avoid disturbance of the water column 
and of sensitive sediments and biological communities. The sensitivity of the water column, sediments 
and biological communities to disruption by diving activities shall be taken into account before Permits 
are granted for these purposes. 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• 
Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem or scientific values of the Area, and which 
cannot be served elsewhere; 
• 
Essential management activities, including monitoring. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit and permanent 
structures or installations, other than the airstrip markers, are prohibited.  All scientific equipment installed 
in the Area shall be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal 
investigator and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be a 
condition of the Permit. 
 
 
 
9
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
When necessary for purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed within the 
Area. One camp site has been designated within the Area: it is located on the north-western (upper) end of 
the airstrip in Moutonnée Valley (latitude 70°51'48" S, longitude 68°21'39" W) (Map 2). The site is not 
marked, although tents should be erected as close as practicable to the marker on the north-western end of 
the airstrip. This site should be used by preference when working in this vicinity. Other specific camp site 
locations have not, as yet, been designated, although camping is prohibited on sites where significant 
vegetation is present. Camps should be located as far as practicable (preferably at least 200 m) from 
lakeshores, and avoid dry lake or stream beds (which may host an inconspicuous biota).  By preference and 
where practical, camps should be located on snow or ice surfaces.  Previously existing campsites should be 
re-used where possible, except where the above guidelines suggest these were inappropriately located. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area 
and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken against accidental introductions.  No herbicides or 
pesticides shall be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, 
which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed 
from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.  Fuel is not to be 
stored in the Area, unless authorised by Permit for specific scientific or management purposes. All 
materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that 
stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is 
minimised.  If release occurs which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged 
only where the impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The 
appropriate authority should be notified of any materials released and not removed that were not included 
in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Killing of any seal within the Area is prohibited. Any other taking or harmful interference with 
native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is 
involved, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be 
used as a minimum standard. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and should 
be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  Material of human origin 
likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or 
otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the 
material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, except human and domestic liquid wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human and 
domestic liquid wastes may be disposed of within the Area down ice cracks along the margin of George VI 
Ice Shelf or Jupiter Glacier, or by burying in moraine along the ice margin in these localities as close as 
practical to the ice. Disposal of human and domestic liquid wastes in this manner shall be more than 200 m 
from, and avoiding the catchments of, the main lakes in Ablation, Moutonnée or Flatiron valleys, or shall 
otherwise be removed from the Area.  
 
 
 
10
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can 
continue to be met 
1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, which 
may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for protective measures. 
2. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values derived from the relatively low level of recent 
human impact at Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights, visitors shall take special precautions against 
introductions.  Of concern are microbial, invertebrate or plant introductions derived from soils at other 
Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica.  Visitors shall ensure that 
sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area are thoroughly cleaned or sterilised.  To the 
maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment to be used in the Area shall be thoroughly 
cleaned beforehand. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as appropriate, the 
information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties should maintain a record of 
such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of 
activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow 
evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit 
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to 
be used both in any review of the management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
Bibliography 
 
Bell, C.M. 1975. Structural geology of parts of Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 
41 and 42: 43-58. 
Butterworth, P.J. 1985. Sedimentology of Ablation Valley, Alexander Island: report on Antarctic 
field work. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  66: 73-82. 
Butterworth, P.J., Crame, J.A., Howlett, P.J. and Macdonald, D.I.M. 1988. Lithostratigraphy of 
Upper Jurassic – Lower Cretaceous strata of eastern Alexander Island, Antarctica. 
Cretaceous Research  9: 249-64. 
Clapperton, C.M. and Sugden, D.E. 1982. Late Quaternary glacial history of George VI Sound 
area, West Antarctica. Quaternary Research 18: 243-67. 
Clapperton, C.M. and Sugden, D.E. 1983. Geomorphology of the Ablation Point massif, 
Alexander Island, Antarctica. Boreas 12: 125-35. 
Convey P., Greenslade P., Richard K.J. and Block W. 1996. The terrestrial arthropod fauna of the 
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands - Collembola. Polar Biology 
16(4): 257-59. 
Convey P. and Lewis Smith, R.I.L. 1997.  The terrestrial arthropod fauna and its habitats in 
northern Marguerite Bay and Alexander Island, maritime Antarctic. Antarctic Science 9(1): 
12-26. 
Crame, J.A. 1981. The occurrence of Anopaea (Bivalvia: Inoceramidae) in the Antarctic 
Peninsula. Journal of Mollusca Studies  47: 206-219. 
 
 
11
Crame, J.A. 1985. New Late Jurassic Oxytomid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula region. 
British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  69: 35-55. 
Crame, J.A. and Howlett, P.J. 1988. Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous biostratigraphy of the 
Fossil Bluff Formation, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  78: 1-35. 
Croxall, J.P., Steele, W.K., McInnes, S.J. and Prince, P.A. 1995. Breeding distribution of the 
Snow Petrel Pagodroma nivea. Marine Ornithology 23(2): 69-99. 
Elliott, M.R. 1974. Stratigraphy and sedimentary petrology of the Ablation Point area, Alexander 
Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 39: 87-113. 
Greenslade, P. 1995. Collembola from the Scotia Arc and Antarctic Peninsula including 
descriptions of two new species and notes on biogeography.  Polskie Pismo 
Entomologiczne 64: 305-19. 
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas 
originally proposed by the United States of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit 
report. Internal report for the National Science Foundation, US, and the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
Heywood, R.B. 1977. A limnological survey of the Ablation Point area, Alexander Island, 
Antarctica. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 279: 39-54. 
Heywood, R.B. and Light, J.J. 1975. First direct evidence of life under Antarctic shelf ice. Nature 
254: 591-92. 
Hodgson, D. 2001. Millennial-scale history of the George VI Sound ice shelf and 
palaeoenvironmental history of Alexander Island. BAS Scientific Report - Sledge 
Charlie 2000-2001. Ref. R/2000/NT5. 
Howlett, P.J. 1986. Olcostephanus (Ammonitina) from the Fossil Bluff Formation, Alexander 
Island, and its stratigraphical significance. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  70: 71-77. 
Howlett, P.J. 1988. Latest Jurassic and Early Cretaceous cephalopod faunas of eastern 
Alexander Island, Antarctica.  Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University College, London. 
Light, J.J. and Heywood, R.B. 1975. Is the vegetation of continental Antarctica predominantly 
aquatic? Nature 256: 199-200. 
Lipps, J.H., Krebs, W.N. and Temnikow, N.K. 1977. Microbiota under Antarctic ice shelves. 
Nature 265: 232-33. 
Maslen, N.R. 1982. An unidentified nematode-trapping fungus from a pond on Alexander Island. 
British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 51: 285-87. 
Rowley P.D. and Smellie J.L. 1990.  Southeastern Alexander Island.  In LeMasurier, W.E. & 
Thomson, J.W., eds. Volcanoes of the Antarctic plate and southern oceans. Antarctic 
Research Series 48. Washington D.C., American Geophysical Union: 277-279. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1988.  Bryophyte oases in ablation valleys on Alexander Island, Antarctica.  
The Bryologist 91(1): 45-50. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1996.  Terrestrial and freshwater biotic components of the western Antarctic 
Peninsula.  In Ross, R.M., Hofmann, E.E. and Quetin, L.B. Foundations for ecological 
research west of the Antarctic Peninsula.  Antarctic Research Series 70: American 
Geophysical Union, Washington D.C.: 15-59. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1997.  Oases as centres of high plant diversity and dispersal in Antarctica.  In 
Lyons, W.B., Howard-Williams, C. and Hawes, I. Ecosystem processes in Antarctic ice-free 
landscapes. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam: 119-28. 
Starý, J. and Block, W. 1998.  Distribution and biogeography of oribatid mites (Acari: Oribatida) in 
Antarctica, the sub-Antarctic and nearby land areas. Journal of Natural History  32: 861-94. 
 
 
12
Sugden, D.E. and Clapperton, C.N. 1980. West Antarctic ice sheet fluctuations in the Antarctic 
Peninsula area. Nature 286: 378-81. 
Sugden, D.E. and Clapperton, C.M. 1981. An ice-shelf moraine, George VI Sound, Antarctica. 
Annals of Glaciology 2: 135-41. 
Taylor, B.J., Thomson, M.R.A. and Willey, L.E. 1979. The geology of the Ablation Point – 
Keystone Cliffs area, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports 82. 
Thomson, M.R.A. 1972. Ammonite faunas of south-eastern Alexander Island and their 
stratigraphical significance.  In Adie, R.J. (ed) Antarctic Geology and Geophysics, 
Universitetsforlaget, Oslo. 
Thomson, M.R.A. 1979. Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous Ammonite faunas of the Ablation 
Point area, Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Reports 97. 
Thomson, M.R.A. and Willey, L.E. 1972. Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous Inoceramus 
(Bivalvia) from south-east Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 29: 1-19. 
Willey, L.E. 1973. Belemnites from south-eastern Alexander Island: II. The occurrence of the 
family Belemnopseidae in the Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous. British Antarctic 
Survey Bulletin 36: 33-59. 
Willey, L.E. 1975. Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous Pinnidae (Bivalvia) from southern 
Alexander Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 41 and 42: 121-31. 
 
 
13
Annex 1. 
 
6(i)  Additional information on the natural features of the Area. 
CLIMATE 
No extended meteorological records are available for the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights area, 
but the climate has been described as dominated by the dual influences of easterly-moving cyclonic 
depressions of the Southern Ocean, against the more continental, north to northwesterly, flow of cold 
anticyclonic air from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  The former bring 
relatively mild weather, strong northerly winds and a heavy cloud cover to the region, whereas the latter 
induces clear, cold and stable conditions with temperatures below 0º C, and relatively light winds from the 
south.  Based on data recorded nearby (25 km) in the early 1970s, the mean summer temperature was 
estimated as just below freezing point, with mean annual temperature estimated at about -9º C (Heywood 
1977);  precipitation was estimated at <200 mm of water equivalent per year, with little snow falling in 
summer.  A thin snow cover is common after winter, but the region is generally snow-free by the end of the 
summer, apart from isolated snow patches that may persist in places.  
 
GEOLOGY 
The geology of Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights is complex, but is dominated by well-stratified 
sedimentary rocks. The most prominent structural feature of the massif is a large asymmetrical anticline 
with a northwest–southeast orientation, extending from Grotto Glacier to Jupiter Glacier (Bell 1975, Crame 
and Howlett 1988).  Thrust faults in the central part of the massif suggest vertical displacements of strata of 
up to 800 m (Crame and Howlett 1988). 
The main lithologies are conglomerates, arkosic sandstones and fossiliferous shales, with subordinate 
pebbly mudstones and sedimentary breccias (Elliot 1974, Taylor et al 1979, Thomson 1979).  A range of 
fossils have been found in the strata, which are of Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous age, including 
bivalves, brachiopods, belemnites, ammonites, shark teeth and plants (Taylor et al 1979, Thomson 1979, 
Crame and Howlett 1988, Howlett 1989).  Several interstratified lavas have been observed in the lowest 
exposures at Ablation Point (Bell 1975).  The base of the succession is formed of a spectacular mélange, 
including large blocks of lava and agglomerate which crop out on the valley floors and at the base of 
several cliffs (see Bell 1975; Taylor et al 1979). The presence of exposures of the Fossil Bluff Formation is 
of prime geological importance because it is the only known area of unbroken exposure of rocks spanning 
the Jurassic – Cretaceous boundary in the Antarctic, which makes this a critical locality for understanding 
the change in floras and faunas at this temporal boundary. 
 
GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
The entire area was at one time over-run by glacier ice from the interior of Alexander Island.  Thus, 
landforms of both glacial erosion and deposition are widespread throughout the Area, providing evidence 
of a former general eastward flow of ice into George VI Sound (Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  Misfit 
glaciers, striated bedrock, and erratics indicate considerable deglaciation since the Pleistocene glacial 
maximum (Taylor et al 1979). Numerous terminal moraines fronting present remnant glaciers, several 
unexpectedly talus-free sites, and polished and striated roches moutonnées indicate that glacial retreat may 
have been rapid (Taylor et al 1979). There is evidence that George VI Ice Shelf did not exist around 6500 
yr B.P., which suggests that the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights massif is likely to have been largely 
free of permanent ice around that time, although there have been a number of subsequent glacier 
fluctuations in the region (Clapperton and Sugden 1982). 
The landforms have been modified by periglacial, gravitational and fluvial processes. Bedrock on the 
upper plateau surfaces (where it has been largely scraped free of a till overburden) has been shattered by 
frost action into platy or blocky fragments (Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  On valley slopes gelifluction 
 
 
14
lobes and stone stripes and circles are common, while on valley floors stone circles and polygonal patterned 
ground are frequently found in glacial till and in fluvioglacial sediments subjected to frost action.  Valley 
walls are also dominated by landforms derived from frost action, rock/ice-fall activity, and seasonal 
meltwater flows, which have led to ubiquitous talus slopes and, commonly, boulder fans below incised 
gullies.  Mass wasting of fissile sedimentary rocks has also led to the development of steep (about 50º) 
horizontally rectilinear bedrock slopes thinly veneered with debris.  Occasional aeolian landforms have 
been observed, with dunes of up to 1 m in height and 8 m in length as, for example, in Erratic Valley 
(Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  ‘Raised beaches’ mentioned in the original management plan are not 
described in other literature (Clapperton and Sugden 1983): it is likely the reference is either to elevated 
moraines derived from a formerly more extensive George VI Ice Shelf, or perhaps to raised alluvial or 
lacustrine beaches.  Thin layers of peat of up to 10-15 cm in depth are occasionally associated with 
vegetated areas, and these are the most substantial developments of soil within the Area.  
 
FRESHWATER ECOLOGY 
Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights is an exceptional limnological site that contains a number of 
lakes, ponds and streams and a generally rich benthic flora. From late December until February running 
water develops from three main sources: precipitation, glaciers and from melting on George VI Ice Shelf, 
with run-off generally converging toward the coast (Clapperton and Sugden 1983). Most of the streams, 
which are up to several kilometres in length, drain glaciers or permanent snowfields. The principal streams 
drain into Ablation Lake and Moutonnée Lake, both dammed by the ice shelf. Surveys in the early 1970s 
recorded these lakes as frozen to 2.0–4.5 m depth year-round, with maximum water depths of around 117 
m and 50 m respectively (Heywood 1977). A stable upper layer of fresh water, down to approximately 60 
m and 30 m respectively, overlies increasingly saline waters influenced by interconnection with the ocean 
beneath the ice shelf and which subjects the lakes to tidal influence (Heywood 1977).  Surface meltwater 
pools – which in summer form particularly in hollows between lake-ice pressure ridges – flood to higher 
levels daily and encroach up alluvial fans in the lower valleys (Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  Some recent 
observations suggested a decrease in the permanent ice cover of the lakes, for example with about 25% of 
Moutonnée Lake being free of ice cover in the 1994–95 and 1997–98 summers (Convey and Smith 1997, 
Convey pers comm 1999). However, all three of the main lakes in the Area showed almost complete ice 
cover in early February 2001 (Harris 2001). 
Numerous ephemeral, commonly elongated, pools and ponds form laterally along the land / ice shelf 
margin, varying in length from 10 to 1500 m and up to 200 m wide, with depths ranging from 1 to 6 m 
(Heywood 1977, Clapperton and Sugden 1983). These pools / ponds often rise in level over the melt 
period, yet on occasion may drain suddenly via sub-ice fissures opening into the ice shelf, leaving former 
lake shorelines evident in surrounding moraines. The pools / ponds vary widely in their turbidity depending 
on the presence of suspended glacial sediment.  The pools are typically ice-free in summer, while the larger 
ponds often retain a partial ice cover, and all but the deeper ponds probably freeze solid in winter 
(Heywood 1977). 
Numerous ponds of up to 1 ha and 15 m in depth are present within the valleys, some with moss 
growth covering extensive areas down to 9 m in depth (Light and Heywood 1975). The dominant species 
described were Campylidelphus polygamus (=Campylium polygamum) and Dicranella, stems of which 
reached 30 cm in length. Bryum pseudotriquetrum (and possibly a second Bryum species), Distichium 
capillaceum, and an unidentified species of Dicranella all grew on the benthic substratum at or below 1 m 
in depth (Smith 1988).  Moss cover was 40-80% in the 0.5-5.0 m depth zone (Light and Heywood 1975). 
Much of the remaining area was covered by dense cyanobacterial felts (11 taxa) up to 10 cm thick, 
dominated by species of Calothrix, Nostoc and Phormidium together with 36 taxa of associated microalgae 
(Smith 1988).  The extensive growths of moss suggest that these ponds are probably relatively permanent, 
although their levels may fluctuate from year to year. The water temperature reaches 7ºC in the deeper 
ponds and 15ºC in the shallower pools in summer, offering a relatively favourable and stable environment 
for bryophytes. The shallower pools, in which several mosses have been found, may normally be occupied 
by terrestrial vegetation and flooded for short periods during summer (Smith 1988). 
 
 
15
Algae are abundant in slow-moving streams and ephemeral melt runnels, although they do not 
colonise the unstable beds of fast-flowing streams.  For example, large wet areas of level ground in 
Moutonnée Valley have particularly rich floras, in places forming over 90% cover, with five species of 
desmid (which are rare in Antarctica) and the filamentous green Zygnema being abundant, and Nostoc sp. 
and Phormidium spp. colonising drier, less stable and silted areas (Heywood 1977). 
Protozoa, Rotifera, Tardigrada and Nematoda form a benthic fauna in the pools, ponds and streams, 
and probably occur in the lakes although none has thus far been caught (Heywood 1977).  Densities are 
generally highest in the slow-moving streams.  The copepod Boeckella poppei was abundant in lakes, 
ponds and pools, but absent from streams.  The marine fish Trematomus bernacchii was captured in traps 
laid in Ablation Lake at a depth of 70 m, within the saline water layer (Heywood and Light 1975, Heywood 
1977). A seal (species unidentified, but probably crabeater (Lobodon carcinophagus) or Weddell 
(Leptonychotes weddellii)) was reported at the edge of Ablation Lake in mid-December 1996 (Rossaak 
1997), and isolated sightings of solitary seals have also been reported in earlier seasons.  The fish and seals 
may be part of a marine ecosystem present beneath the adjacent ice shelf that is capable of travel to the 
open sea, or may represent isolated vestigial populations confined to the Ablation Point region following 
the relatively recent re-formation of George VI Ice Shelf (Clapperton and Sugden 1982). If the latter, then 
the populations may have special genetic significance because of their extended isolation. However, the 
seals may be capable of travel to the sea overland on George VI Ice Shelf. Further research is required to 
explain these observations. 
 
VEGETATION 
Much of the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights area is arid, and overall vegetation abundance is 
low with a discontinuous distribution.  However, complex plant communities exist in seepage areas and 
along stream margins, which are of particular interest because: 
a) they occur in an otherwise almost barren landscape;  
b) the mixed bryophyte and lichen communities are the best-developed and most diverse of any south of 
70ºS (Smith 1988);  
c) some bryophyte taxa are profusely fertile and fruiting at their southern limit – an unusual phenomenon 
in most Antarctic bryophytes, especially so far south;  
d) the region represents the southernmost known locality for many taxa; and 
e) although some of these communities also occur at other sites on southeastern Alexander Island, the 
Area contains the best and most extensive examples known at this latitude. 
The diversity of mosses is particularly high for this latitude, with at least 21 species recorded within 
the Area, which represents 73% of those known to occur on Alexander Island, and half of all those 
occurring on the Antarctic Peninsula (Smith 1997). The lichen flora is also diverse with more than 35 taxa 
known. Of the macrolichen flora, 12 of the 15 species known to occur on Alexander Island are represented 
within the Area, which is about one third of the 35 species described on the Antarctic Peninsula as a whole 
(Smith 1997).  Moutonnée and Striation valleys, and the SE coastal area, contain the most extensive stands 
of both terrestrial and freshwater vegetation (Smith 1998, Harris 2001). 
Smith (1988, 1997) reported the bryophyte vegetation is generally found in patches of about 10 to 50 
m2, with some stands up to 625 m2, occurring from around 5 m to 40 m altitude on the north- and east-
facing gentle slopes of the main valleys. More recently, Harris (2001) recorded large stands of near-
continuous bryophyte vegetation of up to approximately 8000 m2 on gentle SE-facing slopes on the south-
eastern coast of the Area, at an elevation of approximately 10 m, close to where the Jupiter Glacier joins 
George VI Ice Shelf.  A continuous stand of approximately 1600 m2 was recorded on moist slopes in lower 
Striation Valley. Several large patches of continuous moss (of up to 1000 m2) were observed on SW/NW-
facing eastern slopes of Flatiron Valley, at elevations of 300-400 m.  Small discontinuous patches of moss 
were recorded in this vicinity up to an elevation of 540 m.  Mosses were observed on peaks above Ablation 
Valley at elevations of up to approximately 700 m.  Samples are being analysed to identify species. 
 
 
16
 The dominant bryophyte in the wettest areas is frequently the liverwort Cephaloziella varians (= C. 
exiliflora), which forms a blackish mat of densely interwoven shoots. Although the most southerly record 
of C. varians has been reported at 77ºS from Botany Bay (SSSI No. 37) in Victoria Land, the extensive 
mats it forms in the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights massif represent the most substantial stands of 
this species this far south.  Cyanobacteria, notably Nostoc sp., are usually associated either on the surface of 
the liverwort or soil, or with moss shoots.  Beyond the wettest areas, undulating carpets of pleurocarpous 
mosses dominated by Campyliadelphus polygamus forms the greenest stands of vegetation, with associated 
Hypnum revolutum. These carpets overlie up to 10-15 cm of peat composed of largely undecomposed 
moribund moss shoots. Intermixed with these mosses, but often predominating on the drier margins, Bryum 
pseudotriquetrum grows as isolated cushions that may coalesce to develop a convoluted turf. In these drier, 
peripheral areas, several other turf-forming bryophytes are often associated with Bryum. Besides the more 
hydric species already cited, these include the calcicolous taxa Bryoerythrophyllum recurvirostrum, 
Didymodon gelidus, Distichium capillaceum, Encalypta rhaptocarpa (=E. patagonica), E. procera, Pohlia 
cruda, Schistidium antarcticum, S. fragilis, Syntrichia princeps (=Tortula princeps), Tortella alpicola, and 
several unidentified species of Bryum and Schistidium. 
A significant characteristic of the vegetation in the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights massif is 
the unusual occurrence of a number of fertile bryophytes.  Antarctic bryophytes seldom produce 
sporophytes, yet Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Distichium capillaceum, Encalypta rhaptocarpa, E. procera and 
Schistidium spp. have all been recorded in the Area as frequently fertile.  Most unusually, small quantities 
of the moss Bryoerythrophyllum recurvirostre and the liverwort Cephaloziella varians have been observed 
fruiting in Ablation Valley, which was the first time this had been recorded anywhere in Antarctica (Smith 
pers comm., cited in Convey 1995; Smith 1997); in addition, D. capillaceum has never before been 
recorded with sporophytes throughout the maritime Antarctic (Smith 1988).  E. procera has only been 
reported as fertile in one other Antarctic location (on Signy Island, South Orkney Islands: Smith 1988).  
Beyond the permanent seepage areas, bryophyte vegetation is extremely sparse and restricted to 
habitats where there is free water for at least a few weeks during the summer. Such sites occur sporadically 
on the valley floors, stone stripes on slopes, and also in crevices in north-facing rock faces. Most of the 
species occurring in the bryophyte patches have also been observed in these habitats, including lichens, 
most frequently in the shelter of, or even in crevices beneath, larger stones – especially at the margins of 
patterned ground features.  At elevations of over 100 m aridity increases, and at higher altitudes only 
Schistidium antarctici (at 500 m in MoutonnéeValley) and Tortella fragilis (near the summit of the highest 
peak south-west of Ablation Valley (775 m) have been recorded. 
In these drier habitats lichens tend to become more frequent, especially where the substratum is 
stable. Lichens are widespread and locally abundant on the more stable screes, ridges, and plateaux above 
the valleys, the most predominant species being Usnea sphacelata (=U. sulphurea), giving rock surfaces a 
black hue. This species is often associated with Pseudephebe minuscula, several crustose lichen species 
and, rarely, Umbilicaria decussata reaching the highest part of the massif; all but the latter species are also 
common in Moutonnée Valley.  Epiphytic and terricolous lichens, predominantly the white encrusting 
species Leproloma cacominum, are often frequent where the marginal bryophyte surface is driest. Other 
genera such as Cladonia galindezii, C. pocillum and several crustose lichens are also sometimes present. 
Various lichens colonise the dry soil and pebbles in these localities, occasionally spreading onto cushions 
of moss.  These include Candelariella vitellina, Physcia caesia, Physconia muscigena, occasional 
Rhizoplaca melanophthalma, Usnea antarctica, Xanthoria elegans, and several unidentified crustose taxa 
(especially species of Buellia and Lecidea). An abundance of Physcia and Xanthoria in isolated places 
suggests nitrogen enrichment deriving from south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki).  A few 
ornithocoprophilous lichens occur on occasional boulders used as bird perches. 
Many of the bryophytes and lichens are at the southern limit of their know distributions and several 
species are very rare in the Antarctic. Rare moss species within the Area include Bryoerythrophyllum 
recurvirostrum, Campylium polygamum, Encalypta rhaptocarpa, Tortella alpicola, and Tortella fragilis. 
Several Bryum species, Encalypta rhaptocarpa, Schistidium occultum and Schistidium chrysoneurum are all 
at the southern limit recorded for these species.  Of the lichen flora, Ablation Valley is the only known site 
where Eiglera flavida has been observed in the S. Hemisphere, and Mycobilimbia lobulata and 
Stereocaulon antarcticum are also rare. Lichen species with furthest-south records are Cladonia galindezii, 
 
 
17
Cladonia pocillum, Ochrolechia frigida, Phaeorrhiza nimbosa, Physconia muscigena, and Stereocaulon 
antarcticum. 
 
INVERTEBRATES, FUNGI, BACTERIA 
The microinvertebrate fauna thus far described is based on ten samples from Ablation Valley, and 
comprises seven confirmed taxa (Convey and Smith 1997): two Collembola (Cryptopygus badasa, Friesea 
topo); one cryptostigmatid mite (Magellozetes antarcticus); and four prostigmatid mites (Eupodes parvus, 
Nanorchestes nivalis (= N. gressitti), Rhagidia gerlachei and Stereotydeus villosus). A number of 
specimens collected were earlier reported as Friesea grisea, a widespread maritime Antarctic species.  
However, specimens of Friesia collected subsequently from Alexander Island (i.e. from 1994 onwards) 
have been described as a distinct new species, F. topo (Greenslade 1995), which is itself currently thought 
to be endemic to Alexander Island.  The earlier specimens from Ablation Valley have been re-examined, 
with all those that remain identifiable being reassigned as F. topo. 
While the same number of species has been described at one other site on Alexander Island, the 
samples from Ablation Valley exhibited a mean total microarthropod population density about seven times 
greater than other sites in the region. Diversity at Ablation Valley was also greater than at several other 
documented sites on Alexander Island. Both diversity and abundance are considerably less than has been 
described at sites in Marguerite Bay and further north (Starý and Block 1998, Convey et al 1996, Convey 
and Smith 1997, Smith 1996).  The most populous species recorded in Ablation Valley was Cryptopygus 
badasa (96.6% of all arthropods extracted), which was particularly common in moss habitats.  Friesea topo 
was found on stones at low population densities and was virtually absent from the moss habitat, showing 
these species to have distinct habitat preferences. Ablation Valley is the only site on Alexander Island 
where the predatory mite R. gerlachei has been described.  Very little research has been conducted on fungi 
in the Area, and the only publication available reported an unidentified nematode-trapping fungus present 
in a pond in Ablation Valley (Maslen 1982).  While further sampling is required to describe the terrestrial 
microfauna more fully, available data support the biological importance of the Area. 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
The avifauna of Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights has not been described in detail. A few pairs 
of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) have been reported as nesting close to some of the moist 
vegetated sites (Smith 1988).  Snow petrels have been noted as “probably breeding” in the vicinity of 
Ablation Point (Croxall et al 1995, referring to Fuchs and Adie 1949).  No other bird species has been 
recorded in the Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights massif. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS 
Human activity at Ablation Valley – Ganymede Heights has been exclusively related to science.  The 
first visit to the Ablation Valley area was by members of the British Graham Land Expedition in 1936, who 
collected about 100 fossil specimens from near Ablation Point (Howlett 1988).  The next visits were about 
a decade later, when basic geological descriptions and further fossil collections were undertaken.  More 
intensive palaeontological investigations were made by British geologists in the 1960s through to the 
1980s, with detailed studies of the geomorphology (Clapperton and Sugden 1983).  Limnological 
investigations were undertaken in the 1970s, with a number of expeditions examining the terrestrial biology 
being initiated in the 1980s and 1990s.  All known expeditions into the Area have been by British 
scientists.  The impacts of these activities have not been fully described, but are believed to be minor and 
limited to footprints, aircraft tracks at the Moutonnée Valley terrestrial airstrip (see Section 7.1), removal of 
small quantities of geological and biological samples, markers, abandoned items such as supplies and 
scientific equipment, and the remains of human wastes.  
In February 2001 an abandoned depot remained on the moraine bench adjacent to George VI Ice 
Shelf, approximately 500 m north of Moutonnée Lake.  The depot consists of a number of fuel and oil 
 
 
18
containers, an old food box, poles, disintegrating cardboard and string. Various expeditions in the 1970s-
80s placed empty fuel drums as route markers through pressure ice from George VI Sound into Ablation 
Valley, and a large onshore rock is painted yellow SE of Ablation Lake (McAra 1984, Hodgson 2001).  
Nearby is a large cross made from red painted rocks and cairns, with a wooden marker board in the centre.  
Evidence of campsites close to the shore of Ablation Lake remained in 2000-01 (Harris 2001, 
Hodgson 2001).  One site is on the SW shore near a rich area of vegetation, and another is approximately 
four kilometres east on the SE shore.  At both sites circles of stones mark old tent sites, and circular 
structures have been built with low (0.8 m) stone walls.  At the former site a number pieces of wood 
(including old markers), an old food box, string and human wastes were observed (Harris 2001, Hodgson 
2001). Several red-painted rocks were found around the southern and western shores of Ablation Lake in 
February 2001, and paint fragments were sometimes observed in sediments. In 2000-01 some of the 
abandoned materials in Ablation Valley were removed: three fuel drums on lake ice, the old food box and 
some wood and string on the SW shore, and numerous fragments from broken perspex acryllic cloches on 
the SW shore (nine were deployed in January 1993 – Wynn-Williams 1993, Rossaak 1997 – all were 
destroyed by wind) (Harris 2001, Hodgson 2001). The painted rocks and other materials remain. 
Snowmobiles have been used on lake and glacier ice, and modified snowmobiles with front wheels were 
used over gravel terrain in a limited vicinity of the SW shore of Ablation Lake in 1983–84 (McAra 1984).  
Some evidence of erosional paths forming on steep scree slopes, presumably a result of field work, was 
recorded in Moutonnée Valley (Howlett 1988).  Cairns have been built on a number of mountain summits 
and to mark a number of survey sites throughout the Area. 
 
 
19
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 117 
AVIAN ISLAND, MARGUERITE BAY, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Avian Island (Latitude 67°46' S, Longitude 68°54' W, 0.49 km2), is situated in northwestern 
Marguerite Bay, 400 m south of Adelaide Island on the western side of the central Antarctic 
Peninsula.  It was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 30 under 
Recommendation XV-6 in 1989 after a proposal by the United Kingdom.  Included was the island 
together with its littoral zone, but excluded was a small area near a refuge on the northwestern 
coast of the island.  Values protected under the original designation were described as the 
abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds present on the island, that the southern giant petrel 
(Macronectes giganteus) colony is one of the most southerly known breeding population of this 
species, and that the blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) are breeding close to the 
southern limit of their range.  The Area was therefore considered of outstanding ornithological 
importance, meriting protection from unnecessary human disturbance. 
Designation as an SSSI was terminated with redesignation of Avian Island as a Specially 
Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation XVI-4 (1990, SPA No. 21) after a proposal by 
the United Kingdom.  The boundaries were similar to the original SSSI, but included the entire 
island and the littoral zone without the exclusion zone near the refuge on the northwestern coast.  
The values protected were the same as for the SSSI, but with attention drawn to the additional 
important values of: 
• “35,600 pairs of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), which is the largest Adélie colony on 
the Antarctic Peninsula, containing a third of the total breeding population of the region”; 
• “670 pairs of blue-eyed cormorants, which are close to the southern limit of their breeding 
range, and one of the largest known breeding colonies in the Antarctic, representing 
approximately 85% of the total population breeding south of the Antarctic Circle”. 
While the size of the Avian Island Adélie penguin colony on the Antarctic Peninsula is not 
substantiated by recent data, this colony and those of several other resident species are nonetheless 
some of the largest in the region, and the values noted in the original SSSI and subsequent SPA 
designations are generally reaffirmed in the present management plan.  Further values evident 
from scientific descriptions of Avian Island are also considered important as reasons for special 
protection of the Area.  These values are:   
• the outstanding and unique attribute of being the only known site on the Antarctic Peninsula 
where seven seabird species are breeding in such close proximity to each other within the 
confined space of a single, small island, with unusually high population densities and virtually 
the whole island occupied by breeding birds throughout the summer; 
• Representation of seven of the seabird species breeding along the Antarctic Peninsula;  
• the southern giant petrel colony is one of the two largest on the Antarctic Peninsula, 
comprising about one-fifth of the population south of the South Shetland Islands, and these 
birds are extremely vulnerable to disturbance; 
• the kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) colony is also large and is breeding near the southern extent 
of its range; 
 
 
20
• the southernmost record of breeding brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi) in the Antarctic 
Peninsula region was noted on Avian Island in 1978-79; 
• the moss Warnstorfia laculosa (=Calliergidium austro-stramineum) on Avian Island is at the 
southern limit of its known range. 
The boundaries of the Area designated under Recommendation XVI-4 have been changed in 
this management plan to include offshore islets and rocks previously excluded.  
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Avian Island aims to: 
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance to the Area; 
• allow scientific research on the ecosystem and physical environment, particularly on the 
avifauna, provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere; 
• minimise the risk of introduction of pathogens which may cause disease in bird or mammal 
populations within the Area; 
• minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• gather data on the population status of the seabirds on the island on a regular basis, preferably 
for all resident breeding species at least once every five years; 
• allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at the stations Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), Rothera (UK) and 
General San Martín (Argentina), where copies of this management plan shall also be made 
available. 
• Signs showing the location and boundaries of the Area with clear statements of entry 
restrictions shall be placed in prominent positions on the northwestern and eastern coasts of the 
island (Map 2), to help avoid inadvertent entry. 
• Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition or removed. 
• Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the 
Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated, and in particular to conduct 
bird censuses, and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
 
21
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Avian Island, ASPA No. 117, in relation to Marguerite Bay, showing the locations of the 
stations Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), Rothera (UK) and General San Martín (Argentina).  
The location of other protected areas within Marguerite Bay (ASPA No. 107 at Emperor 
Island (Dion Islands), ASPA No. 115 at Lagotellerie Island, and ASPA No. 129 at Rothera 
Point) are also shown.  Inset: the location of Avian Island on the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Map 2: Avian Island, ASPA No. 117, topographic map.  Map specifications – Projection:  Lambert 
Conformal Conic; Standard parallels: 1st 67° 30' 00" S; 2nd  68° 00' 00"S; Central 
Meridian:  68° 55' 00" W;  Latitude of Origin: 68° 00' 00" S; Spheroid: WGS84; Datum: 
Mean sea level; Vertical contour interval 5 m; Horizontal accuracy: ± 5 m; vertical 
accuracy ±1.5 m. 
Map 3: Avian Island, ASPA No. 117, distribution of breeding wildlife. Map derived from ground 
survey and digital orthophotography (ground pixel resolution 25 cm; source aerial 
photography taken 15 December 1998 by the British Antarctic Survey). Adélie penguin 
(Pygoscelis adeliae) and elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) distributions are digitised from 
the orthophotograph. Nests of other species are derived from a sketch map and ground 
survey conducted in 1978 (Poncet 1982), with positions approximate. Note: data on 
distributions for other breeding species are unavailable.  Map specifications are the same as 
for Map 2. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Avian Island (Latitude 67°46' S, Longitude 68°54' W, 0.49 km2), is situated in the northwest 
of Marguerite Bay, 400 m south of the southwestern extremity of Adelaide Island (Map 1).  The 
island is 1.45 km long by 0.8 km at its widest, and is of roughly triangular shape.  It is rocky with 
a low relief of generally less than 10 m in the north, rising to about 30 m at the centre, and 40 m in 
the south where several rock and ice slopes of up to 30 m drop steeply to the sea.  The coastline is 
irregular and rocky with numerous offshore islets, although there are several accessible beaches on 
the northern and eastern coasts.  The island is usually ice-free in summer.  It contains habitat 
particularly suitable for a variety of breeding birds: well-drained north-facing slopes suitable for 
blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps); broken rock and boulders with crevices suitable 
for small nesting birds such as Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus); elevated rocky 
heights suitable for southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus); extensive expanses of snow-
free ground for Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae).  The presence of the latter attracts skuas 
(Catharacta maccormicki and C. loennbergi) and kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus).  For a detailed 
description of the geology and biology of the Area see Annex 1. 
BOUNDARIES 
The designated Area comprises the whole of Avian Island and the littoral zone, offshore 
islets and rocks, and a buffer zone of the surrounding marine environment (including sea ice when 
present) within 100 m of the shoreline of the main island (Map 2).  Boundary markers have not 
been installed because the coast forms a visually obvious reference for the marine boundary. 
 
 
22
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area 
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
Two small abandoned refuges and two beacon structures are present within the Area.  A 
refuge erected by Chile in 1962 is located on the northwestern coast of the island at latitude 
67°46'16" S, longitude 68°54'00" W.  A refuge constructed by Argentina in 1957 is 650 m SE of 
this position, on the eastern coast at latitude 67°46'39" S, longitude 68°53'35" W.  Both refuges 
were in a poor state of repair in February 2001.  Further deterioration of the huts has potential to 
impact on nesting birds. 
An old iron frame structure, believed to have been erected by the UK during the operation of 
Adelaide Base and used as a navigational aid, is located at approximately 38 m near the highest 
point of the island.  The structure remains standing, although is rusting. 
A new beacon was constructed by Chile in February 1998 on an adjacent site at a similar 
elevation.  This structure is a solid cylindrical painted iron tower of approximately 2 m diameter 
and 2.5 m in height, set in a concrete pad of approximately 2.5 x 2.5 m. A lit beacon, protective 
rails and solar panels are affixed to the top of the structure.  No other structures are known to exist 
on the island. 
Four survey control markers were installed on the island on 31 January 1999 (Map 2).  The 
southernmost marker is located adjacent to the navigation beacon and consists of a survey nail in 
bedrock covered by a cairn.  A similar marker is installed on the high point of the low ridge on the 
northeastern coast of the island, also covered by a cairn.  The remaining two markers are survey 
nails affixed to the roof of each of the refuges.  Two signs marking the Area shall be installed in 
prominent positions on the northwestern and eastern coasts of the island. 
The nearest scientific research station is 1.2 km northwest at Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), 
on southern Adelaide Island (latitude 67°46' S, longitude 68°55' W). Since 1982 this has been 
operated as a summer-only facility, open from October until March.  Over this period the station 
has generally accommodated up to 10 personnel.  Formerly, this facility was established and 
operated continuously by the UK from 1961 until 1977. 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Avian Island are the Dion Islands (ASPA No. 107) about 
12.5 km SSE, Rothera Point (ASPA No. 129) 40 km to the NE, and Lagotellerie Island (ASPA 
No. 115) 65 km east (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
 
 
23
• 
it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, in 
particular for scientific study of the avifauna and ecosystem of the Area, or for essential 
management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or 
review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the values of the Area; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit. 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• Vehicles are prohibited on land within the Area.  All movement on land within the Area shall 
be on foot. Movement within the Area on foot shall be by routes that minimise any disturbance 
to breeding birds, and to achieve this it may be necessary to take a longer route to the 
destination than would otherwise be the case.  A preferred walking route, which avoids the 
most sensitive bird breeding sites, should be used when traversing across the central part of the 
island where movement in this area is necessary (Map 2).  The designated route extends from 
the central eastern coast up the eastern slopes of the hill (Map 2).  Visitors should bear in mind 
that specific nest sites may vary from year to year, and some variations on the recommended 
route may be preferable: the route is intended as a guide, and visitors are expected to exercise 
good judgement to minimise the effects of their presence.  In other areas, and where practical 
and safe, it is usually preferable to adopt a route that follows the coastline of the Area. 
• Access into areas where southern giant petrels are nesting (Map 3) shall only be undertaken for 
purposes specified in the Permit.  When access to the beacon is necessary (eg. for 
maintenance), visitors shall follow the designated access route as closely as possible, trying to 
avoid nesting birds.  Much of the area leading up to and surrounding the beacon is occupied by 
breeding petrels, so great care must be exercised. 
• Movements should be slow, noise kept to a minimum, and the maximum distance practicable 
should be maintained from nesting birds. 
• Visitors shall watch carefully for signs of agitation and preferably retreat from approach if 
significant disturbance is observed. 
• Small boat landings should be made at the designated locations on the central northwestern 
coast or on the central eastern coast of the island (Map 2).  If sea or ice conditions render this 
impractical, small boat landings may be made elsewhere along the coast as conditions allow. 
• Access by vehicle to the coast when sea ice is present should also use these access points, and 
vehicles shall be parked at the shore.  
• Travel by small boat or vehicle within the marine part of the Area is not confined to specific 
routes, but shall be by the shortest route consistent with the objectives and requirements of the 
permitted activities.  Vehicle or boat crew, or other people on vehicles or boats, are prohibited 
 
 
24
from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing site unless specifically 
authorised by Permit. 
• Aircraft should avoid landing within the Area throughout the year.  Restrictions on overflight 
also apply (see Table 2 below).  A Permit may be granted for helicopter use when this is 
considered necessary for essential purposes and where there is no practical alternative, such as 
for the installation, maintenance or removal of structures.  In such instances the need for 
helicopter access, including alternatives, and the potential disturbance to breeding birds shall 
be adequately assessed before a Permit may be granted.  Such a Permit shall clearly define the 
conditions for helicopter access based on the findings of the assessment. 
 
Table 2: Aircraft overflight restrictions applying year-round at Avian Island. 
 
 
Aircraft type 
 
Number of  
engines 
Minimum approach distance (m) 
Vertical (above ground) 
Horizontal 
Feet 
Metres 
Feet 
Metres 
Helicopter 
1 
2460 
750 
2460 
750 
Helicopter 
2 
3300 
1000 
3300 
1000 
Fixed-wing 
1 or 2 
1480 
450 
1480 
450 
Fixed-wing 
4 
3300 
1000 
3300 
1000 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• Scientific research that will not jeopardise the avifauna or ecosystem of the Area, and which is 
for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
Restrictions on times at which activities may be conducted apply within the Area, and are 
specified in the relevant sections of this management plan. 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit.  Any new or 
additional permanent structures are prohibited.  Existing abandoned or dilapidated structures 
should be removed or renovated.  Small temporary hides, blinds or screens may be constructed for 
the purpose of scientific study of the avifauna.  Before a Permit may be granted for the 
installation, modification or removal of structures, an adequate environmental impact assessment 
shall be undertaken.  Installation, modification, maintenance or removal of structures shall be 
undertaken in a manner that minimises disturbance to breeding birds.  Such activities shall be 
undertaken between 1 February and 30 September inclusive to avoid the main breeding season.  
All structures, scientific equipment, hides or markers installed within the Area must be approved 
by Permit for a specified period, clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator 
and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
harm to bird populations or of contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific equipment, hides 
or markers for which the period specified in the Permit has expired shall be a condition of the 
Permit. 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
 
 
25
Camping should be avoided within the Area.  However, when necessary for purposes 
specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed at two designated campsites: one on the 
central eastern coast of the island, the other on the central northwestern coast of the Area (Map 2). 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken to prevent accidental 
introductions.  In view of the presence of significant breeding bird colonies on the island, poultry 
products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, are prohibited within the Area.  No 
herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-
nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes 
specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity 
for which the Permit was granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically 
authorised by Permit for specific scientific or management purposes.  Refuelling of aircraft or 
vehicles is prohibited on land within the Area.  Anything introduced shall be for a stated period 
only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and 
handled so that risk of any introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs 
which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the 
impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The 
appropriate authority should be notified of anything released and not removed that was not 
included in the authorised Permit. 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and 
should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  Permits 
shall not be granted if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, 
remove or damage such quantities of soil, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance 
on Avian Island would be significantly affected.  Samples of flora or fauna found dead within the 
Area may be removed for analysis or audit without prior authorisation by Permit.  Material of 
recent human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the 
Area by the Permit Holder, or is not otherwise authorised, shall be removed unless the impact of 
removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate 
authority should be notified. 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, except human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.  Human wastes shall be 
removed from the Area or disposed of into the sea. 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met 
 
 
26
4. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, 
which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for 
protective measures. 
5. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
6. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values found at Avian Island visitors shall take 
special precautions against introductions.  Of concern are pathogenic, microbial or plant 
introductions sourced from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside 
Antarctica.  Visitors shall ensure that sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area are 
cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment used 
or brought into the Area (including backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly 
cleaned before entering the Area.  
7. Poultry products and other introduced avian products, which may be a vector of avian 
diseases, are prohibited within the Area. 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
Bibliography 
Barlow, 1968. Biological Report. Adelaide Island. 1967/68. Unpublished British Antarctic 
Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1967/N. 
Bramwell, M.J. 1969. Report on Elephant seal pupping on Avian Island. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1969/N. 
Bramwell, M.J. 1970. Journey report: Avian Island 7 Oct – 4 Nov 1969. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1969/K3. 
Elliott, M.H. 1969. Summer geological camp on Avian Island 26 Nov – 4 Dec 1968. 
Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1968/K3. 
Fox, A. and Gray, M. 1997. Aerial photography field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season. 
Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1996/L2. 
Gray, M. and Fox, A. 1997. GPS Survey field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season. 
Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1996/L1. 
Griffiths, C. 1992. Geological fieldwork on Adelaide Island 1991-92. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1991/GL1. 
 
 
27
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas originally 
proposed by the United States of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit report. Internal 
report for the National Science Foundation, US, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 
UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
Moyes, A.B., Willan, C.F.H., Thomson, J.W. and others 1994. Geological map of Adelaide Island to Foyn 
Coast, BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 3, Scale 1:250,000, with supplementary text. British Antarctic 
Survey, Cambridge. 
Patterson, D.L., Woehler, E.J., Croxall, J.P., Cooper, J., Poncet, S. and Fraser, W.R.  in press.  
Breeding distribution and population status if the Northern Giant petrel Macronectes halli and 
the Southern Giant petrel Macronectes giganteus.  Submitted to Marine Ornithology. 
Poncet, S. and Poncet, J. 1979. Ornithological report, Avian Island, 1978-79. Unpublished 
British Antarctic Survey report BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1978/Q. 
Poncet, S. 1982. Le Grand Hiver: Damien II Base Antarctique.  Les Éditions Arthaud, Paris  
Poncet, S. and Poncet, J. 1987. Censuses of penguin populations of the Antarctic Peninsula, 
1983-87. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 77:  109-129. 
Poncet, S. 1990. Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, SPA Proposal. 
Unpublished report to the SCAR Group of Specialist on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation 1990. 
Smith, H.G. 1978. The distribution and ecology of terrestrial protozoa of sub-Antarctic and 
maritime Antarctic islands.  BAS Scientific Report 95, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1996.  Terrestrial and freshwater biotic components of the western Antarctic Peninsula.  
In Ross, R.M., Hofmann, E.E. and Quetin, L.B. Foundations for ecological research west of the 
Antarctic Peninsula.  Antarctic Research Series 70: American Geophysical Union, Washington D.C.: 
15-59. 
Stonehouse, B. 1949. Report on biological activities at Base E 1948-49. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1948/N1. 
Stonehouse, B. 1950. Preliminary report on biological work Base E 1949-50. Unpublished 
British Antarctic Survey report BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1949/N. 
Willey, I.M. 1969. Adelaide Island bird report 1968. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey 
report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1968/Q. 
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. 
 
 
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1 
6(i)  Additional information on the natural features of the Area. 
CLIMATE AND SEA ICE 
No extended meteorological records are available for Avian Island, but records from 1962-
74 for Adelaide Base (formerly UK; now Teniente Luis Carvajal, Chile), 1.2 km distant, show a 
mean daily maximum temperature of 3ºC in February (extreme maximum 9ºC) and a mean daily 
minimum of -8ºC in August (extreme minimum -44ºC).  The same general pattern was observed in 
year-round observations made on the island in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979).  Precipitation 
on the island in this year was usually as snow, most of which fell between August and October, 
but with occasional snowfalls and some rain in the summer. 
Marguerite Bay usually freezes in winter, although the extent and character of sea ice shows 
considerable inter-seasonal variation.  Occasionally Marguerite Bay may not clear of ice 
completely until February or March, at which time the sea may again begin to freeze.  Despite the 
extent and frequent persistence of regional sea ice, a recurrent polynya has been observed near 
Avian Island, which can provide locally ice-free conditions from October onward.  In addition, 
strong tidal currents around Avian Island help to keep surrounding waters ice-free for much of the 
year, which facilitates easy access to feeding grounds for several species.  The island is not 
particularly windy, with an annual average of 10 knots in 1978-79.  However, the strong katabatic 
winds that descend from Adelaide Island, perhaps for 1-3 days a few times every month, reduce 
snow accumulation on the island and push sea ice away from the coast, helping to form the 
polynya.  The relatively snow-free conditions are important for bird colonisation. 
 
GEOLOGY, GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
The bedrock of Avian Island forms the eastern limb of a NNE – SSW trending synclinal 
structure at the southwestern end of Adelaide Island and is composed of interbedded lithic-rich 
and feldspar-rich volcaniclastic sandstones.  Bedded tuffaceaous sandstones, pebbly sandstones 
rich in volcanic lithics, and a volcanic granule breccia also occur.  The latter is probably a primary 
volcanic deposit, while the rest of the sequence is largely composed of reworked volcanic 
material.  The sequence forms part of the Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic Group and is of Jurassic to 
early Tertiary age (Griffiths 1992, Moyes et al 1994).  Apart from rock outcrop, the surface 
consists mainly of frost-shattered rock with permafrost.  Ornithogenic soils are widespread, 
particularly in the north; organic peat soil is virtually absent, but where present is not well-
developed and is associated with moss growth.  Several raised beaches have been noted on Avian 
Island, but the geomorphology has not otherwise been described. 
 
STREAMS AND LAKES 
Avian Island has several ephemeral freshwater ponds of up to 10,000 m2 and of about 40 cm 
in depth, the largest being on the eastern coast, at about 5 m altitude, and on the north-western 
coast near sea level.  Numerous small pools and meltwater channels develop from seasonal snow 
melt, and small streams drain valleys in the vicinity of the ponds.  Both the ponds and melt-pools 
freeze solid in winter.  Freshwater bodies on the island are organically enriched by guano, a source 
 
 
29
of nutrients, and in summer a number of the ponds show a rich benthic flora and fauna of algae, 
phyllopods, copepods, Nematoda, Protozoa, Rotifera, and Tardigrada.  Large numbers of the 
crustacean Branchinecta sp. have also been observed (Poncet and Poncet 1979).  The freshwater 
ecology of the island has not been studied in detail. 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
Seven species of birds breed on Avian Island, which is a relatively high number compared to 
other sites on the Antarctic Peninsula.  Several species have unusually high populations, being 
some of the largest for their species in the Antarctic Peninsula region (Map 3).  Detailed year-
round data for all species were collected in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979), while data are 
otherwise sporadic.  Descriptions below are thus often based on a single season’s observations and 
it should be emphasised that these data are therefore not necessarily representative of longer term 
population trends.  However, this is the best information that is presently available. 
The most recent data available for Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) on Avian Island 
indicated a population of 35,600 breeding pairs (11/11/78) (Poncet and Poncet 1979, Woehler 
1993).  The colony occupies the northern half and central eastern coast of the island (Map 3).  The 
former management plan referred to the Avian Island colony as “the largest on the Antarctic 
Peninsula [containing] a third of the total population breeding in the region”.  While this is not 
substantiated by recent data (e.g. one Antarctic Peninsula colony has over 120,000 pairs and 
several others have over 30,000 (Woehler 1993)), the Avian Island colony represents one of the 
largest breeding populations in this region.  It contains perhaps as much as 9% of the total Adélie 
breeding population along the Antarctic Peninsula, excluding the South Shetland Islands. 
In 1978-79 Adélie penguins were recorded on the island from October until the end of April, 
with egg laying occurring through October and November, and the first chicks hatching around 
mid-December.  Chick créches were observed around mid-January, with the first chicks becoming 
independent near the end of January.  Most of the moulting adults and independent chicks had 
departed the island by the third week of February, although groups returned periodically 
throughout March and April.  
A large colony of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) has been recorded in three 
groups located on the south-western coastal extremity of the island (Map 3).  Stonehouse (1949) 
reported about 300 birds present in October 1948; a similar number were recorded in mid-
November 1968, most of which were breeding (Willey 1969).  Poncet and Poncet (1979) observed 
320 pairs in 1978, and approximately 670 pairs on 17 January 1989 (Poncet 1990).  A count on 23 
February 2001 recorded 185 chicks, although it is probable some had departed by the time of the 
count; approximately 250 nest sites were counted.  In 1968 blue-eyed cormorants were observed 
present on the island from 12 August, with egg laying occurring from November, and chicks 
hatching in December (Willey 1969).  In 1978-79 they were observed from September until June, 
with egg laying occurring from November through to January, when the first chicks hatched, and 
chicks started to become independent in the third week of February (Poncet and Poncet 1979) . 
Of the thirteen southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) colonies known south of the 
South Shetland Islands, Avian Island is one of the two largest, and comprises about one fifth of the 
breeding population in the southern Antarctic Peninsula region (Patterson et al in press).  In 1979 
the southern giant petrels occupied principally the elevated rocky outcrops of the central and 
 
 
30
southern half of the island in four main groups (Map 3).  Data on the numbers of birds present on 
the island are shown in Table 1. 
 
 
 
Table 1: Southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) numbers at Avian Island. 
Year 
Number of 
birds 
Number of 
pairs 
Number of 
chicks 
Source 
1948 
~100 
n/a 
n/a 
Stonehouse 1949 
1965 
n/a 
160 
n/a 
Patterson et al 2000 (?) 
1968 
400 
163 
n/a 
Willey 1969 
1979 
n/a 
197 
n/a 
Poncet and Poncet 1979 
1989 
n/a 
250 
n/a 
Poncet 1990 
2001 
n/a 
n/a 
237 
Harris 2001 
n/a - not available. 
In 1978-79 the birds were present on Avian Island from mid-September through to as late as 
June.  In this season, egg laying occurred from late October through to the end of November, with 
hatching occurring throughout January and chicks generally achieving independence by April.  In 
the 1978-79 austral summer up to 100 non-breeders were observed on the island during the 
courtship period in October, with these numbers decreasing to a few non-breeders as the season 
progressed. 
Approximately 200 adult Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), of which over 60 pairs were 
breeding, were recorded on Avian Island in 1978-79.  These birds were distributed widely, but 
principally in the elevated central and southern parts of the island (Poncet and Poncet 1979) (Map 
3).  In the 1978-79 austral summer the majority of breeders arrived in early October, followed by 
egg laying around mid-November and hatching a month later.  Detailed data are not available 
because of concern that human disturbance by data collection would seriously impair the breeding 
performance of this species.  However, no more than 12 chicks were observed on the island near 
the end of January 1979, which would suggest breeding performance in this season was low: the 
exact cause – whether human disturbance or natural factors – could not be determined. In 1967, 19 
pairs and 80-120 birds were recorded (Barlow 1968). 
An estimate of at least several hundred pairs of breeding Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites 
oceanicus) on the island was made in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979).  Wilson’s storm petrels 
were observed on the island from the second week of November, with laying and incubation 
probably occurring through to mid-December.  Departure of adults and independent chicks was 
largely complete by the end of March.  Most of the rocky outcrops on the northern half of the 
island and all of the stable rocky slopes in the south are ideal habitat for this species. 
In 1978-79 about 25-30 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) were breeding 
on Avian Island.  The skua nests were distributed widely over the island, although the majority 
were on the central and eastern part of the island, especially on slopes overlooking the Adélie 
penguin colony (Map 3).  Large groups of non-breeders (around 150 birds; Poncet and Poncet 
1979) were observed to congregate around the shallow lake on the eastern side of the island.  
Barlow (1968) reported approximately 200 non-breeding birds in 1968.  In the 1978-79 austral 
 
 
31
summer the south polar skuas took up residence around the end of October, with egg laying in 
early December and hatching complete by the end of January.  Independent chicks and adults 
generally departed by the end of March, with some late-breeders remaining until mid-April.  A 
breeding success of one chick per nest was reported in the 1978-79 austral summer.  Barlow 
(1968) reported 12 breeding pairs of brown (=subantarctic) skuas (Catharacta loennbergi), 
although this number could include south polar skuas.  One breeding pair of brown skuas was 
recorded on the southwest of the island in the 1978-79 austral summer.  This is the southernmost 
record of this species breeding along the Antarctic Peninsula.  Several non-breeding brown skuas 
were also recorded in the same season.  
Several other bird species, known to breed elsewhere in Marguerite Bay, are frequent 
visitors to Avian Island, notably Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), 
and southern fulmars (Fulmarus glacialoides).  These species have not been observed to nest on 
Avian Island. Small numbers of Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica) have been seen on a 
few occasions.  The cape petrel (Daption capense) was observed on Avian Island in October 1948 
(Stonehouse 1949).  Solitary individuals of king (Aptenodytes patagonicus) and chinstrap 
(Pygoscelis antarctica) penguins were observed in 1975 and 1989, respectively. 
 
TERRESTRIAL BIOLOGY 
Vegetation on Avian Island is generally sparse, and the flora has not been described in 
detail. Phanerogams are absent from the island and there is a limited range of cryptogams, 
although there is a rich lichen flora.  To date, nine moss and 11 lichen species have been identified 
within the Area.  
Mosses described are Andreaea depressinervis, Brachythecium austro-salebrosum, Bryum 
argenteum, B. pseudotriquetrum, Pohlia cruda, P. nutans, Sanionia uncinata (=Drepanocladus 
uncinatus), Syntrichia princeps (=Tortula princeps) and Warnstorfia laculosa (=Calliergidium 
austro-stramineum).  The latter species is at the southern limit of its known range on Avian Island 
(Smith 1996).  Moss development is confined to those parts of the island that are unoccupied by 
breeding Adélie penguins or blue-eyed cormorants, and occurs in moist depressions or by melt 
pools.  Patches of moss of up to 100 m2 surround the shore of a small pond on the hill in the south 
of the Area, at ca. 30 m elevation.  The green foliose alga Prasiola crispa is widespread in wet 
areas of the island. 
Lichens identified on Avian Island are Acarospora macrocyclos, Cladonia fimbriata, C. 
gracilis, Dermatocarpon antarcticum, Lecanora dancoensis, Lecidea brabantica, Physcia caesia, 
Rinodina egentissima, Siphulina orphnina, Thamnolecania brialmontii, and Usnea antarctica.  
The most extensive communities are on the rocky outcrops in the south of the island. 
The microinvertebrate fauna, fungi and bacteria on Avian Island have yet to be investigated 
in detail.  Thus far only one mesostigmatid mite (Gamasellus racovitzai) (BAS Invertebrate 
Database 1999) has been described, although a Collembollan (springtail) and several species of 
Acari (mites) have been observed but not identified (Poncet 1990).  A number of nematode 
species (dominated by Plectus sp.) (Spaull 1973) and one fungus (Thyronectria hyperantarctica) 
(BAS Invertebrate Database 1999) have been recorded on the island.  
 
 
 
32
BREEDING MAMMALS AND MARINE ENVIRONMENT 
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) were common on and around Avian Island in 1978-
79.  During the winter more than a dozen remained, hauled out on coastal ice (Poncet 1990).  
Several pups were born on the shores of the island in the last week of September 1978.  An 
elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) was reported pupping on the northeastern coast of Avian Island 
on 10 October 1969 (Bramwell 1969).  Aerial photography taken on 15 December 1998 revealed 
182 elephant seals hauled out in groups, mostly close to the ponds.  Leopard seals (Hydrurga 
leptonyx) have been observed around the shoreline, and one was observed ashore in winter 1978.  
A number of non-breeding Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) were reported on the island 
in March 1997 (Gray and Fox 1997), and again at the end of January 1999 (Fox pers comm 1999).  
At least several hundred were present on 23 February 2001 (Harris 2001), particularly on beaches 
and low-lying ground in the central and northern parts of the island. Crabeater seals (Lobodon 
carcinophagus) are regularly seen in Marguerite Bay, but have not been reported on Avian Island.  
The marine environment surrounding Avian Island has not been investigated. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS 
Human activity at Avian Island has been sporadic.  The first record of a visit was made in 
October 1948, when members of the UK Stonington Island expedition discovered the large Adélie 
penguin colony on Avian Island (then referred to as one of the Henkes Islands).  Subsequent visits 
have comprised a mixture of science, base personnel recreation, tourism and logistic activity 
(survey etc.).  Refuges were constructed on the island in 1957 and 1962 by Argentina and Chile 
respectively (see Section 6(iii)). 
A geological field party of two camped for about 10 days on the southeast of the island in 
November 1968 (Elliott 1969).  In the same year, a UK Naval hydrographic survey team camped 
on the eastern coast of Avian Island over the summer.  Permanent chains and rings for mooring 
lines to the survey vessel were installed in a small bay on the northwestern coast, and were still 
present in 1989 (Poncet 1990). 
In 1969, a field party camped on the island for a month conducting research on the common 
cold virus: accompanying dogs were inoculated with a virus and then returned to base (Bramwell 
1969). Dogs often accompanied personnel on the regular visits to Avian Island during the period 
of operation of the UK base on Adelaide Island, but impacts are unknown. 
A two-person party spent a year on the island in 1978-79, based on the yacht Damien II, 
making detailed observations of the avifauna and other aspects of the biology and natural 
environment of the island (Poncet and Poncet 1979, Poncet 1982, Poncet 1990).  The yacht was 
moored in a small cove on the NW coast.  This yacht party regularly visited the island over the 
next decade before SPA designation. 
Map survey work and aerial photography was conducted on and over the island in 1996-98 
(Fox and Gray 1997, Gray and Fox 1997), and 1998-99 (Fox pers. comm.1999). 
The impacts of these activities have not been described and are not known, but are believed 
to have been relatively minor and limited to transient disturbance to breeding birds, campsites, 
footprints, occasional litter, human wastes, scientific sampling and markers.  Despite the likely 
transient nature of most disturbance, it has been reported that human visits have caused loss of 
 
 
33
eggs and chicks, either through nest abandonment or by opportunistic predation.  Several species, 
such as southern giant petrels and kelp gulls are particularly vulnerable to disturbance, and have 
been observed to abandon nests at particular periods of the nesting cycle, perhaps at the sight of 
people as much as 100 m distant (Poncet 1990).  Approximately 140 people, including a tour 
vessel of 100, were reported to have visited Avian Island in the 1989-90 summer.  Growing 
concern over the number and unregulated nature of visits prompted SPA designation. 
The most lasting and visually obvious impacts are associated with the two refuges and 
beacon structures described in Section 6(iii), which are situated close to breeding birds.  Both 
refuges were in poor repair in February 2001, with rubbish such as rusting cans, glass, wood, 
roofing iron and empty fuel drums nearby.  Birds and seals were observed among this rubbish in 
February 2001.  The older of the two beacon structures is disused and its iron structure, while 
standing, is rusting and deteriorating.  The new beacon, erected in February 1998, was in good 
repair in February 2001.  
 
 
34
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 126 
BYERS PENINSULA, LIVINGSTON ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND 
ISLANDS 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Byers Peninsula (latitude 62°34'35" S, longitude 61°13'07" W, 60.6 km2), Livingston Island, 
South Shetland Islands, was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 10 
through Recommendation IV-10 in 1966. This area included the ice-free ground west of the 
western margin of the permanent ice sheet on Livingston Island, below Rotch Dome, as well as 
Window Island about 500 m off the northwest coast and five small ice-free areas on the south 
coast immediately to the east of Byers Peninsula. Values protected under the original designation 
included the diversity of plant and animal life, many invertebrates, a substantial population of 
southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), small colonies of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella), and the outstanding scientific interest associated with such a large variety of plants and 
animals within a relatively small area. 
Designation as an SPA was terminated through Recommendation VIII-2 and redesignation 
as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) was made through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, 
SSSI No. 6).  The new designation as an SSSI more specifically sought to protect three smaller 
ice-free sites on the peninsula of Jurassic and Cretaceous sedimentary and fossiliferous strata, 
considered of outstanding scientific value for study of the former link between Antarctica and 
other southern continents. Following a proposal by the Chile and United Kingdom, the SSSI was 
subsequently extended through Recommendation XVI-5 (1991) to include boundaries similar to 
those of the original SPA:  i.e. the entire ice-free ground of Byers Peninsula west of the margin of 
the permanent Livingston Island ice sheet, including the littoral zone, but excluding Window 
Island and the five southern coastal sites originally included, as well as excluding all offshore 
islets and rocks. Recommendation XVI-5 noted that in addition to the special geological value, the 
Area was also of considerable biological and archaeological importance.  Biological values noted 
were: 
• Sparse but diverse flora of calcicolous and calcifuge plants and cyanobacteria associated with 
the lavas and basalts respectively; 
• Particularly well-developed vegetation on basaltic plugs; 
• Several rare cryptogams and two native vascular plants (Deschampsia antarctica and 
Colobanthus quitensis) occur at several sites; 
• Coastal and inland lakes, the latter with a particularly important biota, including aquatic 
mosses, and serving as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steinenii, the only native 
winged insect in the Antarctic and which has exceptionally restricted distribution; 
• The only other Antarctic dipteran, the wingless midge Belgica antarctica, occurs with 
restricted distribution in stands of moist moss near Cerro Negro. 
 
In addition, the archaeological values were described as unique in possessing the greatest 
concentration of historical sites in Antarctica, namely the remains of refuges, together with 
contemporary artifacts, and shipwrecks of early nineteenth century sealing expeditions. 
 
 
 
35
The values recorded in the original management plans, are reaffirmed in the present 
management plan.  Further values not referred to originally, but evident from scientific 
descriptions of Byers Peninsula, are also considered important as reasons for special protection of 
the Area.  These values are:   
• well-preserved sub-fossil whale bones are present in raised beaches, which are important for 
radiocarbon dating of beach deposits; 
• the described terrestrial flora and fauna is of exceptional diversity, with one of the broadest 
representations of species known in the maritime Antarctic; 
• with over 60 lakes, numerous freshwater pools and a great variety of often extensive streams, it 
is the most significant limnological site in the South Shetland Islands – and perhaps the 
Antarctica Peninsula region – and also one which has not been subjected to significant levels 
of human disturbance; 
• the lakes and their sediments constitute one of the most important archives for study of the 
Holocene palaeoenvironment in the Antarctic Peninsula region, as well as for establishing a 
regional Holocene tephrachronology; 
• Parochlus steinenii is of limited distribution in the South Shetland Islands, and Belgica 
antarctica has a very restricted distribution on the Antarctic Peninsula, but both species are 
abundant at several of the lakes and pools on Byers Peninsula;  
• unusually thick (3-10 cm) and extensive cyanobacterial mats of Phormidium sp., particularly 
on the upper levels of the central Byers Peninsula plateau, are the best examples so far 
described in the maritime Antarctic; 
• the breeding avifauna within the Area is diverse, including two species of penguin (chinstrap 
Pygoscelis antarctica and gentoo P. papua), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata), Wilson's storm 
petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), cape petrels (Daption capense), kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), 
southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica), 
blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps), brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi), and 
sheathbills (Chionis alba). 
While the particular status of designation and boundaries have changed from time to time, 
Byers Peninsula has in effect been under special protection for most of the modern era of scientific 
activity in the region.  Recent activities within the Area have been almost exclusively for scientific 
research.  Most visits and sampling within the Area, since original designation in 1966, have been 
subject to Permit conditions. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Byers Peninsula aims to: 
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance; 
• allow scientific research on the ecosystem and geology;  
• allow other scientific research within the Area provided it is for compelling reasons which 
cannot be served elsewhere; 
• allow archaeological research and measures for artefact protection, while protecting historic 
artefacts present within the Area from unnecessary destruction, disturbance, or removal; 
 
 
36
• minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at Base Juan Carlos I (Spain) and St. Kliment Ochridski Station 
(Bulgaria) on Hurd Peninsula, where copies of this management plan shall be made available; 
• Markers, signs, fences or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition; 
• Visits shall be made as necessary (preferably no less than once every five years) to assess 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure 
management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Byers Peninsula ASPA No. 126 in relation to the South Shetland Islands, showing the 
location of Base Juan Carlos I (Spain) and St. Kliment Ochridski Station (Bulgaria), and 
showing the location of protected areas within 75 km of the Area.  Inset: the location of 
Livingston Island along the Antarctica Peninsula. 
Map 2: Byers Peninsula ASPA No. 126 topographic map.  Topographic information simplified 
after SGE et al (1993).  Map specifications: Projection  UTM Zone 20; Spheroid: 
WGS84;  Datum: Mean Sea Level.  Horizontal accuracy of control: ±0.05 m. Vertical 
contour interval 25 m, vertical accuracy unknown but expected to be better than ±12.5 m. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Byers Peninsula (between latitudes 62°34'35" and 62°40'35" S and longitudes 60°54'14" and 
61°13'07" W, 60.6 km2) is situated at the west end of Livingston Island,  the second-largest of the 
South Shetland Islands (Map 1).  The peninsula has a central west-east extent of about 9 km and a 
NW-SE extent of 18.2 km, and is the largest ice-free area in the South Shetland Islands. The 
peninsula is generally of low, gently rolling relief, although there are a number of prominent hills 
ranging in altitude between 80 – 265 m (Map 2). The interior is dominated by a series of extensive 
platforms at altitudes of up to 105 m, interrupted by isolated volcanic plugs such as Chester Cone 
(188 m) and Cerro Negro (143 m) (Thomson and López-Martínez 1996).  There is an abundance 
of rounded, flat landforms resulting from marine, glacial and periglacial erosional processes.  The 
most rugged terrain occurs on Ray Promontory, a ridge forming the northwest-trending axis of the 
 
 
37
roughly ‘Y’-shaped peninsula. Precipitous cliffs surround the coastline at the northern end of Ray 
Promontory with Start Hill (265 m) at the NW extremity being the highest point on the peninsula.  
The coast of Byers Peninsula has a total length of 71 km (Map 2).  Although of generally 
low relief, the coast is irregular and often rugged, with numerous headlands, cliffs, offshore islets, 
rocks and shoals.  Byers Peninsula is also notable for its broad beaches, prominent features on all 
three coasts (Robbery Beaches in the north, President Beaches in the west, and South Beaches).  
The South Beaches are the most extensive; extending 12 km along the coast and up to almost 0.9 
km in width, these are the largest in the South Shetland Islands (Thomson and López-Martínez 
1996).  For a detailed description of the geology and biology of the Area see Annex 1. 
 
BOUNDARIES 
The boundaries of the Area designated under Recommendation XVI-5 have been changed in 
this management plan.  The Area now includes two islets several hundred metres SW of Devils 
Point and a small area of ice-free ground at Clark Nunatak in the SE corner as these sites also 
support values consistent with the remainder of the Peninsula.  The Area is now defined to include 
the whole of Byers Peninsula west of the permanent ice sheet of Rotch Dome, Livingston Island, 
above the low tide water level, including the two islets adjacent to Devils Point noted above, but 
excluding all other offshore islets and rocks (Map 2). 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
Besides the sealers refuges, there are no structures known to be present in the Area.  
Several cairns marking sites used for topographical survey are present within the Area.  The 
nearest scientific research stations are 30 km east at Hurd Peninsula, Livingston Island (Base Juan 
Carlos I (Spain) and St Kliment Ochridski (Bulgaria)). 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Byers Peninsula are: Cape Shirreff, ASPA No. 149, which 
lies about 20 km to the northeast; Port Foster and other parts of Deception Island, ASPAs No. 140 
and No. 145 respectively, which are approximately 40 km SSE; and ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), 
ASPA No. 144, which is about 70 km to the east at Greenwich Island (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, geology or archaeology of the Area, or 
for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; or  
• 
it is issued for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as 
inspection, maintenance or review; 
 
 
38
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological, geological, historical or scientific 
values of the Area; 
• 
the sampling proposed will not take, remove or damage such quantities of soil, rock, native 
flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance on Byers Peninsula would be significantly 
affected; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• Vehicles are prohibited within the Area and access shall be by small boat or by helicopter. 
• There are no special restrictions on landings from the sea, or that apply to the sea routes used 
to move to and from the Area. 
• During the period 1 October – 30 April inclusive, aircraft should avoid landing within 500 m 
of the coast (Map 2). Within this zone the overflight guidelines, specified in Table 1 (below), 
should be followed to the maximum extent practicable in order to protect the numerous birds 
and seals concentrated along the coast. 
• Helicopters may land elsewhere within the Area when necessary for purposes consistent with  
the  objectives of the Plan, although landings should, where practicable, be made on ridge and 
raised beach crests. 
• Helicopters should avoid sites where there are concentrations of birds or well-developed 
vegetation. When conditions require aircraft to fly at lower elevations than recommended in 
the guidelines, aircraft should maintain the maximum elevation possible and minimise the time 
taken to transit the coastal zone. 
• Use of helicopter smoke grenades is prohibited within the Area unless absolutely necessary for 
safety.  If used all smoke grenades should be retrieved. 
• Subject to the guidelines in Table 1, movement within the Area shall be on foot or by 
helicopter. 
• Pilots, air or boat crew, or other people on aircraft or boats, are prohibited from moving on 
foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorised by 
Permit. 
• All movement should be undertaken carefully so as to minimise disturbance to animals, soils, 
geomorphological features and vegetated surfaces, walking on rocky terrain or ridges if 
practical to avoid damage to sensitive plants, patterned ground and the often waterlogged soils. 
• 
Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any 
permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects. 
 
 
39
 
Table 1: Aircraft overflight guidelines applying 1 October – 30 April inclusive within a 500 m coastal zone 
at Byers Peninsula. 
 
 
 
Aircraft type 
 
Number of  
engines 
Minimum approach distance (m)
Vertical (above ground) 
Feet 
Metres 
Helicopter 
1 
2460 
750 
Helicopter 
2 
3300 
1000 
Fixed-wing 
1 or 2 
1480 
450
Fixed-wing 
4 
3300 
1000
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
• Specific guidelines on times and locations at which aircraft may operate within the Area apply, 
specified in Section 7 (i) of this Management Plan. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit.  Permanent 
structures are prohibited. All structures or scientific equipment installed in the Area shall be 
approved by Permit for a specified period and clearly identified by country, name of the principal 
investigator and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose 
minimal risk of contamination to the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit 
has expired shall be a condition of the Permit. 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
When necessary for purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed within 
the Area. Specific camp site locations have not been designated, although camps should be located 
on non-vegetated sites, such as on the drier parts of the raised beaches, or on thick (>0.5 m) snow-
cover when practicable, and should avoid concentrations of breeding birds or mammals.  It is 
prohibited to camp within 50 m of any historic sealer’s refuge or shelter. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix)(3) below shall be taken against accidental 
introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies on Byers Peninsula, no poultry 
products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, including wastes from such 
products, shall be released into the Area or into the adjacent sea.  No herbicides or pesticides shall 
be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which 
may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be 
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was 
 
 
40
granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically authorised by Permit for specific 
scientific or management purposes.  Anything introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be 
removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that 
risk of any introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs which is likely to 
compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal is 
not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate authority should 
be notified of anything released and not removed that was not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only 
be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific, 
archaeological or management needs.  Anything of recent human origin likely to compromise the 
values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder, or is not an historic 
artefact or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be 
greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be 
notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes 
may be disposed of into the sea. 
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan 
can continue to be met 
8. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, 
which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for 
protective measures. 
9. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
10. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values derived from the relatively low level of 
recent human impact at Byers Peninsula special precautions shall be taken against 
introductions.  Of concern are microbial or plant introductions sourced from other Antarctic 
sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica.  All sampling equipment or 
markers brought into the Area shall be cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum extent 
practicable, footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks, 
carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area. 
 
 
41
11. Poultry products and other introduced avian products, which may be a vector of avian diseases, 
shall not be released into the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management 
Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
 
42
Bibliography 
Birnie, R.V. and Gordon, J.E. 1980. Drainage systems associated with snow melt, 
South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Geografiska Annaler 62A(1-2): 57-62. 
Björck, S., Hakansson, H, Zale, R., Karlén, W. and Jönsson, B.L. 1991.  A late 
Holocene lake sediment sequence from Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, with 
palaeoclimatic implications.  Antarctic Science 3(1): 61-72. 
Björck, S. Sandgren, P. & Zale, R. 1991. Late Holocene tephrochronology of the Northern 
Antarctic Peninsula. Quaternary Research 36: 322-28. 
Björck, S., Hjort, C, Ingólfsson, O., and Skog, G. 1991.  Radiocarbon dates from the 
Antarctic Peninsula-  problems and potential.  In Lowe, J.J., Radiocarbon dating: 
recent applications and future potential.  Quaternary Proceedings 1, Quaternary 
Research Association, Cambridge: 55-65. 
Björck, S., Håkansson, H., Olsson, S., Barnekow, L. & Janssens, J. 1993. Palaeoclimatic 
studies in South Shetland Islands, Antarctica, based on numerous stratigraphic 
variables in lake sediments. Journal of Paleolimnology 8: 233-72. 
Björck, S. & Zale, R. 1996: Late Holocene tephrochronology and palaeoclimate, based on lake 
sediment studies. In López-Martínez, J., Thomson, M. R. A., and Thomson, J.W. (Eds.) 
Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series Sheet 
5-A, 43-48. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Björck, S., Hjort, C., Ingólfsson, O., Zale, R. and Ising, J. 1996: Holocene deglaciation 
chronology from lake sediments. In López-Martínez, J., Thomson, M. R. A. and 
Thomson, J.W. (Eds.) Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. 
BAS GEOMAP Series Sheet 5-A, 49-51. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Block, W. and Christensen, B.  1985. Terrestrial Enchytraeidae from South Georgia 
and the Maritime Antarctic. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  69: 65-70. 
Block, W. and Starý, J. 1996.  Oribatid mites (Acari: Oribatida) of the maritime Antarctic 
and Antarctic Peninsula. Journal of Natural History  30: 1059-67. 
Bonner, W.N. and Smith, R.I.L. (Eds) 1985.  Conservation areas in the Antarctic. SCAR, 
Cambridge: 147-56. 
Booth, R.G., Edwards, M. and Usher, M.B. 1985. Mites of the genus Eupodes (Acari, 
Prostigmata) from maritime Antarctica: a biometrical and taxonomic study.  Journal of 
the Zoological Society of London (A) 207: 381-406.  (samples of Eupodes analysed) 
Convey P., Greenslade P. Richard K.J. and Block W. 1996. The terrestrial arthropod 
fauna of the Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands - 
Collembola. Polar Biology 16(4): 257-59. 
Covacevich V.C. 1976. Fauna valanginiana de Peninsula Byers, Isla Livingston, 
Antartica. Revista Geologica de Chile 3: 25-56. 
Crame J.A. 1984. Preliminary bivalve zonation of the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary in 
Antarctica. In Perrilliat, M. de C. (Ed.) Memoria, III Congreso Latinamerico de 
 
 
43
Paleontologia, Mexico, 1984. Mexico City, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de 
Mexico, Instituto de Geologia: 242-54. 
Crame J.A. 1985. New Late Jurassic Oxytomid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula 
region. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  69: 35-55. 
Crame J.A. 1995. Occurrence of the bivalve genus Manticula in the Early Cretaceous of 
Antarctica. Palaeontology 38 Pt. 2: 299-312. 
Crame J.A. 1995. A new Oxytomid bivalve from the Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous of 
Antarctica. Palaeontology 39 Pt. 3: 615-28. 
Crame J.A. 1996. Early Cretaceous bivalves from the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.  
Mitt. Geol-Palaont. Inst. Univ. Hamburg  77: 125-127. 
Crame J.A. and Kelly, S.R.A. 1995. Composition and distribution of the Inoceramid 
bivalve genus Anopaea. Palaeontology 38 Pt. 1: 87-103. 
Crame J.A., Pirrie D., Crampton J.S. and Duane A.M.  1993. Stratigraphy and regional 
significance of the Upper Jurassic - Lower Cretaceous Byers Group, Livingston 
Island, Antarctica. Journal of the Geological Society 150 Pt. 6: 1075-87. 
Croxall, J.P. and Kirkwood, E.D. 1979. The distribution of penguins on the Antarctic 
Peninsula and the islands of the Scotia Sea. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Davey, M.C.  1993. Carbon and nitrogen dynamics in a maritime Antarctic stream. 
Freshwater Biology 30: 319-30. 
Davey, M.C.  1993. Carbon and nitrogen dynamics in a small pond in the maritime 
Antarctic. Hydrobiologia 257: 165-75. 
Duane A.M. 1994. Preliminary palynological investigation of the Byers Group (Late 
Jurassic-Early Cretaceous), Livingston Island, Antarctic Peninsula. Review of 
Palaeobotany and Palynology 84: 113-120. 
Duane A.M. 1996. Palynology of the Byers Group (Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous) 
Livingston and Snow Islands, Antarctic Peninsula: its biostratigraphical and 
palaeoenvironmental significance. Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology 91: 241-
81. 
Duane A.M. 1997. Taxonomic investigations of Palynomorphs from the Byers Group 
(Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous), Livingston and Snow Islands, Antarctic 
Peninsula. Palynology 21: 123-144. 
Ellis-Evans, J.C. 1996. Biological and chemical features of lakes and streams.  In Lopez-
Martínez, J., Thomson M.R.A. and Thomson J.W. (Eds.).  Geomorphological map of 
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A. Cambridge, 
British Antarctic Survey. 
González-Ferrán, O. Katsui, Y. and Tavera, J. 1970.  Contribución al conocimiento 
geológico de la Península Byers, Isla Livingston, Islas Shetland del Sur, Antártica. 
Publ. INACH Serie. Cientifica 1(1): 41-54. 
Gray, N.F. and Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1984. The distribution of nematophagous fungi in the 
maritime Antarctic. Mycopathologia 85: 81-92. 
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas 
originally proposed by the United States of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit 
 
 
44
report. Internal report for the National Science Foundation, US, and the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office, UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
Hansom, J.D. 1979. Radiocarbon dating of a raised beach at 10 m in the South 
Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  49: 287. 
Hathway B. 1997. Nonmarine sedimentation in an Early Cretaceous extensional 
continental-margin arc, Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. 
Journal of Sedimentary Research 67(4): 686-697. 
Hathway, B. and Lomas, S.A. 1998. The Upper Jurassic-Lower cretaceous Byers 
Group, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica: revised stratigraphy and regional 
correlations. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  49: 287. 
Hernandez, P.J and Azcarate, V. 1971.  Estudio paleobotanico preliminar sobre restos de 
una tafoflora de la Peninsula Byers (Cerro Negro), Isla Livingston, Islas Shetland del 
Sur, Antartica. Publ. INACH Serie. Cientifica  2(1): 15-50. 
Hjort, C., Ingólfsson, O. & Björck, S. 1992: The last major deglaciation in the Antarctic 
Peninsula region -a review of recent Swedish Quaternary research. In (eds. Y. 
Yoshida et al.) Recent Progress in Antarctic Science. Terra Scientific Publishing 
Company  (TERRAPUB), Tokyo: 741-743 
Hjort, C., Björck, S., Ingólfsson, Ó. & Möller, P. 1998: Holocene deglaciation and climate history 
of the northern Antarctic Peninsula region: a discussion of correlations between the Southern 
and Northern Hemispheres. Annals of Glaciology 27: 110-112. 
Hodgson, D.A., Dyson, C.L., Jones, V.J. and Smellie, J.L. 1998. Tephra analysis of 
sediments from Midge Lake (South Shetland Islands) and Sombre Lake (South Orkney 
Islands), Antarctica. Antarctic Science 10(1): 13-20. 
John, B.S. and Sugden, D.E. 1971. Raised marine features and phases of glaciation in 
the South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  24: 45-111. 
Jones, V.J., Juggins, S. and Ellis-Evans, J.C. 1993.  The relationship between water 
chemistry and surface sediment diatom assemblages in maritime Antarctic lakes.  
Antarctic Science 5(4): 339-48. 
Kelly, S.R.A. 1995. New Trigonioid bivalves from the Early Jurassic to Earliest 
Cretaceous of the Antarctic Peninsula region: systematics and austral 
paleobiogeography. Journal of Paleontology 69(1): 66-84. 
Lindsay, D.C. 1971. Vegetation of the South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey 
Bulletin  25: 59-83. 
Lopez-Martinez, J., Serrano, E. and Martinez de Pison, E. 1996. Geomorphological 
features of the drainage system.  In Lopez-Martinez, J., Thomson, J.R.A. and 
Thomson, J.W. (Eds.) Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. 
BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A, 15-19.  Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Lopez-Martínez, J., Martínez de Pisón, E., Serrano, E. and Arche, A. 1996 
Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP 
Series, Sheet 5-A, Scale 1:25 000.  Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey,. 
Martínez De Pisón E., Serrano, E., Arche, A and Lopez-Martínez, J. 1996.  Glacial 
geomorphology. In Lopez-Martínez, J., Thomson, M.R.A. and Thomson, J.W. 
(Eds.).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS 
GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5- A, 23-27. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
 
 
45
Pankhurst R.J. Weaver S.D. Brook M. and Saunders A.D. 1979. K-Ar chronology of Byers 
Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey 
Bulletin 49: 277-82.  
Richard, K.J., Convey, P. and Block, W.  1994.  The terrestrial arthropod fauna of the 
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.  Polar Biology 14: 371-
79. 
SGE, WAM and BAS. 1993.  Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island.  Topographic map, 
Scale 1:25 000.  Cartografia Antartica. Madrid, Servicio Geografia del Ejercito. 
Serrano, E., Martínez De Pisón E. and Lopez-Martínez, J. 1996.  Periglacial and nival 
landforms and deposits. In Lopez-Martínez, J., Thomson, M.R.A. and Thomson, 
J.W. (Eds.).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS 
GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A, 28-34. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Smellie J.L., Davies R.E.S. and Thomson M.R.A. 1980.  Geology of a Mesozoic intra-arc 
sequence on Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin 50: 55-76. 
Smith, R.I.L. and Simpson, H.W. 1987. Early Nineteeth Century sealers’ refuges on 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  74: 49-
72. 
Starý, J. and Block, W. 1998.  Distribution and biogeography of oribatid mites (Acari: 
Oribatida) in Antarctica, the sub-Antarctic and nearby land areas. Journal of Natural 
History  32: 861-94. 
Sugden, D.E. and John, B.S. 1973. The ages of glacier fluctuations in the South Shetland 
Islands, Antarctica. In van Zinderen Bakker, E.M. (Ed.) Paleoecology of Africa and 
of the surrounding islands and Antarctica 8.  Cape Town, A.A. Balkema: 139-59. 
Thom, G. 1978.  Disruption of bedrock by the growth and collapse of ice lenses. Journal 
of Glaciology  20: 571-75. 
Torres, D., Cattan, P. and Yanez, J. 1981.  Postbreeding preferences of the Southern 
Elephant seal Mirounga leonina in Livingston Island (South Shetlands). Publ. INACH 
Serie. Cientifica  27: 13-18. 
Thomson, M.R.A. and López-Martínez, J. 1996. Introduction.  In Lopez-Martínez, J., 
Thomson, M.R.A. and Thomson, J.W. (Eds.).  Geomorphological map of Byers 
Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A, 1-4. Cambridge, 
British Antarctic Survey. 
Usher, M.B. and Edwards, M. 1986. The selection of conservation areas in Antarctica: 
an example using the arthropod fauna of Antarctic islands.  Environmental 
Conservation 13(2): 115-22. 
White, M.G. Preliminary report on field studies in the South Shetland Islands 1965/66.  
Unpublished field report in BAS Archives AD6/2H1966/N6. 
Woehler, E.J. (Ed.) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. 
 
 
46
Annex 1 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
CLIMATE 
No extended meteorological records are available for Byers Peninsula, but the climate is 
expected to be similar to that at Base Juan Carlos I, Hurd Peninsula. Conditions there indicate a 
mean annual temperature of below 0º C, with temperatures >0º C for at least several months each 
summer, and a relatively high precipitation rate estimated at about 800 mm/yr, much of which 
falls as rain in summer (Ellis-Evans 1996). The peninsula is snow-covered for much of the year, 
but is usually completely snow-free by the end of the summer.  The peninsula is exposed to 
weather from the Drake Passage in the north and northwest, the directions from which winds 
prevail, and Bransfield Strait to the south. 
 
GEOLOGY  
The bedrock of Byers Peninsula is composed of Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous marine 
sedimentary, volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks, intruded by igneous bodies (see Smellie et al 
1980; Crame et al 1993, Hathway and Lomas 1998) (Map 3 – IN PREP). The rocks represent part 
of a Mesozoic-Cenozoic magmatic arc complex, which is exposed throughout the whole of the 
Antarctic Peninsula region, although most extensively on the Byers Peninsula (Hathway and 
Lomas 1998). The interior, elevated, region of the eastern half of the peninsula – surrounded to the 
north and south by Holocene beach deposits – is dominated by Lower Cretaceous non-marine 
tuffs, volcanic breccias, conglomerates, sandstones and minor mudstones, with intrusions in 
several places by volcanic plugs and sills.  The western half of the peninsula, and extending NW 
half-way along Ray Promontory, is predominantly Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous marine 
mudstones, with sandstones and conglomerates, with frequent intrusions of volcanic sills, plugs 
and other igneous bodies.  The NW half of Ray Promontory comprises mainly volcanic breccias of 
the same age.  Mudstones, sandstones, conglomerates and pyroclastic rocks are the most common 
lithologies found on the peninsula. Expanses of Holocene beach gravels and alluvium are found in 
coastal areas, particularly on South Beaches and the eastern half of Robbery Beaches, with less-
extensive deposits on President Beaches. 
The Area is of high geological value because “the sedimentary and igneous rocks exposed at 
Byers Peninsula constitute the most complete record of the Jurassic-Early Cretaceous period in the 
northern part of the Pacific flank of the magmatic arc complex, and they have proved a key 
succession for the study of marine molluscan faunas (e.g. Crame 1984, 1995, Crame and Kelly 
1995) and non-marine floras (e.g. Hernandez and Azcárte 1971, Philippe et al 1995).” (Hathway 
and Lomas 1998).  
 
GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
Much of the terrain consists of lithosols, essentially a layer of shattered rock, with 
permafrost widespread below an active layer of 30-70 cm depth (Thom 1978, Ellis-Evans 1996, 
Serrano et al 1996). Stone fields (consisting of silty fines with dispersed boulders and surficial 
clasts), gelifluction lobes, polygonal ground (both in flooded and dry areas), stone stripes and 
circles, and other periglacial landforms dominate the surface morphology of the upper platforms 
where bedrock outcrop is absent (Serrano at al 1996).  Debris- and mud-flows are observed in 
several localities.  Beneath some of the moss and grass communities there is a 10-20 cm deep 
 
 
47
layer of organic matter although, because vegetation is sparse over most of Byers Peninsula, there 
are no deep accumulations of peat (Bonner and Smith 1985).  Ornithogenic soils are present 
especially in the Devils Point vicinity and on a number of knolls along President Beaches (Ellis-
Evans 1996). 
Parts of the interior of the peninsula have been shaped by coastal processes, with a series of 
raised beaches ranging from 3 to 54 m in altitude, some of which are over 1 km wide. A 
radiocarbon date for the highest beach deposits suggests that Byers Peninsula was largely free of 
permanent ice by 9700 yr B.P., while the lowest beach deposits are dated at 300 yr B.P (John and 
Sugden 1971, Sugden and John 1973).  Lake sediment analyses, however, suggest a more recent 
general deglaciation of central Byers Peninsula of around 4000-5000 yr B.P., and radiocarbon 
dates in the locality need to be interpreted cautiously (Björck et al 1991a, b).  In several places 
sub-fossil whalebones are embedded in the raised beaches, occasionally as almost entire skeletons. 
Radiocarbon dates of skeletal material from about 10 m a.s.l. on South Beaches suggest an age of 
between 2000 and 2400 yr B.P. (Hansom 1979). Pre-Holocene surfaces of Byers Peninsula exhibit 
clear evidence of a glacial landscape, despite the gentle landforms. Today only three small residual 
glaciers (comprising less then 0.5 km2) remain on Ray Promontory.  The pre-existing, glacially 
modified, landforms have been subsequently overprinted by fluvial and periglacial processes, and 
moraines and other glacial deposits are scarce (Martinez de Pison et al 1996). 
 
STREAMS AND LAKES 
Byers Peninsula is perhaps the most significant limnological site in the South Shetland 
Islands / Antarctica Peninsula region, with over 60 lakes, numerous freshwater pools 
(differentiated from lakes in that they freeze to the bottom in winter), and a dense and varied 
stream network probably has the most stream types in the Maritime Antarctic. The gentle terrain 
favours water retention and waterlogged soils are common in the summer. However, the water 
capacity of the thin soils is limited, and many of the channels are frequently dry, with flow often 
intermittent except during periods of substantial snow melt or where they drain glaciers (Lopez-
Martinez et al 1996).  Most of the streams drain seasonal snowfields and are often no more than 5-
10 cm in depth (Ellis-Evans 1996).  The larger streams are up to 4.5 km in length, up to 20 m in 
width, and 30-50 cm in depth in the lower reaches during periods of flow. Streams that drain to the 
west often have sizeable gorges (Lopez-Martinez et al 1996), and gullies up to 30 m in depth have 
been cut into the uppermost, and largest, of the raised marine platforms (Ellis-Evans 1996).  
Above the Holocene raised beaches the valleys are gentle, with widths of up to several hundred 
metres.  
Lakes are especially abundant on the higher platforms (i.e. at the heads of basins) and on the 
Holocene raised beaches near the coast.  Midge Lake is the largest at 587x112 m, and deepest with 
a maximum depth of 9.0 m (Map 2). The inland lakes are all nutrient-poor and highly transparent, 
with extensive sediments in deeper water overlain by cyanobacterial mats.  In some lakes, notably 
Chester Cone Lake about 500 m to the south of Midge Lake (Map 2), stands of aquatic moss 
Drepanocladus longifolius(= D. aduncus) are found growing at one to several metres in depth. 
Large masses of this moss are sometimes washed up along parts of the shoreline and may serve as 
an opportunistic habitat for Parochlus larvae (Bonner and Smith 1985). 
The lakes are generally frozen to a depth of 1.0-1.5 m for 9-11 months of the year, overlain 
by snow, although surfaces of some of the higher lakes remain frozen year-round (Ellis-Evans 
1996, Lopez-Martinez et al 1996).  On the upper levels of the central plateau, many small, 
shallow, slow-flowing streams flow between lakes and drain onto large flat areas of saturated 
lithosol covered with thick (3-10 cm) cyanobacterial mats of Phormidium sp..  These mats are 
 
 
48
more extensive than in any other Maritime Antarctic site thus far described, and reflect the unique 
geomorphology and relatively high annual precipitation of the Area. With spring melt there is 
considerable flush through most lakes, but outflow from many lakes may cease late in the season 
as seasonal snowmelt decreases.  Some of the streams also contain substantial growths of 
cyanobacterial and green filamentous algae, along with diatoms and copepods. A number of 
relatively saline lakes of lagoonal origin occur close to the shore, particularly on President 
Beaches, and where these are used as southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) wallows these 
have been highly organically enriched.  Those coastal shallow lakes and pools located behind the 
first raised beach often have abundant algal mats and crustaceans, including the copepods 
Boeckella poppei and Parabroteas sorsi, and occasionally the fairy shrimp Branchinecta gainii. 
 
VEGETATION 
Although much of Byers Peninsula lacks abundant vegetation, especially inland (see Lindsay 
1971), the sparse communities contain a diverse flora, with at least 56 lichen species, 29 mosses, 5 
hepatics and 2 phanerogams having been identified as present within the Area.  Numerous 
unidentified lichens and mosses have also been collected.  This suggests the Area contains one of 
the most diverse representations of terrestrial flora known in the maritime Antarctic.  A number of 
the species are rare in this part of the maritime Antarctic.  For example, of the bryophytes, 
Anthelia juratzkana, Brachythecium austroglareosum, Chorisodontium aciphyllum, Ditrichum 
hyalinum, Herzogobryum teres, Hypnum revolutum, Notoligotrichum trichodon, Pachyglossa 
dissitifolia, Platydictya jungermannioides, Sanionia cf. plicata, Schistidium occultum, Syntrichia 
filaris and Syntrichia saxicola are considered rare.  For A. juratzkana, D. hyalinum, N. trichodon 
and S. plicata, their furthest-south record is on Byers Peninsula.  Of the lichen flora, Himantormia 
lugubris, Ochrolechia parella, Peltigera didactyla and Pleopsidium chlorophanum are considered 
rare. 
Vegetation development is much greater on the south coast than on the north. Commonly 
found on the higher, drier raised beaches in the south is an open community dominated by 
abundant Polytrichastrum alpinum (=Polytrichum alpinum), Polytrichum piliferum (=Polytrichum 
antarcticum), P. juniperinum, Ceratodon purpureus, and the moss Pohlia nutans and several 
crustose lichens are frequent. Some large stands of mosses occur near President and South 
Beaches, where extensive snowdrifts often accumulate at the base of slopes rising behind the 
raised beaches, providing an ample source of meltwater in the summer. These moss stands are 
dominated mainly by Sanionia uncinata (=Drepanocladus uncinatus), which locally forms 
continuous carpets of several hectares. The vegetation composition is more diverse than on the 
higher, drier areas. Inland, wet valley floors have stands of Brachythecium austro-salebrosum, 
Campylium polygamum, Sanionia uncinata, Warnstorfia laculosa (=Calliergidium 
austro-stramineum), and W. sarmentosa (=Calliergon sarmentosum).  In contrast, moss carpets are 
almost non-existent within 250 m of the northern coast, replaced by scant growth of Sanionia in 
hollows between raised beaches of up to 12 m in altitude, and of lichens principally of the genera 
Acarospora, Buellia, Caloplaca, Verrucaria and Xanthoria on the lower (2-5 m) raised beach 
crests, with Sphaerophorus, Stereocaulon and Usnea becoming the more dominant lichens with 
increasing altitude (Lindsay 1971). 
On better drained ash slopes Bryum spp., Dicranoweisia spp., Ditrichum spp., Pohlia spp., 
Schistidium spp., and Tortula spp. are common as isolated cushions and turves with various 
liverworts, lichens (notably the pink Placopsis contortuplicata and black foliose Leptogium 
puberulum), and the cyanobacterium Nostoc commune.  P. contortuplicata occurs in inland and 
upland habitats lacking in nitrogen, and is typical of substrata with some degree of disturbance 
such as solifluction; it is often the only plant to colonise the small rock fragments of stone stripes 
 
 
49
and frost-heave polygons (Lindsay 1971).  It is usually found growing alone, though rarely with 
species of Andreaea and Usnea.  N. commune covers extensive saturated areas on level or gently 
sloping, gravelly boulder clay from altitudes of between 60-150 m, forming discrete rosettes of 
about 5 cm in diameter 10-20 cm apart (Lindsay 1971).  Scattered, almost spherical, cushions of 
Andreaea, Dicranoweisia, and Ditrichum are found on the driest soils. In wet, bird- and 
seal-influenced areas the green foliose alga Prasiola crispa is sometimes abundant. 
Rock surfaces on Byers Peninsula are mostly friable, but locally colonised by lichens, 
especially near the coast. Volcanic plugs are composed of harder, more stable rock and are densely 
covered by lichens and occasional mosses. Usnea Plug is remarkable for its luxuriant growth of 
Himantormia lugubris and Usnea aurantiaco-atra (=U. fasciata). More generally, H. lugubris and 
U. aurantiaco-atra are the dominant lichen species on inland exposed montane surfaces, growing 
with the moss Andreaea gainii over much of the exposed rock with up to 80% cover of the 
substratum (Lindsay 1971). In sheltered pockets harbouring small accumulations of mineral soil, 
the liverworts Barbilophozia hatcheri and Cephaloziella varians (=exiliflora) are often found, but 
more frequently intermixed with cushions of Bryum, Ceratodon, Dicranoweisia, Pohlia, Sanionia, 
Schistidium, and Tortula.  Sanionia and Warnstorfia form small stands, possibly correlated with 
the absence of large snow patches and associated melt streams. Polytrichastrum alpinum forms 
small inconspicuous cushions in hollows, but it may merge with Andreaea gainii cushions in 
favourable situations (Lindsay 1971).  
Crustose lichens are mainly species of Buellia, Lecanora, Lecedella, Lecidea, Placopsis and 
Rhizocarpon growing on rock, with species of Cladonia and Stereocaulon growing on mosses, 
particularly Andreaea (Lindsay 1971). On the south coast moss carpets are commonly colonised 
by epiphytic lichens, such as Leptogium puberulum, Peltigera rufescens, Psoroma spp., together 
with Coclocaulon aculeata and C. epiphorella.  On sea cliffs Caloplaca and Verrucaria spp. 
dominate on lower surfaces exposed to salt spray up to about 5 m, with nitrophilous species, such 
as Caloplaca regalis, Haematomma erythromma,and Xanthoria elegans often dominant at higher 
altitudes where seabirds are frequently nesting. Elsewhere on dry cliff surfaces a Ramalina 
terebrata - crustose lichen community is common.  A variety of ornithocoprophilous lichens, such 
as Catillaria corymbosa, Lecania brialmontii, and species of Buellia, Haematomma, Lecanora, 
and Physcia occur on rocks near concentrations of breeding birds, along with the foliose lichens 
Mastodia tessellata, Xanthoria elegans and X. candelaria which are usually dominant on dry 
boulders. 
Antarctic hairgrass (Deschampsia antarctica) is common in several localities, mainly on the 
south coast, and occasionally forms closed swards (e.g. at Sealer Hill); Antarctic pearlwort 
(Colobanthus quitensis) is sometimes associated. Both plants are quite abundant in southern 
gullies with a steep north-facing slope, forming large, occasionally pure stands with thick carpets 
of Brachythecium and Sanionia, although they are rarely found above 50 m in altitude (Lindsay 
1971). An open community of predominantly Deschampsia and Polytrichum piliferum extends for 
several kilometres on the sandy, dry, flat raised beaches on South Beaches.  A unique growth-form 
of the grass, forming isolated mounds 25 cm high and up to 2 m across, occurs on the beach near 
Sealer Hill. Deschampsia has been reported at only one locality on the north coast (Lair Point), 
where it forms small stunted tufts (Lindsay 1971). 
 
INVERTEBRATES, FUNGI AND BACTERIA 
The microinvertebrate fauna on Byers Peninsula thus far described comprises 23 taxa (Usher 
and Edwards 1986, Richard et al 1994, Block and Stary 1996, Convey et al 1996): six Collembola 
(Cryptopygus antarcticus, Cryptopygus badasa, Friesea grisea, Friesea woyciechowskii, Isotoma 
 
 
50
(Folsomotoma) octooculata (=Parisotoma octooculata) and Tullbergia mixta; one mesostigmatid 
mite (Gamasellus racovitzai), five cryptostigmatid mites (Alaskozetes antarcticus, Edwardzetes 
dentifer, Globoppia loxolineata (=Oppia loxolineata), Halozetes belgicae and Magellozetes 
antarcticus); nine prostigmatid mites (Bakerdania antarcticus, Ereynetes macquariensis, Eupodes 
minutus, Eupodes parvus grahamensis, Nanorchestes berryi, Nanorchestes nivalis, 
Pretriophtydeus tilbrooki, Rhagidia gerlachei, Rhagidia leechi, and Stereotydeus villosus); and 
two Dipterans (Belgica antarctica and Parochlus steinenii).  
Larvae of the wingless midge Belgica antarctica occur in limited numbers in moist moss, 
especially carpets of Sanionia, although it is of very restricted distribution on Byers Peninsula 
(found especially near Cerro Negro) and may be near its northern geographical limit.  The winged 
midge Parochlus steinenii and its larvae inhabit the margins of inland lakes and pools, notably 
Midge Lake and another near Usnea Plug, and are also found amongst the stones of many stream 
beds (Bonner and Smith 1985, Richard et al 1994, Ellis-Evans pers comm 1999).   During warm 
calm weather, swarms of adults may be seen above lake margins.  
The diversity of the arthropod community described at Byers Peninsula is greater than at any 
other documented Antarctic site (Convey et al 1996).  Various studies (Usher and Edwards 1986, 
Richard et al 1994, Convey et al 1996) have demonstrated that the arthropod population 
composition on Byers Peninsula varies significantly with habitat over a small area.  Tullbergia 
mixta has been observed in relatively large numbers; it appears to be limited in Antarctic 
distribution to the South Shetland Islands (Usher and Edwards 1986). Locally, the greatest 
diversity is likely to be observed in communities dominated by moss cushions such as Andreaea 
spp. (Usher and Edwards 1986). Further sampling is required to establish populations and 
diversities with greater reliability.  While further sampling at other sites may yet reveal the 
communities described at Byers Peninsula to be typical of similar habitats in the region, available 
data on the microfauna confirm the biological importance of the Area. 
An analysis of soil samples collected from Byers Peninsula yielded several nematophagous 
fungi: in Deschampsia soil Acrostalagmus goniodes, A. obovatus, Cephalosporium balanoides and 
Dactylaria gracilis; in Colobanthus soil, Cephalosporium balanoides and Dactylella gephyropaga 
were found (Gray and Smith 1984). The basidiomycete Omphalina antarctica is often abundant on 
moist stands of the moss Sanionia uncinata (Bonner and Smith 1985). 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
The avifauna of Byers Peninsula is diverse, although breeding colonies are generally not 
large. Two species of penguin, the chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica) and the gentoo (P. papua), 
breed in the Area; although widely distributed in the region, Adélie Penguins (P. adeliae) have not 
been observed to breed on Byers Peninsula or its offshore islets.  The principal chinstrap penguin 
colony is at Devils Point in the SW, where a rough estimate of about 3000 pairs was made in 
1987; a more accurate count made in 1965 indicated about 5300 pairs in four discrete colonies, of 
which almost 95% were nesting on an islet 100 m to the south of Devils Point (Croxall and 
Kirkwood 1979, Woehler 1993).  Small chinstrap penguin colonies have been reported on the 
northern coast, but no breeding pairs were reported in a 1987 survey. Gentoo penguins breed at 
several colonies on Devils Point, with approximately 750 pairs recorded in 1965. Two smaller 
gentoo colonies totalling about 400 pairs were reported on the northern coast in 1965 (Croxall and 
Kirkwood 1979, Woehler 1993). More recent data are not available. 
The most recent data available for other breeding species are from a detailed survey 
conducted in 1965 (White 1965, in Croxall – BAS internal bird data reports).  The most populous 
breeding species recorded then, with approximately 1760 pairs, was the Antarctic tern (Sterna 
 
 
51
vittata), followed by 1315 pairs of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), approximately 
570 pairs of cape petrels (Daption capense), 449 pairs of kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), 216 pairs 
of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), 95 pairs of black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta 
tropica), 47 pairs of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) (including those on nearshore 
islets), 39 pairs of brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi), and 3 pairs of sheathbills (Chionis alba).  
In addition, prions (Pachytilla sp.) and snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) have been seen on the 
peninsula but their breeding presence has not been confirmed. The census of burrowing and scree-
nesting birds is considered an underestimate (White pers. comm. 1999).  The majority of the birds 
nest in close proximity to the coast, principally in the west and south. 
 
BREEDING MAMMALS 
Large groups of southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) breed on the Byers Peninsula 
coast, with a total of over 2500 individuals reported on South Beaches (Torres et al. 1981) – which 
is one of the largest populations of this species recorded in the South Shetland Islands.  Large 
numbers haul out in wallows and along beaches in summer. Weddell (Leptonychotes weddellii), 
crabeater (Lobodon carcinophagous) and leopard (Hydrurga leptonyx) seals may be seen around 
the shorelines. Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) were once very abundant on Byers 
Peninsula (see below), but have not substantially recolonised the Area in spite of the recent rapid 
population expansion in other parts of the maritime Antarctic. 
 
HISTORICAL FEATURES 
Following discovery of the South Shetland Islands in 1819, intensive sealing at Byers 
Peninsula between 1820 and 1824 exterminated almost all local Antarctic fur seals and southern 
elephant seals (Smith and Simpson 1987). During this period there was a summer population of up 
to 200 American and British sealers living ashore in dry-stone refuges and caves around Byers 
Peninsula (Smith and Simpson 1987). Evidence of their occupation remains in their many refuges, 
many of which still contain artifacts (clothing, implements, structural materials, etc.). Several 
sealing vessels were wrecked near Byers Peninsula and timbers from these ships may be found 
along the shores.  Byers Peninsula has the greatest concentration of early 19th Century sealers’ 
refuges and associated relics in the Antarctic, and these are vulnerable to disturbance and/or 
removal.   
Elephant seal numbers, and to some extent fur seal numbers, recovered after 1860, but were 
again decimated by a second sealing cycle extending to the first decade of the twentieth century. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS 
The modern era of human activity at Byers Peninsula has been largely confined to science.  
The impacts of these activities have not been described, but are believed to be minor and limited to 
items such as campsites, footprints, markers of various kinds, sea-borne litter washed onto beaches 
(e.g. from fishing vessels), and from human wastes and scientific sampling. Several wooden stake 
markers and a plastic fishing float were observed in the SW of the Area in a brief visit made in 
February 2001 (Harris 2001).  
 
 
52
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 107 
EMPEROR ISLAND, DION ISLANDS, MARGUERITE BAY, ANTARCTIC 
PENINSULA 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
 
The Dion Islands (Latitude 67°52' S, Longitude 68°42' W), on the western side of the central 
Antarctic Peninsula in north-western Marguerite Bay, were originally designated as Specially 
Protected Area (SPA) No. 8 through Recommendation IV-8 in 1966 after a proposal by the United 
Kingdom.  All of the islands in the Dion Islands archipelago were included.  Values protected 
under the original designation were described as the presence of the only colony of emperor 
penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) known to exist on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula and that 
the isolation of this colony from others of the same species makes it of outstanding scientific 
interest.  A management plan for the Area was adopted through Recommendation XVI-6 (1990), 
which reaffirmed the values of the Area.  The boundaries were extended to include the intervening 
sea between the islands to ensure protection of the emperors at sea or on sea-ice in the immediate 
vicinity.  Attention was drawn to the additional important value of the colony being one of only 
two known in which breeding occurs on land.  It was also noted as the most northerly and 
probably the smallest of Emperor colonies, with annual numbers fluctuating around 150 pairs. 
 
The values of the emperor penguin colony are reaffirmed in this revised management plan.  
The boundaries of the Area are now defined more precisely. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Emperor Island aims to: 
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance to the Area; 
• allow scientific research on the ecosystem and physical environment, particularly on the 
avifauna, provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere; 
• minimise the possibility of introduction of pathogens which may cause disease in bird 
populations within the Area; 
• minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• gather data on the population status of the emperor penguin colony on a regular basis, 
preferably at least once every five years; 
• allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• Maps showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at any operational research station located within 50 km of the Area, 
where copies of this management plan shall also be made available. 
 
 
53
• Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition. 
• Visits shall be made as necessary (preferably no less than once every five years) to assess 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated, and in particular 
to conduct bird censuses, and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period, provided the Emperor penguins continue to breed in the Area. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Emperor Island, Dion Islands, ASPA No. 107, in relation to Marguerite Bay, showing the 
locations of the stations Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), Rothera (UK) and General San 
Martín (Argentina).  The location of other protected areas within Marguerite Bay (ASPA 
No. 117 at Avian Island, ASPA No. 115 at Lagotellerie Island, and ASPA No. 129 at 
Rothera Point) are also shown.  Inset: the location of Dion Islands on the Antarctic 
Peninsula. 
Map 2: Emperor Island, Dion Islands, ASPA No. 107: topographic map.  Map specifications: 
 
Projection:  Lambert Conformal Conic;  Standard parallels: 1st 67° 0' 00" W;  2nd  68° 
00' 00"S; Central Meridian:  68° 42' 30" W; Latitude of Origin: 68° 00' 00" S; Spheroid: 
WGS84; Datum: Mean sea level. Horizontal accuracy: ± 1.5 m; Vertical accuracy ±1 m 
(best accuracy of the control points); Vertical contour interval 5 m (index contour interval 
15m). 
Map 3: Emperor Island, ASPA No. 107: topographic map.  Map specifications as for Map 2. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
The Dion Islands (Latitude 67°53' S, Longitude 68°42' W, within a region of approximately 
12 km2), situated 13.5 km south of the south-western extremity of Adelaide Island in north-
western Marguerite Bay (Map 1), is a small archipelago comprising the following islands, rocks 
and reefs: Envoy Rock, Regent Reef, Consort Islands (approximately 3 ha), Emperor Island 
(approximately 5 ha), Jester Rock, Noble Rocks, Courtier Islands (approximately 8 ha), Embassy 
Islands and Consul Reef.  The islands are generally small, rocky and precipitous, especially 
Emperor Island, which at a maximum elevation of 46 m is also the highest.  The island group 
contains numerous offshore islets, rocks and reefs, which are potentially hazardous to shipping.  
The Dion Islands have only been visited occasionally and detailed descriptions of the Area have 
yet to be made.  The islands are generally ice-free in summer, although there are a few small 
patches of permanent ice and persistent snow.  A meltwater pond is located on the northern side of 
Emperor Island. Terrain suitable for breeding birds is limited, and the colonies present are 
relatively small, mostly found on Emperor Island.  For a detailed description of the geology and 
biology of the Area see Annex 1. 
 
 
 
54
BOUNDARIES 
The designated Area of just over 3 km2 comprises Emperor Island and the marine 
environment (including sea ice when present) within 1000 m of the coastline of Emperor Island 
(Maps 2 and 3).  The 1000 m boundary is set as a precautionary limit to avoid disturbance to 
breeding Emperor penguins.  Within this zone landing and overflight restrictions apply to aircraft 
during the period 1 April to 15 December (see Section 7(i) below).  However, the area does not 
include the terrestrial areas of the Consort Islands in the north, Jester Rock in the east, or the 
Courtier Islands in the southwest. 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area 
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
No structures are known to be present within the Area.  A GPS survey station, consisting of 
a nail driven into a rock marked by a small cairn, was installed on the northeastern side of the 
largest of the Courtier Islands in March 1997 (Gray and Fox 1997). 
The nearest scientific research station is 14 km north-west at Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), 
on southern Adelaide Island (Latitude 67°46' S, Longitude 68°55' W), a summer-only facility 
operated from October until March since 1982. Over this period the station has generally 
accommodated up to 10 personnel.  Formerly, this facility was established and operated by the UK 
year-round from 1961 until 1977. The nearest year-round scientific station is Rothera Research 
Station (UK), 41 km to the north-east on Rothera Point, also on Adelaide Island. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Emperor Island are Avian Island (ASPA No. 117) about 
12.75 km NNW, Lagotellerie Island (ASPA No. 115) 58 km east, and Rothera Point (ASPA No. 
129) 41 km to the NE (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, in particular 
for scientific study of the avifauna and ecosystem of the Area, or for essential management 
purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or review; 
• the actions permitted will not jeopardise the values of the Area; 
• any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
• the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were not 
included in the authorised Permit. 
 
 
55
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• Subject to the following restrictions, access to the Area shall be by boat, aircraft or over sea ice 
by vehicle or foot. 
• Vehicles are prohibited on land within the Area and all movement on land within the Area 
shall be on foot. 
• Access shall be conducted so as to minimise disturbance to any fauna that may be present, and 
vehicles or boats should not approach closer than 200 m to any breeding colony. 
• There are otherwise no special restrictions on the locations where vehicle or small boat travel 
or landings may be made, but this shall be by the shortest route consistent with the restrictions 
in this plan and the objectives and requirements of the permitted activities. 
• Aircraft are prohibited from landing within the Area or overflying the Area below 1000 m in 
the period 1 April to 15 December inclusive. 
• Vehicle, aircraft or boat crew, or other people on vehicles, aircraft or boats, are prohibited 
from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically 
authorised by Permit. 
• All movement should be undertaken carefully so as to minimise disturbance to breeding birds, 
the soil and vegetated surfaces. 
• Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any 
permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise effects. 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• Scientific research that will not jeopardise the avifauna or ecosystem of the Area, and which is 
for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
Restrictions on times and locations at which aircraft may operate within the Area apply, specified 
in Section 7 (i) of this Management Plan. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit and 
permanent structures or installations are prohibited. Small temporary refuges, hides, blinds or 
screens may be constructed for the purpose of scientific study of the avifauna. Installation 
(including site selection), removal, modification or maintenance of structures shall be undertaken 
in a manner that minimises disturbance to breeding birds.  All scientific equipment or markers 
installed within the Area must be clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator 
and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
harm to bird populations or of contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific structures, 
equipment or markers for which the Permit has expired shall be a condition of the Permit. 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
 
 
56
Temporary camping within the Area is allowed when necessary for purposes specified in 
the Permit.  Specific campsite locations have not been designated, but camping within 200 m of 
the emperor penguin colony should be avoided. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material, pathogens or microorganisms shall be deliberately 
introduced into the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken against accidental 
introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies on Emperor Island, no poultry 
products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, including wastes from such 
products, shall be released into the Area, including into the sea.  No herbicides or pesticides shall 
be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which 
may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be 
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was 
granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically authorised by Permit for specific 
scientific or management purposes.  All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, 
shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled 
so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs which is 
likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of 
removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate 
authority should be notified of any materials released and not removed that were not included in 
the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only 
be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific 
or management needs. Permits shall not be granted in instances where it is proposed to take, 
remove or damage such quantities of soil, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance 
within the Area would be significantly affected.  Samples of flora or fauna found dead within the 
Area may be removed for analysis or audit without prior authorisation by Permit. Anything of 
human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by 
the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely 
to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be 
notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, except human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.  Human wastes shall be 
removed from the Area or disposed of into the sea. 
 
 
 
57
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan 
can continue to be met 
12. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, 
which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for 
protective measures. 
13. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
14. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values found at Emperor Island visitors shall 
take special precautions against introductions.  Of concern are pathogenic, microbial or plant 
introductions sourced from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside 
Antarctica. Visitors shall ensure that sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area are 
cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment used 
or brought into the Area (including backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly 
cleaned before entering the Area.  
15. Poultry products and other introduced avian products, which may be a vector of avian 
diseases, shall not be released into the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Barlow, 1968. Biological Report. Adelaide Island. 1967/68. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey 
report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1967/N. 
Conroy, J.W.H. 1975. Recent increases in penguin populations in Antarctica and the Subantarctic. 
In The biology of penguins, Stonehouse, B. (ed). Macmillan Press, London. 
Croxall, J.P. and Kirkwood, E.D. 1979. The distribution of penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula 
and the islands of the Scotia Sea. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Dewar, G.J. 1970. The geology of Adelaide Island. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Report 57. 
Fox, A. and Gray, M. 1997. Aerial photography field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season. 
Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1996/L2. 
 
 
58
Glenister, T.W. 1954. The Emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri Gray: II. Embryology. Falkland 
Islands Dependency Survey Scientific Reports No. 10. 
Gray, M. and Fox, A. 1997. GPS Survey field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season (plus 
Appendix).  Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. 
AD6/2R/1996/L1. 
Gray, N.F. and Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1984. The distribution of nematophagous fungi in the maritime 
Antarctic. Mycopathologia 85: 81-92. 
Jennings, P.G. 1976. Tardigrada from the Antarctic Peninsula and the Scotia Ridge region. British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin 44:  77-95. 
McGowan, E.R. 1958. Base Y Ornithological report 1958-59.  Unpublished BAS internal report 
AD6/2Y/1958/Q. 
Moyes, A.B., Willan, C.F.H., Thomson, J.W. and others 1994. Geological map of Adelaide Island 
to Foyn Coast, BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 3, Scale 1:250,000, with supplementary 
text. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Poncet, S. 1982. Les lles Dion. In Le grand hiver: Damien II, Base Antarctique. Paris, Arthaud: 
93-97. 
Poncet, S. and Poncet, J. 1987. Censuses of penguin populations of the Antarctic Peninsula, 1983-
87. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 77:  109-129. 
Procter, N.A.A. 1959. Ornithology: report on Emperor penguins at Dion Islands. Unpublished 
BAS internal report AD6/2Y/1958/Q. 
Skinner, A.C. 1969. Field report on the geological landings carried out on selected islands off the 
western coast of the Antarctic Peninsula, and in the Marguerite Bay area, in the 
summer season of 1968-69. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS 
Archives Ref. AD6/2/1968/G2. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1996.  Terrestrial and freshwater biotic components of the western Antarctic 
Peninsula.  In Ross, R.M., Hofmann, E.E. and Quetin, L.B. Foundations for ecological 
research west of the Antarctic Peninsula.  Antarctic Research Series 70: AGU, 
Washington D.C.: 15-59. 
Spaull, V.W. 1973. Distribution of soil nematodes in the maritime Antarctic. British Antarctic 
Survey Bulletin 37:  1-6. 
Stonehouse, B. 1949. Report on biological activities at Base E 1948-49. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1948/N1. 
Stonehouse, B. 1949. Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, 1949: Notes on Emperor penguin rookery 
June 5th – August 16th. Unpublished FIDS report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1949/Q. 
Stonehouse, B. 1950. Preliminary report on biological work Base E 1949-50. Unpublished British 
Antarctic Survey report BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1949/N. 
Stonehouse, B. 1953. The Emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri Gray  I. Breeding behaviour and 
development. Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey Scientific Reports 6. 
Thomson, M.R.A. 1972 New discoveries of fossils in the Upper Jurassic Volcanic Group of 
Adelaide Island. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 30: 95-101. 
Thomson, M.R.A. and Griffiths, C.J. 1994. Palaeontology. Supplementary text to Whillan, C.F.H., 
Moyes, A.B. and Thomson, J.W. (eds) BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 3, Scale 1:250 
000. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey: 35-38. 
 
 
59
Willey, I.M. 1969. Adelaide Island bird report 1968. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, 
BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1968/Q. 
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic penguins. 
SCAR, Cambridge. 
 
 
 
60
Annex 1. 
 
6(i)  Additional information on the natural features of the Area. 
 
CLIMATE AND SEA ICE 
Extended meteorological records are not available for Dion Islands, but records from 1962-
74 for Adelaide Base (formerly UK; now Teniente Luis Carvajal, Chile), show a mean daily 
maximum temperature of 3ºC in February (extreme maximum 9ºC) and a mean daily minimum of 
-8ºC in August (extreme minimum -44ºC). This general pattern is consistent with observations at 
the Dion Islands recorded by Stonehouse (1953) during the winter of 1949, who also noted that the 
dominant winds occurred from a northerly direction.  The islands are surrounded by fast ice up to 
2 m thick for about seven months of the year, with a variable presence of open water and pack ice 
during the summer. 
 
GEOLOGY, GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
The geology of the Dion Islands consists of dark fine-grained lavas and tuffs of Jurassic to 
Early Tertiary age belonging to the Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic Group (Dewar 1970, Moyes et al 
1994). Andesitic and basaltic lavas and pyroclastic rocks dominate toward the south, while in the 
north are found well-bedded sedimentary and volcaniclastic rocks. Shales, sandstones, grits and 
conglomerates are also present, usually as thin units of up to about 1 m thick (Skinner 1969). 
Poorly preserved plant fossils have been observed on Consort Islands and Noble Rocks, where 
indeterminate carbonaceous compressions, presumably representing tree trunks, of up to 1 m 
across occur (Thomson 1972). Flattened, carbonised and mineralised logs, up to 4 m long and 50 
cm across, are common in siltstones on these islands (Thomson and Griffiths 1994).  Small veins 
of copper are prominent as green streaks on the rocks.   
There is virtually no soil development in the island group, except for small pockets of 
ornithogenic mud composed largely of guano, decayed moss and Prasiola crispa, notably on 
Emperor Island. Deposits of pure guano 10-30 cm thick have been observed on the edge of the 
Emperor Island cormorant colony. On the raised pebble beach on the largest of the Courtier 
Islands, periglacial circles of a yellowish-brown clay suggest an ornithogenic origin, although bird 
colonies do not presently occupy the site. In moist depressions this soil type is colonised by the 
moss Sanionia uncinata (=Drepanocladus uncinatus). The soils have exceptionally high 
concentrations of Ca, P and Mg, and also of Na in soils associated with the seabird colonies, as, 
for example, near the cormorant colony on Emperor Island (Smith 1996). 
Several small low-lying areas on the Courtier and Emperor islands consist of large pebbles, 
suggesting raised beach deposits. The deposits occur on the south-eastern side of Emperor Island 
and on the largest of the Courtier Islands.  Small sorted soil circles are evident in the deposits at 
about 6 m above mean sea level on this island. The geomorphology of the Dion Islands has 
otherwise not been described. 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
Six species of birds have been recorded as breeding on Dion Islands. Owing to the 
difficulties of access, however, data are few and dated.  Descriptions below are thus often based 
 
 
61
on limited and/or old observations and it should be emphasised that these data are therefore not 
necessarily representative of present numbers or trends. 
The outstanding feature of the avifauna is the presence of a small colony of emperor 
penguins which typically breeds on a low-lying shingle beach and rocky headland on the northern 
coast of south-eastern Emperor Island. The colony was discovered in October 1948 by Stonehouse 
(1953), who studied the breeding behaviour and performance, while Glenister (1954) investigated 
emperor penguin embryology from specimens taken by Stonehouse.  It is the only emperor 
penguin colony in this region of Antarctica; it is also the most northerly colony and possibly the 
smallest, and one of only two in which breeding occurs on land (the other is at Taylor Rookery, 
SPA No. 1). It is also the most isolated, being about 2500 km (by sea) from the nearest known 
breeding colony.  Stonehouse (1953) reported that the birds spent most of their time on the low-
lying beach, occupying an area of about 650 m2. 
Stonehouse (1953) reported numbers of adult birds varying between 100 and 183 during the 
1949 winter (observations between 5 June – 15 August), and from egg counts it was estimated that 
about 150 breeding pairs were present. In the previous year 100 adults and 70 chicks were 
counted.  Egg-laying occurred from around 1 June until 29 June, 1949, with most eggs laid in the 
first week. Birds laid one egg per pair, and replacement eggs were not laid if originals were lost.  
Initially, eggs were passed a number of times between pair partners, eventually being held by the 
male for incubation over several months while their partners were at sea, most of which returned 
around the end of July / early August when hatching occurred. The numbers of adult birds present 
increased after hatching, with frequent arrivals and departures. Observations made on chicks the 
previous year showed they had formed crêches by October, and some evidence in the 1949 season 
suggested crêches were formed around a month earlier.  A chick mortality rate of less than 10% 
was estimated by Stonehouse for this season. 
Fluctuations in numbers have been discussed by Conroy (1975), Croxall and Kirkwood 
(1979) and Woehler (1993).  Approximately 150 breeding pairs were observed until about 1968, 
with some evidence (based on aerial photographs) of an increase (possibly to about 500 pairs) in 
1977.  However, it is probable this latter count included Adélie penguins which breed nearby, as 
only 70-80 adults and about 20 chicks were reported from a ground count in late July 1978 
(Poncet 1982). The most recent count was made in July 1999, when only 14 males with eggs were 
counted in the same location on Emperor Island.  It is not known whether this number is typical of 
recent seasons. If so, continued presence of the colony may be marginal. 
A small colony of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) in several groups occupies the 
south-eastern part of Emperor Island. A rough count in 1948 indicated about 500 pairs, while a 
1969 estimate indicated about 175 pairs.  The most recent data available (a rough estimate made in 
1986) indicated a population of 700 breeding pairs (Poncet and Poncet 1987, Woehler 1993).   
A small colony of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) was present in the Dion 
Islands in October 1948, although numbers were not recorded (Stonehouse 1949). About 50 pairs 
were recorded on Emperor Island on 30 August 1968 (Willey 1969), while a more precise nest 
count at the same location in February 1969 recorded 107 pairs and 33 pairs in two adjacent 
groups. About 200 empty nests were counted on broad ledges on the steep north-western side of 
Emperor Island in July 1978, and there was evidence of the smaller breeding group closer to the 
location of the emperor penguin colony (BAS internal records, Bonner and Smith 1984). In 
February 1986, 388 pairs were recorded in two main colonies on Emperor Island, one in the north 
and one in the southeast.  Eight pairs were recorded nesting within the Adélie penguin colony 
(Poncet pers comm., 1999).  
 
 
62
Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus) and brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi) are numerous, 
with several pairs nesting on the larger islands (Bonner and Smith 1984). A breeding pair of kelp 
gulls with a chick was observed on Consort Islands on 24 February 1969 (BAS internal records).  
Southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape petrels (Daption capensis) and snow petrels 
(Pagodroma nivea) are frequently seen around the islands, but breeding of these or other seabirds 
that have been observed in the area is unconfirmed, the nearest major breeding site being Avian 
Island, 12.75 km to the north-west. A few Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) nests were 
noted on Emperor Island in February 1969 (BAS internal records). 
 
VEGETATION 
Vegetation on Dion Islands is generally sparse, and the flora has not been described in detail. 
Collections have been made principally on Emperor and Consort islands.  Phanerogams are absent 
from the island and there is a limited range of cryptogams, although there is a rich lichen flora. 
The few taxa recorded on the islands are typical of maritime Antarctic sites exposed to strong 
winds, sea spray and nitrogenous enrichment from seabirds.  The flora of the Area is not regarded 
as possessing properties that in itself merits special protection.  To date, six mosses and at least 19 
lichen species have been identified as present within the Area (BAS Plant Database 1999).  
Bryophytes are restricted to small patches dominated by Sanionia uncinata 
(=Drepanocladus uncinatus) in moist hollows where there is some soil accumulation.  The most 
substantial stands, covering several square metres, occur on the largest of the Courtier Islands. 
Bryum pseudotriquetrum (=Bryum algens), Ceratodon purpureus and Pohlia nutans are usually 
associated.  The moss Syntrichia princeps (=Tortula princeps) has been recorded on Courtier 
Islands and Polytrichastrum alpinum (=Polytrichum alpinum) has been recorded on Emperor 
Island. 
The epipetric communities are composed entirely of lichens. Macrolichens, such as Usnea 
and Umbilicaria, are rare although are common in the general region.  The most prominent lichens 
include Acarospora macrocyclos, Amandinea petermannii, Buellia anisomera, B. cf. 
latemarginata, B. russa, Caloplaca cirrochrooides, C. spp., Lecania brialmontii, Lecanora spp., 
Lecidea atrobrunnea, L. spp., Mastodia tessellata, Physcia caesia, Usnea antarctica, Verrucaria 
elaeoplaca, V. psychrophilia, Xanthoria candelaria and X. elegans. Haematomma erythromma is 
frequent on the largest of the Courtier Islands. The only soil encrusting lichen noted is 
Candelariella vitellina.  Moist rock depressions and faces associated with sea bird colonies 
support small patches of the alga Prasiola crispa and cyanobactarium Phormidium. 
 
INVERTEBRATES, FUNGI, BACTERIA 
The microinvertebrate fauna, fungi and bacteria on Dion Islands have yet to be investigated 
in detail.  Nine species of microinvertebrate fauna have been recorded from the island group (BAS 
Invertebrate Database 1999): two Collembola (Cryptopygus antarcticus, Friesea grisea); one 
mesostigmatid mite (Gamasellus racovitzai), four cryptostigmatid mites (Alaskozetes antarcticus, 
Halozetes belgicae, Magellozetes antarcticus and Globoppia loxolineata (=Oppia loxolineata)); 
and two prostigmatid mites (Eupodes minutus and Pretriophtydeus tilbrooki). The dominant 
species are Cryptopygus antarcticus and Alaskozetes antarcticus. 
Nematodes have been recorded as abundant in Sanionia uncinata on the largest of the 
Courtier Islands, but were rare in Prasiola growing on Emperor Island (Bonner and Smith 1985). 
A sample of Sanionia uncinata intermixed with Bryum pseudotriquetrum from Emperor Island 
yielded several nematode taxa: mostly of the genus Mesodorylaimus, with Plectus and 
 
 
63
Eudorylaimus also present (Spaull 1973). Of the tardigrades in the sample, most were 
Macrobiotus furciger and Hypsibius dujardini, with a small proportion of H. alpinum and H. 
pinguis also present.  Of nine specimens recovered from a soil sample from Consort Islands all 
were H. renaudi (Jennings 1976). Rotifers have been recorded on Emperor Island, although no 
protozoans. Three predacious fungi have been isolated from the Dion Islands: an unidentified 
endoparasite from Sanionia uncinata on Courtier Islands; and Arthrobotrys robusta and 
Cephalosporium balanoides from Prasiola on Emperor Island (Gray and Smith 1984). 
 
BREEDING MAMMALS AND MARINE ENVIRONMENT 
Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are common on ice floes near the islands, with 
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) being less 
frequent visitors (Bonner ad Smith 1985). A single immature bull Elephant seal (Mirounga 
leonina) was seen on the largest of the Courtier Islands on 14 March 1981.  The marine 
environment within the Area has not been investigated. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND IMPACTS 
There has been little human activity at the Dion Islands.  Visits have comprised a mixture of 
science and topographical survey. The impacts of activities such as these have not been described 
and are not known, but are believed to have been minor and limited to items such as transient 
disturbance to breeding birds, campsites, footprints, occasional litter, human wastes, scientific 
sampling and markers. A fuel drum, a box (possibly a food cache, as mentioned in 1969 field 
reports), and several poles were apparent in aerial photographs of Emperor Island taken in 
December 1998, although their status has not been assessed in the field. 
 
 
64
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 108 
GREEN ISLAND, BERTHELOT ISLANDS, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Green Island (Latitude 65°19' S, Longitude 64°09' W, approximately 0.2 km2), Berthelot 
Islands, Grandidier Channel, Antarctic Peninsula, was originally designated as a Specially 
Protected Area through Recommendation IV-9 (1966, SPA No. 9) after a proposal by the United 
Kingdom.  It was designated on the grounds that the vegetation “is exceptionally rich, [and] is 
probably the most luxuriant anywhere on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula”.  The 
Recommendation noted: “in some places the humus is 2 metres thick and that this area, being of 
outstanding scientific interest, should be protected because it is probably one of the most diverse 
Antarctic ecosystems”. A Management Plan for the site was prepared by the United Kingdom and 
adopted through Recommendation XVI-6 (1991). The original reasons for designation were 
extended and elaborated, although following comparisons to other sites in the vicinity, Green 
Island was no longer considered to be particularly diverse. The vegetation on the island was 
described as extensive on the north-facing slopes, with well-developed continuous banks of moss 
turf formed by Chorisodontium aciphyllum and Polytrichum strictum that, over much of their 
extent, overlie peat of more than one metre in depth.  Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia 
antarctica), one of only two native vascular plants that grow south of 56°S, was noted as frequent 
in small patches near a blue-eyed cormorant (Phalacrocorax atriceps) colony. The colony of blue-
eyed cormorants, located on the steep, rocky northwestern corner of the island, was noted as being 
possibly one of the largest along the Antarctic Peninsula.  
The present management plan reaffirms the values of the rich Chorisodontium-Polytrichum 
moss turf as being the primary reason for special protection of Green Island. The Polytrichum 
strictum moss banks, with associated Chorisodontium aciphyllum, are considered to be the most 
extensive examples of this vegetation feature in the west Antarctic Peninsula region, occupying an 
area of over 0.5 ha. Moreover, in recent years many comparable moss banks on more northerly 
islands have suffered damage as a result of an increase in Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella).  The vegetation at Green Island has thus far escaped any significant damage. In addition, 
Chorisodontium aciphyllum is close to the southern-most limit of its range at the Berthelot Islands. 
The blue-eyed cormorant colony was one of the largest along the Antarctic Peninsula in 1981, 
when 500-600 individuals were present, and, until more recent data confirm otherwise, the value 
of this colony as one of the largest known, is included as an additional value and thus a further 
reason for special protection of Green Island. 
Green Island has been afforded protection throughout most of the period of scientific activity 
in the region, with entry permits having been issued for only the most compelling scientific 
reasons.  The island has not been subjected to intensive visitation, research or sampling and is 
potentially valuable as a baseline site for future studies.  Due to the lack of visits and scientific 
studies, detailed information on the island’s geography and ecology is lacking.  
The coastline boundary of the original Area has not been changed, but the boundary is 
defined more precisely to include the whole island above the low tide water level, excluding 
offshore islets and rocks. 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Green Island aims to: 
 
 
65
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance and sampling in the Area; 
• preserve the ecosystem of the Area for its potential as a largely undisturbed reference area; 
• allow scientific research on the ecosystem in the Area provided it is for compelling reasons 
which cannot be served elsewhere, in particular research which is expected to improve 
knowledge of the features and communities identified of special value, and which gathers 
baseline data on the island’s features for which information is poor or not available; 
• minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• allow visits for management purposes only in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at Akademik Vernadsky Station (Ukraine), where copies of this 
Management Plan shall be made available. 
• Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition. 
• Visits should be made as necessary (preferably at least once every five years) to assess whether 
the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure 
management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Green Island, ASPA No. 108, in relation to the Graham Coast, showing the location of Akademik 
Vernadsky Station (Ukraine).  Inset: location of the Berthelot Islands on the Antarctic Peninsula. 
 
Map 2: Green Island, ASPA No. 108, topographic map. Map derived from ground survey 24 February 2001 
and digital orthophotography (ground pixel resolution 12 cm; source aerial photography taken 14 
February 2001 by the British Antarctic Survey). Ground features (vegetation, permanent snow, 
colony, coastline and ponds) are digitised from the orthophotograph. Vegetation distribution 
indicates the principal moss banks, dominated by Polytrichum strictum.  Map specifications – 
Projection: UTM Zone 20S; Spheroid: WGS84; Datum: mean sea level (EGM96). Vertical contour 
interval 5 m.  Horizontal and vertical accuracy: ±2.0 m. 
 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
 
 
66
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Green Island (65°19' S, 64°09' W, approximately 0.2 km2) is a small island situated 150 m 
north of the largest of the Berthelot Islands group, Grandidier Channel, approximately 3 km off 
the Graham Coast of the Antarctic Peninsula (Map 1).  Green Island is 520 m from north to south 
and 500 m from east to west, rising to a rounded peak at a height of 83 m. The island rises steeply 
on all sides, with high precipitous cliffs on the south and east side. The largest extent of low 
ground occurs above the northern coast, which comprises a gently sloping rock platform. There 
are several permanent snow patches with the largest occurring around the summit and to the south 
and east of the summit. 
BOUNDARIES 
The designated area comprises the entire island, with the boundary defined as the low tide 
level. Offshore islets and rocks are not included within the Area.  Boundary markers have not been 
installed. The coast itself is a clearly defined and visually obvious boundary feature. 
CLIMATE 
No climate data are available for Green Island but conditions are expected to be similar to 
those at Akademik Vernadsky Station (Ukraine) on Galindez Island, Argentine Islands 8 km to the 
north.  The mean summer temperature at Vernadsky is 0°C while the extreme maximum summer 
temperature is 11.7°C.  In winter, the mean temperature is -10°C and the extreme minimum 
temperature is -43.3°C.  The mean wind speed is 7.5 knots. 
GEOLOGY AND SOILS 
Green Island, together with the rest of the Berthelot Islands, is composed of gabbro of Lower 
Jurassic to Lower Tertiary age (British Antarctic Survey 1981).  No further information is 
available on the geology of Green Island.  Excluding the large peat deposits, soil is sparse and 
seldom exceeds 20 cm in depth, except occasionally in rock depressions and gullies. This is 
predominantly an ahumic coarse mineral soil derived from weathering of the parent rock. Ledges 
and gullies close to the Blue-eyed Cormorant colony contain an organically richer soil derived in 
part from decayed moss and guano. Over much of the steep northern slopes the mosses 
Chorisodontium aciphyllum and Polytrichum strictum have developed a deep turf of living moss 
overlying at least 1 m of barely altered or decomposed moss peat (Smith 1979, Fenton and Smith 
1982). The permafrost layer is found 20-30 cm below ground level. Elsewhere on the island, 
notably the northeastern side, there are small areas of scree. There are no well-developed 
periglacial features, although a few small stone circles are occasionally evident. 
VEGETATION 
The most significant feature of the vegetation is the extensive continuous stand of 
Polytrichum strictum (= Polytrichum alpestre) on the northern slopes of the island (Map 2).  The 
stand is approximately 140 m wide, extends from an elevation of approximately 25 m up to 70 m, 
and covers over 0.5 ha (Bonner and Smith 1985).  Growth is lush and the permanently frozen peat 
in places reaches two metres deep.  The surface of the hard compact moss is stepped, which is 
thought to be a result of slumping of the active layer on the steep slope.  Chorisodontium 
aciphyllum (=Dicranum aciphyllum) is abundant at the edges of the bank and around the periphery 
of small gullies in the bank, where there is some shelter and moisture available from drifted snow.  
Both these tall turf-forming mosses are usually intimately intermixed in such communities further 
north in the maritime Antarctic; however, in the Grandidier Channel region the more xeric P. 
strictum often occurs alone.  C. aciphyllum is close to its southernmost limit on Green Island 
(Smith 1996).  Amongst the C. aciphyllum, Pohlia nutans is frequent, together with the liverworts 
 
 
67
Barbilophozia hatcheri and Cephaloziella varians.  Epiphytic lichens are not abundant on the live 
Polytrichum and Chorisodontium, but Sphaerophorus globosus is frequent in the more exposed 
north-western area.  Several species of Cladonia are widespread on the moss banks. The white 
encrusting epiphyte Ochrolechia frigida is present but not abundant here; black crustose species 
occur on moribund moss. 
Wet hollows among rocks and melt runnels support small stands of the mosses Warnstorfia 
laculosa (= Calliergidium austro-stramineum), Brachythecium austro-salebrosum and 
Drepanocladus uncinatus.  Elsewhere lichens dominate the vegetation.  On rocks and boulders 
away from the shore and the influence of seabirds, a community dominated by Usnea antarctica 
and species of Umbilicaria (U. antarctica, U. decussata and U. propagulifera) prevail, with the 
mosses Andreaea depressinervis and A. regularis and various crustose lichens associated.  Cliffs 
above the shore possess the most diverse and heterogenous communities, composed 
predominantly of lichens.  These are a modification of the Usnea-Umbilicaria community with 
various nitrophilous taxa, especially close to seabird nests, including species of Acarospora, 
Buellia, Caloplaca, Lecanora, Mastodia, Omphalodina, Physcia and Xanthoria. 
The only flowering plant thus far recorded on Green Island is Antarctic hair grass 
(Deschampsia antarctica), which is frequent in small patches above the cormorant colony and on 
rock ledges on the western side of the island. 
BREEDING BIRDS 
A sizeable colony of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) is present on the steep, 
rocky northwestern flank of the island (Map 2). This is one of the largest known blue-eyed 
cormorant colonies along the Antarctic Peninsula (Bonner and Smith 1985), although numbers 
may vary substantially from year to year. Approximately 50 pairs were estimated as present in 
1971 (Kinnear 1971), while 112 birds were recorded in 1973 (Schlatter and Moreno 1976). 500-
600 individuals (of which 300-400 were immatures) were present when visited in March 1981. 
Harris (2001) recorded 71 chicks on 24 February 2001. 
Brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi) are numerous over much of the island, particularly on 
the extensive moss banks. South polar skuas (C. maccormicki) are also present, along with a few 
possible hybrids.  Over 80 birds were noted in March 1981, but only ten breeding pairs were 
confirmed, most of which were rearing two chicks.  No other breeding birds were noted. 
INVERTEBRATES, FUNGI AND BACTERIA 
There is little information on the invertebrate fauna at Green Island, although 15 species 
were recorded in a study that suggested the invertebrate fauna on Green Island was comparatively 
diverse for the region (Usher and Edwards 1986). The most abundant species were Cryptopygus 
antarcticus, Belgica antarctica and Nanorchestes gressitti.  Larval B. antarctica were particularly 
abundant on Green Island compared to neighbouring Darboux Island.  Other species recorded in 
the Area are: Alaskozetes antarcticus; Ereynetes macquariensis; Eupodes minutus; Eupodes 
parvus grahamensis; Friesea grisea; Gamasellus racovitzai; Halozetes belgicae; N. berryi; Oppia 
loxolineata; Parisotoma octo-oculata; Rhagidia gerlachei; and Stereotydeus villosus. A definitive 
characterisation of the arthropod fauna on Green Island cannot be given until more site-specific 
research has been conducted.  Information on fungal and bacterial communities is not available. 
There are no permanent freshwater bodies on the island, and there is no information available on 
seasonal freshwater communities. 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND IMPACTS 
There have been few reported visits to Green Island. The first recorded landing on the island 
was by the Première Expédition Antarctiques Française in 1903-05. The Deuxième Expédition 
 
 
68
Antarctiques Française visited Green Island several times during the winter in 1909.  The British 
Graham Land Expedition landed on the island on 18 March 1935. Vegetation studies were 
undertaken on Green Island by Lewis-Smith in 1981 (Bonner and Smith 1985) and Komárková in 
1982-83 (Komárková 1983).  Numerous 30 cm lengths of 2.5 mm diameter iron wire, marking the 
corners of 50 m square quadrats of the Polytrichum strictum moss turf overlying the peat banks, 
were recorded (and left in situ) by an inspection team in January 1989 (Heap 1994).  It is not 
known precisely when these markers were installed.  The number of markers, their distribution 
and the nature of any possible contamination these may have had on the moss is unknown. 
In recent years a number of important vegetation sites in the Antarctic Peninsula region have 
been subjected to damage from trampling and nutrient enrichment by increasing numbers of 
Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).  While no Antarctic fur seals were observed on Green 
Island during a site visit made on 24 February 2001, there was some evidence of recent trampling 
and nutrient enrichment on parts of the lower moss banks.  However, damage appeared limited 
and most of the extensive moss banks remained in tact. 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
There are no structures present in the Area.  The nearest scientific research station is 
Akademik Vernadsky (Ukraine) (65°15’S, 64°16’W), approximately 9 km north of the Area on 
Galindez Island. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Green Island are Biscoe Point (ASPA No. 139), 62 km 
north, and Litchfield Island (ASPA No. 113), 63 km north, both near the southern coast of Anvers 
Island.  
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, or for 
essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, 
maintenance or review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
 
 
69
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• Subject to the following restrictions, access to the Area shall be by boat, or over sea ice by 
vehicle or foot. 
• Vehicles are prohibited within the Area and all movement within the Area shall be on foot. 
• Access to the island should be made on the rocky northern coast (Map 2). No special 
restrictions apply to the routes used to move to and from the Area. 
• Aircraft are prohibited from landing within the Area year-round, and restrictions apply to 
overflight (see Table 1 below). 
• Vehicle or boat crew, or other people on vehicles or boats, are prohibited from moving on foot 
beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorised by Permit. 
• All movement should be undertaken carefully so as to minimise disturbance to the soil and 
vegetated surfaces and birds present, walking on snow or rocky terrain if practical. 
• 
Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any 
permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects. 
 
Table 1: Aircraft overflight restrictions applying year-round at Green Island. 
 
 
 
Aircraft type 
 
Number of  
engines 
Minimum approach distance (m) 
Vertical (above ground) 
Feet
Metres
Helicopter 
1 
2461 
750
Helicopter 
2 
3281 
1000 
Fixed-wing 
1 or 2 
1476 
450 
Fixed-wing 
4 
3281 
1000 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem or scientific values of the Area, and 
which cannot be served elsewhere; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit and 
permanent structures or installations are prohibited. All scientific equipment installed in the Area 
must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator 
and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall 
be a condition of the Permit.. 
 
 
 
70
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
When necessary for purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed within 
the Area on the low platform on the northern coast (Map 2). Camps should preferably be located 
on snow surfaces, which typically persist in this locality, or on gravel / rock when snow cover is 
absent. Camping on continuously covered vegetated surfaces is prohibited. 
 
 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken to prevent accidental 
introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies on the island, no poultry products, 
including products containing uncooked dried eggs, including wastes from such products, shall be 
released into the Area or into the adjacent sea.  No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into 
the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be 
introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from 
the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.  Fuel is not 
to be stored in the Area, unless specifically authorised by Permit for specific scientific or 
management purposes. Anything introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at 
or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of any 
introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs which is likely to compromise 
the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal is not likely to be 
greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate authority should be notified of 
anything released and not removed that was not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only 
be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific 
or management needs.  Permits shall not be granted in instances where it is proposed to take, 
remove or damage such quantities of soil, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance 
on Green Island would be significantly affected.  Anything of human origin likely to compromise 
the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise 
authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the 
material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
 
 
71
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes 
may be disposed of into the sea. 
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met 
16. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection activities, 
which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or for 
protective measures. 
17. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
18. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of Green Island special precautions shall 
be taken against introductions. Of concern are microbial, invertebrate or plant introductions 
from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. All sampling 
equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum 
extent practicable, footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including 
backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area. 
19. Poultry products and other introduced avian products, which may be a vector of avian diseases, 
shall not be released into the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management 
Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
Bibliography 
Bonner, W.N. and Smith, R.I.L. (Eds) 1985.  Conservation areas in the Antarctic. SCAR, Cambridge: 73-
84. 
Booth, R.G., Edwards, M and Usher, M.B. 1985. Mites of the genus Eupodes (Acari, 
Prostigmata) from maritime Antarctica: a biometrical and taxonomic study. Journal of Zoology 
207: 381-406. 
British Antarctic Survey. 1981. British Antarctic Territory Geological Map (Scale 1:500 000).  
Series BAS 500G Sheet 3, Edn 1. Cambridge: Antarctic Survey. 
Corner, R.W.M. 1964.  Biological report (interim) for Argentine Islands. Unpublished report, British 
Antarctic Survey Archives Ref AD6/2F/1964/N1. 
Fenton, J.H.C and Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1982. Distribution, composition and general characteristics of the 
moss banks of the maritime Antarctic. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 51: 215-236. 
 
 
72
Greene, D.M and Holtom, A. 1971. Studies in Colobanthus quitensis (Kunth) Bartl. and Deschampsia 
antarctica Desv.: III. Distribution, habitats and performance in the Antarctic botanical zone. British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin 26: 1-29. 
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas originally 
proposed by the United States of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit report. Internal 
report for the National Science Foundation, US, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 
UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
Heap, J. (Ed) 1994.  Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System. 8th Edn. U.S. Department of State, 
Washington. 
Kinnear, P.K. 1971. Phalacrocorax atriceps population data cited in BAS internal report ⎯ original 
reference unavailable. 
Komárková, V. 1983. Plant communities of the Antarctic Peninsula near Palmer Station. Antarctic 
Journal of the United States 18: 216-218. 
Schlatter, R.P and Moreno, C.A. 1976.  Habitos alimentarios del cormoran Antartico, Phalacrocorax 
atriceps bransfieldensis (Murphy) en Isla Green, Antartica. Serie Cientificia, Instituto Antártico 
Chileno 4(1):69-88 
Smith, M.J. and Holroyd, P.C. 1978. 1978 Travel report for Faraday. Unpublished report, British Antarctic 
Survey Archives Ref AD6/2F/1978/K. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1979. Peat forming vegetation in the Antarctic. In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Classification of Peat and Peatlands Finland, September 17-21, 1979. International 
Peat Society: 58-67 
Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1982. Farthest south and highest occurences of vascular plants in the Antarctic.  Polar 
Record 21:170-173. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis and Corner, R.W.M. 1973. Vegetation of Arthur Harbour ⎯ Argentine Islands Region.  
British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 33&34: 89-122. 
Stark, P. 1994. Climatic warming in the central Antarctic Peninsula area. Weather 49(6): 215-220. 
Usher, M.B. and Edwards, M. 1986. The selection of conservation areas in Antarctica: an example using 
the arthropod fauna of Antarctic islands. Environmental Conservation 13(2):115-122. 
 
 
73
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 148 
MOUNT FLORA, HOPE BAY, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Mount Flora (Latitude 63°25' S, Longitude 57°01' W, 0.3 km2), Hope Bay, Antarctic 
Peninsula was originally designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest through 
Recommendation XV-6 (1989, SSSI No. 31) after a proposal by the United Kingdom.  It was 
designated on the grounds that “the site is of exceptional scientific importance for its rich fossil 
flora.  It was one of the first fossil floras discovered in Antarctica and has played a significant role 
in deducing the geological history of the Antarctic Peninsula.  Its long history as an easily 
accessible site and the large amount of fossiliferous debris occurring in scree has made it 
vulnerable to souvenir collectors, and the amount of material available for serious research has 
been considerably depleted.” 
Geologist Johann Gunnar Andersson discovered Mount Flora during the Swedish South 
Polar Expedition (1901-04), whose original stone hut (Historic Monument No. 39) remains nearby 
at Seal Point, Hope Bay. Otto Nordenskjöld, the leader of the expedition, named Mount Flora (as 
‘Flora-Berg’) following the geological observations of Andersson, recognising it as the first 
significant fossil locality discovered in Antarctica. The Area subsequently became of great 
scientific importance for interpreting key geological relationships in the region. Mount Flora has 
important values associated with this significant heritage of geological discovery in Antarctica. 
The scientific values of the rich fossil flora are reaffirmed in this revised management plan. 
Mount Flora is characterised by three distinct geological formations: the Hope Bay Formation 
(Trinity Peninsula Group), which is separated by an unconformity from the overlying gently tilted 
plant beds of the Mount Flora Formation (Botany Bay Group), which in turn are overlaid by 
ignimbrites and welded tuffs of the Kenney Glacier Formation (Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic 
Group).  The relationships between these formations have been fundamental for determining the 
age of the plant beds, which has been vital to the interpretation of the geology of the Antarctic 
Peninsula. Historically, the site has also played an important role in comparisons with other 
Southern Hemisphere floras.  The fossil flora has also been important for providing Mesozoic 
palaeoclimate data from a region where such information is otherwise sparse.  Moreover, Mount 
Flora holds one of the few Jurassic floras known from Antarctica and it is the only site that has 
been relatively well studied and documented.  The Mesozoic plant assemblages from Mount Flora 
include members of the sphenophytes, ferns, cycadophytes (cycads and bennetites), pteridosperms 
and conifers.  Samples of the fossils have served as a major reference source for many studies of 
Jurassic and Cretaceous palaeobotany. 
The Area is approximately three kilometres southeast of Esperanza Station (Argentina) and 
Teniente de Navio Ruperto Elichiribehety Station (Uruguay).  The Area is easily accessible on 
foot from both the stations and Hope Bay.  The boundaries designated in the original management 
plan were inaccurate and excluded some of the fossiliferous strata.  The boundaries have therefore 
been revised in the current management plan to include all of the exposed fossiliferous strata, 
which are found on the northern slopes of Mount Flora. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Mount Flora aims to: 
 
 
74
• avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance and sampling in the Area; 
• allow scientific geological and palaeontological research, while ensuring protection from over-
sampling;  
• allow other scientific research within the Area provided it will not compromise the values for 
which the Area is protected; 
• allow visits for management purposes only in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at Esperanza Station (Argentina) and Teniente de Navio Ruperto 
Elichiribehety Station (Uruguay), where copies of this management plan shall be made 
available. 
• A sign showing the location and boundaries of the Area with clear statements of entry 
restrictions shall be placed in a prominent location on the lower NE ridge at the northeastern 
boundary (approximate elevation 200 m) to help avoid inadvertent entry. 
• Persons wishing to make the ascent of Mount Flora shall be instructed not to enter the Area 
without a Permit issued by the appropriate authority. 
• Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition. 
• Visits shall be made as necessary (at least once every five years) to assess whether the Area 
continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
maintenance measures are adequate. 
• Increasing exposure of fossiliferous rocks on Mount Flora is expected if glacial ice in the 
vicinity continues to retreat, as has occurred in recent years. Periodic updating of the 
boundaries should be undertaken to ensure any newly-exposed fossiliferous rocks are included 
within the Area, which should be considered at the time of review of the management plan. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Mount Flora ASPA No. 148 in relation to Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula, and the South 
Shetland Islands, showing the location of the nearest protected areas.  The location of 
Esperanza Station (Argentina) and Teniente de Navio Ruperto Elichiribehety Station 
(Uruguay) are also shown. 
 
Inset: the location of Mount Flora on the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Map 2: Mount Flora ASPA No. 148, Hope Bay, topographic map.  Map specifications: 
Projection:  Lambert Conformal Conic: Standard parallels: 1st 76° 40' S; 2nd 63° 20' S  
Central Meridian:  57° 02' W;  Latitude of Origin: 70° 00' S; Spheroid: WGS84.  Vertical 
 
 
75
datum: mean sea level. Vertical contour interval 25 m. Horizontal and vertical accuracy 
unknown. Note: topography and positions are based on original 1950s survey data, and 
true positions are known to be in error by up to 500 m (a new map correcting the 
positional errors is in preparation). Ice margins are updated to approximate present 
positions using 1999 aerial photography. 
Map 3: Mount Flora ASPA No. 148 geological sketch map, based on data from Birkenmajer 
1993a&b, aerial photography, and field observations by Smellie (unpublished, pers. 
comm. 2000). 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
Mount Flora (latitude 63°25' S, longitude 57°01' W, 0.3 km2) is situated on the southeastern 
flank of Hope Bay, at the northern end of Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula (Map 1). The 
summit of Mount Flora (520 m) is approximately 1 km from the southern shore of Hope Bay.  
Four glaciers surround Mount Flora. The Flora Glacier extends from the cirque below the summit 
of Mount Flora in a northeasterly direction for one kilometre before it flows into a larger glacier 
that flanks the eastern and southern slopes of Mount Flora, extending northeast from The Pyramid 
(565 m) (Map 2). The western slopes of Mount Flora are bounded by the Kenney Glacier, which 
joins Depot Glacier before flowing into the head of Hope Bay.  The Pyramid is a distinctive peak 
1.5 km to the SSE of Mount Flora. To the north of the Area is the ice-free Five Lakes Valley and 
Scar Hills, and to the northeast is Lake Boeckella. 
BOUNDARIES 
The boundaries designated in the original management plan have been revised in the current 
management plan to include all of the known exposed fossiliferous strata on the northern slopes of 
Mount Flora. The summit ridge and highest peak of Mount Flora (520 m), which were formerly 
within the boundary, are comprised of non-fossiliferous volcanic rocks and have now been 
excluded from the Area.  The boundary runs from the north summit of Mount Flora (516 m) – the 
highest point of the boundary – westward down the ridge to the Kenney Glacier, the eastern 
margin of Kenney Glacier northward to the 150m contour, eastward along the 150m contour to the 
northwestern margin of the Flora Glacier, the northwestern margin of the Flora Glacier south-
westward to the ridge leading westward to the north summit of Mount Flora.  Where present, the 
glacier margins, lower outcrops, western ridge and northern summit of Mount Flora form visually 
obvious features that indicate the boundaries: the Area remains otherwise unmarked. 
CLIMATE 
No climate data are available for Mount Flora but local conditions are indicated by those at 
Esperanza Station.  Average summer temperatures (October – March) at Esperanza Station over 
the 1990s were -0.7°C, while the average in winter was -8.6°C.  Over the 1990s, the warmest 
month was January with an average of +1.5°C, while the coldest was August with an average of -
11.2°C. Temperatures at Mount Flora are likely to be lower owing to its greater elevation. 
GEOLOGY, SOILS AND PALAEONTOLOGY  
The geology of the Area comprises three main formations: the Hope Bay Formation, the 
Mount Flora Formation and the Kenney Glacier Formation.  At the base, the Hope Bay Formation 
(Trinity Peninsula Group) is more than 1200 m thick and is characterised by marine siliciclastic 
turbidite and sandstone. It has an inferred Permo-Carboniferous age based on supposed 
 
 
76
Carboniferous spores (Grikurov and Dibner 1968) and Rb-Sr isotopic dating of ‘grits’ and 
mudstones (281 ±16 Ma; Pankhurst 1983) but the age evidence is sparse and open to ambiguous 
interpretation (Smellie and Millar 1995).  The Hope Bay Formation is separated by an angular 
unconformity and a long stratigraphic gap from the overlying Mount Flora Formation.  The Mount 
Flora Formation (Botany Bay Group) is composed mainly of sandstones, conglomerates and shale, 
and contains the most significant fossil strata.  The overlying Kenney Glacier Formation 
(Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic Group), which is also separated from the Mount Flora Formation by 
an angular unconformity, is composed of ignimbrites and welded tuffs. There has been debate 
over the age of the Mount Flora Formation (Andersson 1906, Halle 1913, Bibby 1966, Thomson 
1977, Farquharson 1984, Francis 1986, Gee 1989, Rees 1990); the most recent palaeobotanical 
and radiometric data available support an age of Early to Middle Jurassic (Rees 1993a&b, Rees 
and Cleal 1993, Riley and Leat 1999). Faults have been observed in the northern face of Mount 
Flora (Birkenmajer 1993a: 30-31) and mapped separating the Trinity Peninsula Group and Mount 
Flora Formation  (Smellie pers. comm. 2000). 
The Mount Flora Formation is about 230-270 m thick and may be subdivided into an older 
Five Lakes Member and an upper Flora Glacier Member, which contains the most important fossil 
deposits. The Five Lakes Member is about 170 m thick and consists of plant-bearing coarse 
sedimentary breccias, conglomerates and sandstones. The dominant lithology, particularly in the 
lower part of the succession, is clast-supported cobble to boulder conglomerate (Farquharson 
1984). It is well-exposed on the northern and northeastern slopes of Mount Flora between the 
Flora Glacier and Five Lakes Valley.  The lower boundary of this member is an angular 
unconformity against the Hope Bay Formation. The contact between the Mount Flora Formation 
and the Hope Bay Formation is covered by scree: this is mapped as a fault on Map 3 (Smellie, 
unpublished data, pers. comm. 2000).  Some 50 m of basal beds of the Five Lakes Member are 
presumed unexposed. A higher section of the Five Lakes Member is well-exposed at a buttress 
which separates Flora Glacier from Five Lakes Valley. 
The Flora Glacier Member comprises a sandstone-conglomerate complex 60-100 m thick, 
locally overlain by a shale complex up to 10 m thick, which is the main fossiliferous zone. It is 
best exposed at a buttress that divides the Flora Glacier cirque from Five Lakes Valley at 
approximately 350 m. A one metre-thick sill occurs in the upper section of the shale, close to the 
contact with the Kenney Glacier Formation. The sandstone association is dominated by fining-
upward cycles (characterised by decreasing grain size) that range in thickness from 2.5 – 11.5 m 
(Farquharson 1984).  Although mostly inaccessible, good exposures of the Flora Glacier Member 
continue in the steep slopes of Mount Flora above Five Lakes Valley, extending westward to the 
margin of the Kenney Glacier. The thickness of the unit increases from 50-60 m at the buttress to 
about 100 m at the glacier margin. Volcanogenic deposits form a small but significant part of the 
Mount Flora Formation.  A single ignimbrite 26 m thick forms a pale band across the north face of 
Mount Flora, approximately halfway up the sedimentary sequence (Farquharson 1984). 
The Kenney Glacier Formation volcanic rocks overlie the Mount Flora Formation, exposed 
in the highest part of Mount Flora. It also unconformably overlies the Hope Bay Formation on the 
eastern spur of the Pyramid (Smellie, pers. comm. 2000). The incomplete formation is a complex 
of predominantly evolved, rhyolite-dacite lavas, ignimbrites, agglomerates and tuffs (Birkenmajer 
1993a & b). Farquharson (1984) identified the presence of tuffs, fine-grained agglomerates and 
welded tuffs. 
The most significant fossil exposures are found on the northern and northwestern faces of 
Mount Flora.  Most research has been conducted on samples from the relatively accessible 
northern face. The fossil flora was first comprehensively described by Halle (1913) and since then 
has been considered a standard for Mesozoic gondwanan floristic and biostratigraphic studies 
 
 
77
(Rees and Cleal 1993). Halle (1913) originally described 61 species from the fossils: more 
recently this was revised to 43 species (Gee 1989), and later to 38 species (Rees 1990, Rees and 
Cleal in press). The flora is represented typically by stems of sphenophytes (Equisetum), as well as 
foliage of ferns and gymnosperms (cycadophytes, pteridosperms and conifers). Cycadophyte and 
conifer cone scales, seeds and other unidentifiable stems, leaves and foliage branches are also 
preserved (Taylor, no date; Rees pers. comm. 1999).  Four beetle elytra (exoskeletons) have been 
identified from a small sample of shale from Mount Flora (Zeuner 1959). These were identified as 
Grahamelytron crofti and Ademosynoides antarctica. No other examples of fossil fauna have been 
recorded.  There are no known marine fossil floral or faunal deposits in the Area. 
TERRESTRIAL AND FRESHWATER BIOLOGY 
The living flora within the Area is sparse and patchily distributed.  Although a full floristic 
survey has not been made, a number of moss and lichen species have been identified as present.  
Moss species identified are: Andreaea gainii, Bryum argenteum, Ceratodon purpureus, 
Hennediella heimii, Pohlia nutans, Sanionia uncinata, Schistidium antarctici and Syntrichia 
princeps. Lichen species identified are: Acarospora macrocyclos, Buellia anisomera, Buellia spp., 
Caloplaca spp., Candelariella vitellina, Cladonia pocillum, Haematomma erythromma, Physcia 
caesia, Pleopsidium chlorophanum, Pseudephebe minuscula, Rhizocarpon geographicum, 
Rhizoplaca aspidophora, Stereocaulon antarcticum, Tremolecia atrata, Umbilicaria antarctica, 
Umbilicaria decussata, Umbilicaria kappenii, Usnea antarctica, Xanthoria candelaria and 
Xanthoria elegans. 
There are no permanent streams or lakes within the Area.  No information is available on the 
invertebrate fauna or microbial communities present at Mount Flora. 
BREEDING BIRDS 
Little information is available on bird communities present at Mount Flora, although a report 
on the exact nesting sites of some species suggested that birds are unlikely to breed within the 
Area (Marshall 1945).  However, the breeding birds of Hope Bay generally have been well-
studied, and part of a large Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony, numbering around 125 
000 pairs, is situated about 500 m northeast of the Area (Woehler 1993) (Map 2). Other birds 
breeding at Hope Bay include gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua), brown skua (Catharacta 
loennbergi), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata), Wilson’s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), kelp gull 
(Larus dominicanus), and sheathbill (Chionis alba).  Further information on the number of 
breeding birds in the vicinity of Mount Flora can be found in Argentina (1997). 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND IMPACTS 
Mount Flora was discovered in 1903 by Johann Gunnar Andersson, a member of the 
Swedish South Polar Expedition of 1901-04, which explored and mapped much of the northern 
Antarctic Peninsula.  Andersson collected fossil and mineralogical specimens from Mount Flora 
while stranded and awaiting rescue at Hope Bay over the winter of 1903. Andersson and his 
companions over-wintered in a stone hut (Historic Monument No. 39). The leader of the 
expedition was Otto Nordenskjöld, who named Mount Flora because of the geological findings of 
Andersson. 
The United Kingdom established Base ‘D’ at Hope Bay in 1945 as part of ‘Operation 
Tabarin’.  The station was operational until February 1964 with a winter complement of 7-19 
personnel. Base ‘D’ was transferred from the United Kingdom to Uruguay in 1997 and renamed as 
Teniente de Navio Ruperto Elichiribehety Station. Argentina established Esperanza Station on 31 
December 1951 and has operated the station continuously since, with approximately 50 winter and 
up to 70 summer personnel. 
 
 
78
Mount Flora was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1989 as a result of 
concern that the best examples of fossils were being collected by casual visitors and might 
therefore be lost to science. 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
There are no structures present within the Area.  The nearest scientific research stations are 
Esperanza Station (Argentina) (latitude 63°24'S, longitude 56°59'W) and Teniente de Navio 
Ruperto Elichiribehety Station (Uruguay) (latitude 63°24'S, longitude 56°59'W), both 
approximately 1.5 kilometres northeast of the Area. 
 
The remains of a British Base, which burnt down in 1948, are situated 300 metres to the 
Northeast of the Uruguayan base.  The graves of two British men who died in the above fire are 
located on a small promontory some 300 metres to the north of the Uruguayan base. 
 
An Argentine hut is located close to the Area at 63o25’S, 56o58’W.  It was established in 
1956 and re-built in 1971. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Mount Flora are Potter Peninsula (ASPA No. 132) and the 
western shore of Admiralty Bay (ASPA No. 128), both located on King George Island, South 
Shetland Islands, lying approximately 150 km to the west (Map 1). A stone hut (Historic 
Monument No. 39) built by members of the Swedish South Polar Expedition is present within the 
vicinity of Esperanza Station (Map 2). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued for scientific study of the geology or palaeontology of the Area, or for other 
scientific study which will not compromise the values for which the Area is protected; 
• 
should the applicant for a Permit propose to make rock collections, the applicant shall 
demonstrate to an appropriate national authority that the research proposed cannot be 
adequately served by samples already collected and held in the various collections world-
wide, before a Permit is granted; 
• 
it is issued for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as 
inspection, maintenance or review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the geological or scientific values of the Area; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
 
 
79
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
• Access to and movement within the Area shall be on foot or by helicopter. 
• Vehicles are prohibited from the Area. 
• Access to the area by helicopter should avoid the penguin colony, either by a route following 
central Hope Bay and over Scar Hills to Five Lakes Valley, or over the ice cap about one 
kilometre east of Esperanza Station and Lake Boeckella (Map 2). 
• No special restrictions apply to where helicopters may land within the Area. 
• Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the objectives of any 
permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise trampling effects 
such as breakage of rocks, especially of rocks in situ. 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• Scientific research that will not jeopardise the scientific values of the Area; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit and 
permanent structures are prohibited.  All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be 
approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year 
of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall 
be a condition of the Permit.   
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
Camping is prohibited within the Area. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area.  No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, 
including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management 
purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the 
activity for which the Permit was granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically 
authorised by Permit for specific scientific or management purposes.  All materials introduced 
 
 
80
shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, 
and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is 
minimised.  If release occurs which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is 
encouraged only where the impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the 
material in situ.  The appropriate authority should be notified of any materials released and not 
removed that were not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
There are no described fauna or flora within the Area. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and 
should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  Permits 
shall not be granted if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, 
remove or damage such quantities of fossiliferous rocks that their abundance on Mount Flora 
would be significantly affected.  Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the 
Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may be 
removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if 
this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.  
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan 
can continue to be met 
In view of the fact that geological sampling is both permanent and of cumulative impact the 
following measures shall be taken to safeguard the scientific values of the Area: 
20. Visitors removing geological samples from the Area shall complete a record describing the 
geological type, quantity and location of samples taken, which should, at a minimum, be 
deposited with their National Antarctic Data Centre or with the Antarctic Master Directory. 
21. Visitors planning to sample within the Area shall demonstrate that they have familiarised 
themselves with earlier collections to minimise duplication. Sample collections exist in 
repositories around the world, namely in: Museum of Natural Sciences B. Rivadavia, Buenos 
Aires; Museum of Natural Sciences, La Plata, Argentina; Natural History Museum, London; 
Swedish Natural History Museum, Stockholm; the Byrd Polar Research Centre, Ohio; Institute 
of Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, Poland; Department of 
Geology, Institute of Geosciences, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, British 
Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
 
 
81
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
Bibliography 
Andersson, J.G. 1906. On the geology of Graham Land. Bulletin of the Geological Institution of 
the University of Upsala 7:19-71. 
Argentina 1997.  Environmental Review of Argentine Activities at Esperanza (Hope) Bay, 
Antarctic Peninsula, XXI ATCM, Information Paper 36. 
Bibby, J.S. 1966. The stratigraphy of part of north-east Graham Land and the James Ross Island 
group. British Antarctic Survey Scientific Report 53. 
Birkenmajer, K. 1992. Trinity Peninsula Group (Permo-Triassic?) at Hope Bay, Antarctic 
Peninsula. Polish Polar Research 13(3-4):215-240. 
Birkenmajer, K. 1993a. Jurassic terrestrial clastics (Mount Flora Formation) at Hope Bay, 
Trinity Peninsula (West Antarctica). Bulletin of the Polish Academy of Sciences: Earth Sciences 
41(1):23-38. 
Birkenmajer, K. 1993b. Geology of late Mesozoic magmatic rocks at Hope Bay, Trinity 
Peninsula (West Antarctica). Bulletin of the Polish Academy of Sciences: Earth Sciences 
41(1):49-62. 
Croft, W.N. 1946.  Notes on the geology of the Hope Bay area. Unpublished report, British 
Antarctic Survey Archives Ref AD6/2D/1946/G1. 
Farquharson, G.W. 1984. Late Mesozoic, non-marine conglomeratic sequences of Northern 
Antarctic Peninsula (Botany Bay Group). British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 65: 1-32. 
Francis, J.E. 1986. Growth rings in Cretaceous and Tertiary wood from Antarctica and their 
palaeoclimatic implications. Palaeontology 29(4): 665-684. 
Gee, C.T. 1989. Revision of the late Jurassic/early Cretaceous flora from Hope Bay, Antarctica.  
Palaeontographica 213(4-6): 149-214. 
Grikurov, G.E. and Dibner, A.F. 1968. Novye dannye o Serii Triniti (C1-2) v zapadnoy 
Antarktide. [New data on the Trinity Series (C1-2) in West Antarctica.] Doklady Akademi 
Nauk SSSR, 179, 410-412. (English translation: Proceedings of the Academy of Science SSSR 
(Geological Sciences) 179: 39-41). 
Halle, T.G. 1913. The Mesozoic flora of Graham Land. Wissenschaftliche ergebnisse der 
Schwedischen Südpolar-expedition 1901-1903 3(14). 
Hathway, B. in press. Continental rift to back-arc basin: stratigraphical and structural evolution of 
the Larsen Basin, Antarctic Peninsula. Journal of the Geological Society of London.  
Marshall, N.B. 1945. Annual report. Base D. Biology and Hydrography. Unpublished report, 
British Antarctic Survey Archives Ref AD6/1D/1945/N2. 
Nathorst, A.G. 1906. On the upper Jurassic flora of Hope Bay, Graham Land. Compte Rendus, 
10th International Geological Congress, Mexico 10(2):1269-1270. 
 
 
82
Pankhurst, R.J. 1983. Rb-Sr constraints on the ages of basement rocks of the Antarctic 
Peninsula. In Oliver, R.L., James, P.R. and Jago, J.B. eds. Antarctic Earth Science. Canberra, 
Australian Academy of Science: 367-371. 
Pankhurst, R.J., Leat, P.T., Sruoga, P., Rapela, C.W., Marquez, M., Storey, B.C., and Riley, T.R., 
1998.  The Chon Aike province of Patagonia and related rocks in West Antarctica: a silicic 
large igneous province.  Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 81 113-136.  
Rees, P. M. 1990. Palaeobotanical contributions to the Mesozoic geology of the northern 
Antarctic Peninsula region.  Unpublished PhD thesis, Royal Holloway and Bedford New 
College, University of London. 
Rees, P. M. 1993a. Dipterid ferns from the Mesozoic of Antarctica and New Zealand and their 
stratigraphical significance. Palaeontology 36(3):637-656. 
Rees, P. M. 1993b. Caytoniales in early Jurassic floras from Antarctica. Geobios 26(1):33-42. 
Rees, P.M., 1993c. Revised interpretations of Mesozoic palaeogeography and volcanic arc 
evolution in the northern Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science 5: 77-85 
Rees, P.M. and Cleal, C.J. 1993. Marked Polymorphism in Archangelskya furcata, a 
pteridospermous frond from the Jurassic of Antarctica. Special papers in Palaeontology 49:85-
100. 
Rees, P.M. and Cleal, C.J. in press. Lower Jurassic floras from Hope Bay and Botany Bay, 
Antarctica. Submitted to Special Papers in Palaeontology. 
Riley, T.R and Leat, P.T. 1999. Large volume silicic volcanism along the proto-Pacific margin 
of Gondwana: lithological and stratigraphical investigations from the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Geological Magazine 136 (1):1-16. 
Smellie, J.L. and Millar, I.L. 1995. New K-Ar isotopic ages of schists from Nordenskjold 
Coast, Antarctic Peninsula: oldest part of the Trinity Peninsula Group? Antarctic Science 7: 
191-96. 
Taylor, B.J. [no date]. Middle Jurassic plant material from Mount Flora, Hope Bay. 
Unpublished report, British Antarctic Survey Archives Ref ES3/GY30/6/1.  
Thomson, M.R.A. 1977. An annotated bibliography of the paleontology of Lesser Antarctica 
and the Scotia Ridge. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics 20 (5): 865-904. 
Truswell, E.M., 1991.  Antarctica: a history of terrestrial vegetation.  In Tingey, R.J., ed. The 
geology of Antarctica. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 499-537. 
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. 
Zeuner, F.E. 1959. Jurassic beetles from Graham Land, Antarctica. Palaeontology 1(4):407-409.  
 
