XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-020
Agenda Item: ATCM 4a
UNITED KINGDOM
Original : English

To be translated soon




Approval of measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:
A Proposal to improve the system

Working Paper
Submitted by the United Kingdom


Background

    1. The international governance of Antarctica is provided by measures adopted by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) under the procedures of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
    2. Article IX(1) provides for Parties to meet together for the purpose of, among other reasons, “recommending to their Governments, measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty”.
    3. Further Article IX(4) of the Treaty provides that “the measures referred to in paragraph 1 …shall become effective when approved by all Contracting Parties whose representatives were entitled to participate in the meetings to consider those measures.”
    4. Thus two fundamental principles of the Treaty are established.  Firstly that measures adopted at ATCMs are ad referendum to governments, and secondly that all relevant Consultative Parties must approve measures before they become effective; i.e. consensus is required both at adoption and approval.
    5. In practice the approval process requires Consultative Parties to take the necessary action within their national legal and administrative systems and then to notify the Depositary Government that they have approved the measure(s).
    6. Measures under Article IX took the form of Recommendations until 1995.  However, Recommendations adopted by the 18 ATCMs between 1961 and 1994 covered a broad range of matters, and no distinction was made between mandatory and exhortatory measures, i.e. those intended to be legally binding and those that were not.  
    7. In order to clarify the decision-making process of the ATCM, the ATCPs adopted Decision 1 (1995) at their XIXth meeting.  By means of this Decision measures were categorised into Measures, Decisions and Resolutions.  Resolutions cover all exhortatory texts; Decisions deal with internal organisational and procedural matters and become operative at adoption; Measures address provisions intended to become legally binding once approved by all ATCPs under the procedures of Article IX.   Since 1995, therefore, only Measures have needed to follow the Article IX process.
Effectiveness of the Article IX Process
    8. Since the Antarctic Treaty entered into force in 1961, 204 Recommendations and 20 Measures have been adopted by the ATCPs.  A total of 224 measures have therefore required approval under the Article IX procedure.  However, of these, only 131 have been approved.  93 have not, i.e. only 58% have become effective and entered into force.
    9. Further, the most recent meeting for which all Recommendations have become effective (i.e. all ATCPs entitled to attend the ATCM have approved the Recommendations) was ATCM XI, held in Buenos Aires in 1981.
    10. Since then, only one Recommendation has become effective, that being Recommendation XVI-10 (Annex V of the Environmental Protocol) which entered into force on 24 May 2002 – 11 years after it was adopted.
    11. But to what extent is this slow approval rate a problem?  As stated above the vast majority of earlier Recommendations were never intended to be legally binding.  So the fact that they may take many years to “become effective” makes little difference in practice.
    12. However, the rate of approval does matter for those texts that are intended to be legally binding. This would include, for example, Recommendation III – VIII covering the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora; Recommendation XIV-2 dealing with the requirements for EIA; and Recommendations XV-3 and XV-4 dealing with waste disposal and prevention of marine pollution matters respectively.  The 11-year wait for Recommendation XVI-10 (Annex V) to enter into force created a number of procedural and administrative problems.  ATCPs were in effect running two parallel systems as they attempted to meet the requirements of Annex V ahead of its entry into force whilst the protected areas themselves were still held under a number of earlier Recommendations, including the 1964 Agreed Measures.
    13. A further example of the problems created by a lengthy approval period relates to Protected Area Management Plans.  Such Plans are intended to be legally binding.  Yet in a number of cases expiry dates for management plans have been extended, and management plans revised, without the original designating Recommendation ever entering into force (Appendix 1 provides an example).
    14. Looking to the future further problems can be foreseen.  Any Measures adopted in respect of, for example, the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, or further Annexes to the Protocol (e.g. a liability Annex) may take an appreciable amount of time to enter into force.
    15. So what conclusions might we draw?  Firstly, it is clear that the Article IX approval process remains extremely slow.  Indeed, as the number of ATCPs has grown the speed with which Recommendations and Measures have been approved has declined.  Secondly, a problem clearly lies with Governments unable to take the necessary action to approve the measures within their own legal and administrative systems in a timely way.
    16. In the light of this, it seems wholly appropriate for the ATCPs to consider whether the process might be improved and if so how.
Possible alternative procedures
    i. CCAMLR (a more recent treaty) has adopted a different approach in terms of the entry into force of its measures.  The formal decisions of CCAMLR are known as Conservation Measures (CMs).  CMs are adopted by the Commission under the provisions of Article IX of the Convention.
Once adopted, the Commission notifies the CMs to all its Members.  However, the key element of Article IX of the Convention is its tacit approval mechanism.  Article IX(6)(b) states that “conservation measures shall become binding upon all Members of the Commission 180 days after..[notification]...”  However, Article IX(6)(c) allows any Member a period of 90 days to notify the Commission if it is unable to accept the CM in whole or in part, in which case the CM shall not, to the extent stated, be binding upon that Member of the Commission (though it will be so for all other Members).
    ii. Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (which entered into force on 24 May 2002) encompasses a slightly different tacit approval process.  Articles 6(1) and 8(2) of Annex V provide for the approval of Measures for the adoption of ASMA management plans and new Historic Sites and Monuments respectively.  These Articles state that such measures, “shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the ATCM at which [the Measure] was adopted, unless one or more Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.”
    iii. The amendment Articles of each of the Protocol’s Annexes also include a tacit approval mechanism.  These provide for each Annex to be amended by means of a measure adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  These amendment clauses further state that amendments of the Annexes “shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the ATCM at which [the measure] was adopted, unless one or more ATCPs notifies the Depositary within that time period that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.”
    17. As such, these examples within the Antarctic Treaty System offer more streamlined or “fast-track” procedures for ensuring that mandatory measures become effective more rapidly.
Proposal
    18. Against this background, can a solution be found to accelerate the approval process of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty?
    19. It would be inappropriate to consider any modification to the Treaty itself on this matter.  Instead, it would be far preferable simply to modify the procedures and practices that relate to the approval of measures under Article IX.
    20. Indeed the precedent for such an approach has already been set.  By means of Decision 1 (1995) ATCPs decided that the measures to be recommended to their Governments under Article IX would be limited to those intended to be legally binding.  Decision 1 (1995) was therefore in the nature of a remedial measure - Article IX having been “misunderstood” and misapplied for many years.
    21. In that regard Decision 1 (1995) has been successful in improving the efficiency of the Antarctic Treaty’s decision-making procedures, and of clarifying the Article IX approval process.  Using Decision 1 (1995) as the precedent, it seems appropriate therefore for the ATCPs to consider whether additional procedural changes might further improve the decision-making system. 
    22. Decision 1 (1995) was explained by its proposers as an application of the rule in Article 31(3)(a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969.  This provides that in interpreting a treaty account also must be taken of “any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions” (emphasis added).  Thus the agreement on how a treaty will be applied does not in itself have to be a treaty, it could be a document that merely expresses the “understandings” of the parties.
    23. Accordingly, further improvements to the procedures by which Measures become effective under Article IX of the Treaty could be achieved either by means of a Measure, or a Decision, or even by an interpretative understanding encompassed within the language of the Final Report of the ATCM.  The UK’s preference, however, would be to follow the precedent of Decision 1 (1995).
    24. It is therefore proposed that a more streamlined or “fast-track” mechanism should be introduced to approve measures adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.  The UK proposes that this can most appropriately be achieved through a further Decision.  This would introduce a tacit approval process for such measures.  A draft of such a Decision is attached at Appendix 2 for the Parties’ consideration.
Appendix 1.

Example of the difficulties generated by the slow rate of approval of Recommendations and Measures.

Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) adopted the management plan for SSSI 1, Cape Royds.
Recommendation XII-5 (1983) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 1985.
Recommendation XIII-9 (1985) amended the management plan and extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 1995
Resolution 7 (1995) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 2000.
Measure 2 (2000) extended the expiry date for SSSI 1 to 31 December 2005.
Cape Royds management plan is currently under review – the amended plan (revised in accordance with Annex V) may be adopted at ATCM XXV. 


The only one of the above Recommendations that has become effective under the procedures of Article IX of the Treaty is Recommendation VIII-4 (1975).  None of the others have so far been approved by all relevant Consultative Parties.
Appendix 2.

Approval of Measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
Draft Decision nn (2002).
The Representatives,
Conscious of the length of time that may occur between adoption and approval of Recommendations and Measures under the procedures of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty;
Aware that this rate of approval, and thus entry into force of Recommendations and Measures, may have a significant impact on the effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty;
Recalling Decision 1 (1995) on Measures, Decisions and Resolutions which provided the basis for more effective decision-making under the Antarctic Treaty;
Desiring to accelerate the approval process whilst retaining the fundamental principle of consensus decision making;
Decide:
                            1. That all Measures adopted henceforth in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty, shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, [one year] after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary Government, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period, or is unable to approve the Measure;
                            2. That paragraph 1 above shall not apply to Measures adopted in accordance with the following Articles of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty:
Article 8(1) of Annex I;
Article 9(1) of Annex II;
Article 13(1) of Annex III;
Article 15(1) of Annex IV;
Article 6(1), 8(2) and 12(1) of Annex V;
or to any other Measure which specifies otherwise.
