




XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-042
Agenda Item: ATCM 4b
AUSTRALIA
Original : English
















Draft Selection Criteria and a Proposed Procedure for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat































Draft Selection Criteria and a Proposed Procedure for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

A procedure is required for the appointment of the Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.  To assist Parties in their consideration of this issue Australia has prepared the following guidelines based on the procedures currently used for the appointment of the Executive Secretaries to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the International Whaling Commission.  

Draft selection criteria for the Executive Secretary are also provided for consideration.

Procedures to be followed for the appointment of the Executive Secretary

    1. The Secretariat shall advertise the vacancy on its website in accordance with the directions of the ATCM.  Consultative Parties may place advertisements in their country with the purpose of attracting suitably qualified applicants from their nationals. Any advertisements placed shall be identical in substance to the Secretariat’s advertisement on its website and shall be charged to the representative of the Consultative Party in whose country they are placed. 
    2. Each Consultative Party may nominate up to two suitably qualified candidates as official candidates for the vacant post.  Persons other than those so nominated shall be entitled to enter an application on their own behalf.
    3. Only nationals of a Consultative Party are eligible for appointment to the post of Executive Secretary. 
    4. The Chair of the ATCM shall determine the closing date for applications and other processes leading to the short-listing of candidates.
    5. After the deadline set for applications electronic copies of all curricula vitae, references and other documents submitted by applicants shall be circulated to all of the Consultative Parties.
    6. Each Consultative Party shall rank up to ten candidates whom they most favour in order of preference, and submit this list to the Chair of the ATCM.
    7. Upon receipt of all the Consultative Parties’ preferences the current Chair of the ATCM shall constitute a selection committee, consisting of him/herself and a senior representative of the two previous ATCM Host Governments and the two future Host Governments.  The current Chair of the ATCM shall act as Chair of the selection committee until the completion of the appointment process.
    8. The selection committee shall aggregate individual applicants’ rankings awarding 10 points for a first preference, 9 points for a second preference, etc.
    9. The candidates with the ten highest aggregate scores shall be short-listed. Should the application of any candidate be withdrawn the next ranking candidate shall be submitted.
    10. From the ten short-listed candidates the selection committee shall select, on the basis of merit, five candidates for interview.  To assist itself in the making of this selection the selection committee may contact applicant’s referees or seek the views of others who are well-positioned to comment on a candidate’s abilities.   
    11. The selection committee shall then determine, on the basis of merit, which of the five candidates should be recommended for the position.  In reaching its decision, the selection committee:
        ◦ shall interview each of the five candidates;
        ◦ shall contact applicants’ referees;
        ◦ may seek the views of others who are well-positioned to comment on a candidate’s abilities;
        ◦ shall take a comprehensive view of all applicant’s claims and supporting material; and
        ◦ may make such other enquiries as are considered appropriate to determine, on the basis of merit, which of these candidates should be recommended for the position.  
    12. The selection committee’s recommendation shall be forwarded to the immediately following ATCM for consideration and approval.
    13. The Secretariat shall pay reasonable travel expenses and per diem incurred by candidates invited for final selection except where a candidate is a nominee of a Consultative Party, in which case the representative of the Consultative Party shall be responsible for payment of these expenses.


Selection Criteria for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

The following selection criteria are provided for consideration:

    1. experience or detailed knowledge of the operations of international intergovernmental organisations;
    2. demonstration of a high level of managerial experience and proven competence, in such areas as;
        a. the selection and supervision of professional, administrative and technical staff;
        b. the preparation of financial budgets and the management of expenditures;
        c. the organisation of meetings and provision of secretariat support for high level committees;
    3. familiarity with Antarctic affairs;
    4. fluency in one of the four Treaty languages, and competence in at least one other;
    5. citizenship of an ATCP; and
    6. pass a medical examination, as determined by the ATCM.
