Page 1 of 3 
XXV ATCM – CEP V 
Warsaw, Poland, 10–20 September 2002 
 
WORKING PAPER 
Submitted by SCAR 
 
CEP Agenda Item 4d 
 
COMMENTS ON THE REVISION OF ANNEX II 
 
Introduction 
At XXIV ATCM in St Petersburg the Committee for Environmental Protection decided to 
begin a rolling review of the Annexes to the Protocol.  The first Annex selected for 
consideration was Annex II. 
SCAR is fully supportive of this review procedure which should allow the opportunity to 
correct inconsistencies and clarify definitions on the basis of the experience of using the 
Annex over the last decade.  Having carefully considered the Annex SCAR makes the 
following comments on the present text. 
 
 
General comments 
1. The process of revision for this Annex should be to work towards agreed interpretations 
usable as best practice, following a similar process to that already used for environmental 
impact assessment. 
2. Since only one of the Annexes is specifically described in the body of the Protocol would 
it not be helpful if all the Annexes started with a descriptive preamble defining their 
objectives more clearly? 
3. There would seem to be a substantive opportunity as the Annex is presently drafted to 
include any marine species within those elements from which they are not specifically 
excluded.  The inclusion of any species warranting protection from either marine or 
terrestrial realms makes scientific sense, but may run counter to what is believed to be 
current jurisdictional responsibilities. 
4. The title of the Annex should be changed to “Conservation of Antarctic biota” as this is 
currently considered a more inclusive scientific term than flora and fauna.  The term 
Biota covers all living things whilst Flora and Fauna has proved difficult to apply 
objectively to some of the lower organisms. 
 
 
Specific comments 
 
ARTICLE 1 
 (a) & (b) 
do not define these species as occuring or visiting only land or iceshelves. 
 
(g) 
fails to include invertebrates although they are defined in (d) earlier 
 
(g) 
no interpretation of the phrase “local distribution or abundance would be 
significantly affected”.  Key elements here are what is local (this could be as 
Page 2 of 3 
small as a single colony or could be considered for example to be the whole of 
King George Island), and what is significant (this could be defined as a 
particular percentage of the whole population, the breeding population, or as 
in Article 3 .3.b more than could be replaced by natural reproduction the 
following season). 
 
(g) 
appears to apply only to living organisms so that dead organisms can be 
collected without any restriction? 
 (h) (i)-(iii) 
the phrase “disturbs concentrations of birds and seals “ seems clear enough in 
intent but is open to interpretation.  What is defined as a disturbance – work 
with penguins suggests that the response to a particular “threat” varies with 
species and may differ between juveniles and adults.  If you have a permit for 
operating a helicopter in support of scientific studies does that automatically 
mean that any ancillary disturbance of wildlife is already authorised?  What 
constitutes a “concentration” and does it therefore mean that disturbing  
solitary Ross seals by overflying is not harmful interference? 
 
(h)(iv) 
why is “wilful disturbance confined to  persons on foot”? Persons driving or 
piloting vehicles, boats or helicopters could undertake wilful disturbance.  
Would it not be better to drop “wilful” completely? 
 
(h) (v) 
invertebrates have been omitted from this section 
 
(h) (vi) 
does this not constitute everything that is in (v )? Or are specific examples like 
this needed for permitting guidance? 
 
ARTICLE 3 
 
3.(a) 
invertebrates have been omitted from this section 
 
3.(b) 
lack of definition again for “local populations”; how is the “combination with 
other permitted takings” to be ascertained if the taking is by scientists from 
more than one Party? Should the precautionary approach be implemented if 
there is no reliable information on reproductive rates? 
 
3.c. 
should be Antarctic Treaty “Area”. 
 
4. 
Special Protection appears, inter alia, to be simply the permit limitations 
outlined in the following section.  This section clearly needs completely 
rewriting at the conclusion of the present discussions on the criteria for 
designating special protection and the resultant actions for the conservation of 
individual species. 
 
5. 
This whole section is perverse in that it appears to be repeating limitations that 
apply to taking for any species but with caveats that are undefined.  For 
example what is a compelling scientific purpose that is not covered in sect.  2 
of this article? Linking “survival or recovery” is confusing as there are no 
actions in Annex II dealing with recovery.  Equally confusing is the linkage 
between “species or local population” as local population remains undefined 
and species may be interpreted either as the proportion of the species within 
the Antarctic or the species worldwide. 
 
5.(c) 
What is the purpose of 5(c)? Animal welfare appears to be covered adequately 
by sect.  6 so 5(c) appears redundant. 
 
Page 3 of 3 
ARTICLE 4 
 
1. 
Does the competence of the ATCM  extend to the high seas? If it does not how 
can the Parties permit introductions into “water” in the AT area? Surely this 
can only be for CCAMLR to decide for marine areas and the AT competency 
extends only to inland waters (note not just fresh waters)? 
 
2. 
This section is now redundant 
 
4. 
The phrase “unless it is determined that they pose no risk to native flora and 
fauna” could be considered scientifically unsound with our present state of 
knowledge of Antarctic ecosystems.  There is no guidance on how such a 
determination should be made, or what constitutes risk.  It would seem 
preferable to remove this clause entirely and require that all introduced species 
be disposed of or removed from the area. 
 
6. 
This is presently unhelpful as it is not tied to a code of conduct and it is simply 
impossible at the present state of knowledge to be able to say exactly what 
viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts and fungi are native to the Antarctic. 
 
 
Appendix C is entitled micro-organisms but parasites are generally not micro-
organisms.  Indeed parasites are categorised by function whilst all the other 
groups are defined taxonomically so parasites should be removed from the list. 
 
ARTICLE 6 
 
1.(a) 
invertebrates are missing from this section 
 
1.(b) 
what is “status” meant to mean? If this implies conservation status then we 
need to look again at the IUCN criteria as we are doing for Specially Protected 
Species.  Is this meant to be the way in which species designated as SPS are 
reviewed and that new species would be considered for that status? It is not 
clear as there is neither mention of SPS nor any formal linkage to Article 3.  
The phrase “the extent to which any species or population needs protection” is 
also confusing as in previous sections the term “local population” is used; is 
“population” used here in a different sense?  Since all species are protected 
what, other than special protection, is envisaged for this reporting? 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
 
The outcome of the current discussions should provide agreement on changes 
to this listing. 
 
APPENDIX C 
 
1. 
It is believed to be impossible to detect the diseases mentioned simply by 
inspection of prepared carcasses – they must be detected in living birds.  
Whilst there should be no mention of parasites in Article 4.6 it may well be 
appropriate to list parasite checks in this Appendix. 
 
2. 
Non-sterile soil contains a wide range of organisms that should not be 
introduced into the Antarctic.  This instruction should have the caveat 
removed and simply state “The importation of non-sterile soil is prohibited”.  
It is specifically banned anyway in Annex III Art.7! 
 
