XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-002
Agenda Item: ATCM 16
FRANCE
Original : French
Working Paper Submitted by France to the Twenty-Fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002)

Usefulness of an Annex VII to the Madrid Protocol regarding the regulation of tourist and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area
1.Tourist activities are continuously being developed in the Antarctic area. One must acknowledge that this continent becomes ever more attractive for tourists. Indeed, for the past 20 years, the numbers have kept increasing: in 1998 Antarctica received over 10,000 tourists, thus more people than the total staff working in the scientific stations and bases in Antarctica. Around sixty sites are periodically visited by sea (cruising ships may hold up to 1,700 passengers and certain ships may land 800 passengers on certain sites) or by air.

In the face of such an increasing phenomenon, State Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol do have a general competence to frame the tourist activities taking place in Antarctica in order to monitor the environmental consequences stemming from these activities. Article 2 of the Madrid Protocol designates the Antarctic Treaty Area as «a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science». Article 3, on the other hand, indicates that activities must be planned and conducted «so as to accord priority to scientific research and to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research». Besides, this latter provision also lists the principles related to environmental protection and article 6 requests that State Parties co-operate in the planning and conduct of activities to the South of the 60 degrees South latitude. On the basis of these provisions, we may consider that it is solely for the State Parties to regulate this activity. If the tour operator organizations were allowed to make rules in this realm on their own it would diminish the value of the existing legal framework (indeed, the elaboration of rules contained in an Ethics code, in spite of its practical interest, has no binding legal value whatsoever).

Although the issue of tourism comes up periodically during the Consultative Parties meetings, and especially during discussions on damage to the environment, it has not been discussed in depth for a while now. One may thus recall that the formal session of the 17th ATCM (Venice, 1992) was preceded by two days of informal discussions on tourism (November 9 and 10, 1992). That year, three States (France, Chile, Italy) had decided to launch a joint initiative in order to prepare a draft annex to the Madrid Protocol on protection of the environment in Antarctica on regulating tourist and non-governmental activities on that continent. The interest of such a draft annex was based on the will to have a global approach to tourist activities in Antarctica.
However, no agreement has been reached on this issue. By virtue of the considerable growth of tourist activities, the States decided during the 18th ATCM (Kyoto, 1994) not « to create new rules but to provide guidelines for Antarctic visitors and for those who plan and conduct tourist and non-governmental activities in this region» (Paragraph 59, Final Report of the 18th Consultative Meeting). Guidelines on tourism have been adopted and are to be found in Recommendation XVIII-I, «Tourism and non-governmental activities, Annexes: Guidelines for visitors to Antarctica, Guidelines for those planning and conducting tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica» (Final Report of the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Kyoto, 1994)).
Since then, Consultative Parties have failed to adopt any new regulatory measures specifically geared at tourist activities. Efforts have only been made on the circulation of data concerning tourists. Thus, Recommendation XIX-3 deals with reports on tourism and non-governmental activities (Final Report of the 19th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Seoul, 1995)). Likewise, Resolution XXI-3 bears on the Standard Form for Advance Notification and Post-Visit Reporting on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica (Final Report of the 21st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Christchurch, 1997)). More recently, Consultative Parties requested the States and non-consultative Parties which are not yet Parties to the Madrid Protocol, and especially those with Antarctic tourist activities organised on their territory, to adhere to the Madrid Protocol as soon as possible (Resolution 6 (1999) - Adherence to the environmental Protocol by non-consultative parties, Final Report of the 23rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Lima, 1999)).
During the last consultative meeting, the diversity of tourist activities was put forward, as they may represent new management challenges. Consultative Parties have become aware of the importance of an appropriate management of tourism in Antarctica and have estimated that the tourist issue should be extensively discussed during the 25th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002).

2. France considers that it is a priority to examine again the issue of management by the States of tourism in Antarctica due to the risks involved. Tourist activities may be the cause of environmental damage in Antarctica and its dependant and associated ecosystems. Likewise, such a commercial activity may hamper scientific research carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area. One might thus consider that the presence of tourists is not welcome and that tourism should be banned South of the 60 degrees South latitude. Such an extreme solution would be an admission of relative powerlessness, as it would be tantamount to admitting that Consultative Parties are in no position to regulate the management of the only commercial activity presently developed in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
The Antarctic Treaty doesn't deal with tourists and the Madrid Protocol doesn't specifically deal with tourism. However, the provisions of the Madrid Protocol, by virtue of their general nature, are enforceable on those going to the Antarctic Treaty area, whether they do so for scientific, logistical or sheer tourist purposes. Nevertheless the fact remains that these rules have not specifically been laid down for the purposes of tourists. Without denying the value of the Madrid Protocol rules, one may however regret that the issue of tourism is not put forward within the framework of this instrument, the purpose of which is, if we may recall it, the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems» (art 2 of the protocol). It would indeed seem that the Madrid Protocol rules regarding environmental protection might be strengthened to make sure that tourist activities are better encompassed. It is indeed essential to make sure they do not disturb research activities in Antarctica as «Activities shall be planned and conducted in the Antarctic Treaty area so as to accord priority to scientific research and to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research, including research essential to understanding the global environment» (art. 3, paragraph 3 of the protocol). It is likewise important that tourists are not the cause of environmental damage as « the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and that of the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, […], shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area » (art. 3, paragraph 1 of the protocol). Besides the search for rules worth examining and adopting, it is important to see how such a regulation should be adopted.

3. In this perspective, France recommends a separate annex or an annex to the Madrid Protocol bearing on tourist issues the solution of which is still pending.

1/ It is the intention of France to submit, during the next Consultative Meeting, a draft annex or other regulation text of similar purport bearing on tourist and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. In order to carry out this task, France also intends to gather all the information and working papers tabled at different consultative meetings. 
In this vein, it would be useful, in France's opinion, that the Consultative Parties Meeting asks all the delegations with a particular interest in tourist activities to contact the French delegation. The preparatory work of such an annex might be carried out within the framework of an Ad Hoc working group.
It would comprise specialists-representatives of all Consultative Parties having expressed their wish to participate therein. During the first stage of the work, it would be good to discuss the individual proposals on the Internet. Different issues deserve special attention: a) the need for a regulation of tourism, b) the outline of such a regulation, c) the contents of the regulation. A second stage might include the consultation of experts on this issue.

France offers itself to act as a moderator of this working group and thus contribute to the preparation of the discussions to take place during the 26th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, during which the results of this group's work could be introduced and discussed. 
