ATCM XXV
Working Paper WP-50
Agenda Item:
New Zealand
Original: English

LIABILITY:
INFORMAL CONTACT GROUP WORK ON
"OPERATOR", SCOPE, AND ACTIONS FOR
COMPENSATION

Submitted by New Zealand
Warsaw, 19 September 2002

Informal Contact Group on Definition of "Operator"

"Operator" means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non-governmental, which organizes or carries out activities covered by the Protocol [in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notification is required under Article VII(5) of the Treaty]. "Operator" does not include a natural person unless that person is the organizer of the activity. When the term "operator" is used in conjunction with "Party" it means an operator which is subject to the laws and regulations of that party, including the laws and regulations implementing the Protocol.
Informal Contact Group on Article 1 on Scope

Article 1

Scope

This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which related to

(activities for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Treaty)

or

(scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities is in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities)

or

(activities that are covered by the Protocol and its Annexes);

and to measures and plans for preventing and responding to such emergencies.
Informal Contact Group on Article 7 on Actions for Compensation

19 September 2002
Warsaw

CONTACT GROUP

Article 7 - ACTIONS FOR COMPENSATION.(1)

7.1
Actions against a non State operator for liability under article 6-1 may be brought in the Courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business of his or her habitual place of residence. Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the start of the response action.

7.2
                                                  First Option
A Party in its discretion may provide that actions against that Party for liability under Article 6-1 may be brought in the Courts of the Party and if so it will inform the depository. No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

                                                  Second Option
Actions against a State operator for Liability under Article 6-1 may be brought in the Courts of that State. No Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

                                                  Third Option
Deletion of paragraph 2.

7.3
Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1 and, where applicable, paragraph 2. (2)

7.4
Except as provided for in paragraph 2, the liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6-1 shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20-1 of the Protocol and the arbitration schedule to the Protocol.

(1) Many delegations noted that discussion of this article should take into account the way other articles of the Annex would be drafted, in particular Article 6 (liability) and Article 12 (Environmental Protection Fund).

(2) - The expression "and, where applicable, paragraph 2" will have to be reviewed in light of the decision taken on paragraph 7.2.
7.5

a. Each Party shall also provide under its domestic law for enforcement of Article 6-2 (and 6-3) with respect to any non-State operator that is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.

[b. The liability if a Party as a State operator under article 6-2 (and 6-3) shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of Article 20 of the Protocol and the arbitration schedule to the Protocol.](3)

(3) Some delegations objected to the proposal that all disputes involving compensation to the Environmental Protection Fund would be dealt with by arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol and maintained that whenever a dispute is not merely of a pecuniary nature but concerns an assessment of a harmful impact on the Antarctic environment such issues could only be dealt with by inquiry, conciliation and other procedures mentioned in the draft annexes introduced by Chile and the Netherlands at the XIII ATCM (XII ATCM/WP34 and XII ATCM/WP18 respectively).
