Antarctic Protected Areas System 
Draft Management Plan for ASPA 114: North Coronation Island 
 
Working Paper 
Submitted by the United Kingdom 
 
Introduction. 
 
1. At CEP IV the UK presented a Working Paper (XXIV ATCM / WP2) assessing the status of 
ASPA 114, North Coronation Island (formerly SPA number 18).  The Working Paper noted 
the poor state of knowledge about the area owing to the fact that severe physical limitations on 
access had prevented any visits to the site for more than 25 years. 
2. At CEP IV the UK put forward three possible options for this protected area: 
• 
Continue to protect the site whilst recognising the severe limitations on baseline 
information; 
• 
Continue with protection but amend the values being protected (possibly to recognise the 
sites potential as a “pristine” reference area); 
• 
Terminate designation. 
3. Following discussion of the matter, the Committee asked the UK further to evaluate the site 
and to prepare a draft Management Plan for consideration at CEP V (paras 53 to 56 of the 
Final Report of CEP IV refer). 
 
North Coronation Island – draft Management Plan. 
4. The UK has therefore prepared a draft Management Plan, based on available information about 
the site.  This is attached. 
5. The draft Plan has taken account of the views expressed at CEP IV regarding possible 
amendment of the values to be protected.  These have been modified to recognise the pristine 
nature of the site, and its potential as a reference area in comparative studies with more heavily 
impacted regions. 
6. It must be noted, however, that as no baseline data currently exist for this site, its value as a 
reference area is greatly diminished until such data can be obtained.  The draft management 
plan therefore proposes that entry into the site is prohibited other than for compelling scientific 
research that cannot be undertaken elsewhere, or for the collection of baseline data. 
7. The draft management plan also records the extreme physical restrictions on access to the area 
and that the chances of mounting a successful survey of the site are extremely low.  For this 
reason the draft Management Plan proposes a period of designation of five years.  If access to 
the site cannot be achieved during this time, the UK believes that retention of the site as an 
ASPA would be untenable. 
Summary. 
8. The UK would welcome the views of the Committee on the draft Management Plan and future 
management of this protected area. 
DRAFT 
Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 114 
NORTHERN CORONATION ISLAND, SOUTH ORKNEY ISLANDS 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Northern Coronation Island (Latitude 60°33' S, Longitude 45°35' W, 88.5 km2), South Orkney 
Islands was originally designated as a Specially Protected Area through Recommendation XIII-10 (1985, 
SPA No. 18) following a proposal by the United Kingdom.  It was designated on the grounds that the Area 
“embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain (Conception, Prong and Foul Points) with large seabird colonies 
and lichen-dominated cliffs, and permanent ice rising to the Brisbane Heights plateau which provides an 
excellent representative area of a pristine ice environment near the northern limit of the maritime Antarctic 
and the Antarctic Treaty Area, and that the interrelated terrestrial, permanent ice and marine components of 
this area comprise an integrated example of the coastal, permanent ice and sublittoral ecosystems of the 
maritime Antarctic environment”.  
 
The Area is difficult to access, few site visits have been made and there is little baseline or up-to-date 
information available on the ecosystems within the Area. Thus, the original values cited for the Area cannot 
be reaffirmed, as insufficient information exists to substantiate these claims. In addition, the presence and 
nature of large seabird colonies within the Area cannot be substantiated, and the extent and types of lichen-
dominated cliffs are largely unknown.  The extent to which the ice environment and the ecosystems within 
the Area are representative is also unknown.  It has not proved possible to make a recent inspection of the 
Area despite numerous attempts. 
 
However, the few records of visits to the Area suggest it has been subjected to minimal direct human 
disturbance and, as such, is likely to be relatively pristine. In view of this assumed pristine condition, the 
primary potential value of the Area is as a reference site for use in comparative studies with more heavily 
impacted sites. Before this value can be realised, baseline studies are required on the nature of the 
environment and ecosystems present.   In order to maintain the site for its potential value as a reference 
area, all visits to the Area shall be prohibited except for compelling scientific research, including gathering 
baseline data, or to exploit the value of the site as a reference area, or for site inspection. 
 
The boundaries of the Area are unaltered from those originally designated and include most of the 
catchment of northern Coronation Island draining northward into the sea between Conception Point and 
Foul Point. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Northern Coronation Island aims to: 
• 
preserve the ecosystem of the Area in a largely undisturbed state for its potential as a reference area; 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the potential value of the Area as a reference site by 
prohibiting all visits, except for scientific research within the Area for compelling reasons which cannot 
DRAFT 
be served elsewhere, or  for the purpose of acquiring baseline data, or monitoring of the state of the 
environment, or for inspections; 
• 
ensure that the purpose, nature, methods and conditions of observation and / or sampling are clearly 
defined before access for scientific research is allowed; 
• 
ensure that visits for management purposes are in support of the aims of the management plan 
 
3.  Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• 
A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed 
prominently at Signy (UK) and Orcadas (Arg.) research stations, where copies of this Management 
Plan shall be made available. 
• 
Visits may be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which 
it was designated. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for a period of five years to allow opportunity for site visits to be made.  If access to the 
site remains unachievable during this time, consideration should be given to terminating the site’s status as 
an ASPA. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Northern Coronation Island Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 114 in relation to the South 
Orkney Islands, showing the location of Signy (UK) and Orcadas (Arg.) research stations and 
other nearby protected areas.  Inset: the location of the South Orkney Islands in Antarctica. 
Map 2: Northern Coronation Island Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 114 topographic map. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND BOUNDARIES 
Coronation Island (Latitude 60°33' S, Longitude 45°35' W, 88.5 km2) is the largest of the South 
Orkney Islands, extending approximately 48 km with a west-north-west to east-south-east orientation (Map 
1). It is largely ice-covered, and the northern coastline, like that of most of the island, is indented and 
generally precipitous, with sharp rocky ridges forming bold headlands between ice cliffs. Exposed boulder 
beaches are present at the base of many of the ice and rock cliffs.  The interior of Coronation Island is 
mountainous and rugged, rising to its maximum height of 1266 m at Mount Nivea (Map 2).  The majority 
of the Area is ice covered, with two catchments draining from the Brisbane Heights plateau into 
Ommanney Bay and a similar-sized unnamed bay to its west.  Small areas of ice-free terrain are present on 
Conception, Foul and Prong Points.  
 
DRAFT 
The Area includes that area between Foul Point to the east and Conception Point to the west (Map 2). 
The eastern boundary follows a ridge from Foul Point 6 km southwards to the summit of Mount Nivea 
(1266 m), thence west-south-westwards down the ridge to the col at High Stile, thence rising further along 
the ridge to the broad plateau of Brisbane Heights and the summit of Wave Peak (960 m). From Wave Peak 
the boundary extends in a northwesterly direction for 5 km across the broad ridge of Brisbane Heights.  The 
boundary then extends due north for 6 km to Conception Point. The summits of Mount Nivea and Wave 
Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside of the Area.  The northern boundary is defined as a 
straight line extending 11.5 km across the sea from Conception Point to Foul Point, including Ommanney 
Bay and the unnamed bay to the west as within the Area. 
 
CLIMATE 
No climate data are available for Northern Coronation Island but conditions are expected to be 
broadly similar to those at Signy Island, 10 km to the south.  Mean summer (November – March) air 
temperatures at Signy Research Station range from –2°C to +3°C, with an extreme maximum temperature 
of +19.8°C. In winter, mean monthly temperatures range from –2°C to –17°C, with an extreme minimum 
of –39.3°C (Shears and Downie 1998). However, compared to Signy Research Station, Northern 
Coronation Island experiences more persistent cloud cover, which often forms fog banks when the 
prevailing moisture-laden north-westerly winds rise over the ice-covered peaks of the island. Differences in 
elevation also suggest that temperatures within the Area will be much colder than those recorded at Signy 
Research Station. 
 
GEOLOGY AND SOILS 
Coronation Island is composed predominantly of regionally metamorphosed rocks belonging to the 
Scotia metamorphic complex (Tanner et al. 1982). The rocks were deformed and metamorphosed to albite-
epidote-amphibolite-facies grade during or prior to the late Triassic but the true age of the original 
sedimentary sequences is uncertain. The main rock type within the Area is a grey micaceous schist (quartz-
rich quartz-mica-schist with albite, biotite and muscovite) (Dalziel et al. 1977).  Beds are flat-lying and 
uncontorted (Matthews 1956).  The schists on Coronation Island are thought to represent a metamorphosed 
sandstone-shale sequence in which there were interbedded tuffs and basic lavas and/or basic minor 
intrusions (Thomson 1974). 
 
STREAMS AND LAKES 
No information on streams and lakes in the area is available. 
 
BIOLOGICAL COMMUNITIES 
There is little information available on the biological communities in the Area.  Breeding chinstrap 
penguins (Pygoscelis  antarctica) occupy the few flat and gently sloping parts of the Area at Conception 
Point, with numbers roughly estimated to be around 5000 in 1997 (Convey 1997).  Crags are occupied by 
nesting cape petrels (Daption capense) and snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea).  Skuas (Catharacta sp.) and 
DRAFT 
sheathbills (Chionis alba) have been noted at Conception Point, while southern giant petrel (Macronectes 
giganteus), Antarctic fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides), prions (Pachyptila sp.), and Wilson’s and black-
bellied petrels (Oceanites oceanicus, Fregetta tropica) have been observed close to the coast (Convey 
1997). Seals have not been observed within the Area, and the rough boulder beaches at the foot of ice and 
rock cliffs are generally unsuitable for breeding fur or elephant seals (Arctocephalus gazella, Mirounga 
leonina). 
 
White, yellow and orange encrusting lichens are present, often on ice-free cliffs on the coast, along 
with patches of the common alga Prasiola crispa. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND IMPACTS 
There have been few reported visits to Northern Coronation Island and human impacts, while 
unknown, are considered to be minimal.   
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
There are no structures known to be present in the Area.  The nearest scientific research station is 
Signy Research Station (United Kingdom) (60°43'S, 45°36'W), 12 km south of the Area on Signy Island. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Northern Coronation Island are Lynch Island (ASPA No. 110) which 
lies about 5 km to the south, Moe Island (ASPA No. 109) which is 15 km SSW, and Southern Powell 
Island (ASPA No. 111) which is about 35 km to the east (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions  
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate national 
authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued only for compelling scientific research within the Area for reasons which cannot be served 
elsewhere, or for the purpose of acquiring baseline data, or monitoring of the state of the environment, 
or for site inspection; 
• 
the purpose, nature, methods and conditions of observation and / or sampling are clearly defined 
before access for scientific research is allowed; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the values of the Area; 
• 
proposed activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period. 
DRAFT 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
Glaciers, crevasses and icefalls render access into and across the Area exceptionally difficult.  
There are few ice-free sites suitable for landing of helicopters, and those that do exist are generally 
occupied by breeding colonies of birds throughout the summer. Extreme caution must be exercised when 
attempting boat landings owing to significant dangers from swell, submerged rocks and on-shore ice-falls 
onto narrow boulder-strewn beaches.  The existence and location of suitable landing sites for small boats is 
unknown, although the most promising sites appear to be Foul, Prong or Conception Points.  Movement 
within the Area shall be on foot. 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• 
scientific research for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; 
• 
collection of baseline information on the Area that will not jeopardise the potential value of the site as a 
reference Area; 
• 
essential management activities, including site inspection or monitoring. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area. 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
Camping is permitted within the Area for purposes consistent with the objectives of this 
management plan. No information is available on sites suitable for camping, although they would appear to 
be few and difficult to access. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area 
and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken against accidental introductions.  No herbicides or 
pesticides, nor any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, shall be brought into the 
Area. Fuel may be used for essential transport within the Area, although fuel and other materials shall not 
be stored in the Area except in support of essential activities for which a Permit is granted. All fuel and 
other materials shall be stored and handled so that risk of any introduction into the environment is 
minimised and shall be removed when permitted activities cease.  If release occurs which is likely to 
compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal is not likely 
to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate authority should be notified of any 
materials released and not removed that were not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit issued in 
accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Where 
DRAFT 
taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals 
for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a minimum standard 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
 Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit and should 
be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  Permits shall not be granted 
if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, displace, remove or damage such 
quantities of rock, soil, water, or native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance at Northern 
Coronation Island would be significantly affected.  Material of human origin likely to compromise the 
values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder or otherwise authorised, may 
be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is 
the case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.   
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can 
continue to be met 
To help maintain the values derived from the historically low level of human impact at Northern 
Coronation Island special precautions against introductions shall be taken. To the maximum extent 
practicable, all equipment brought into the Area (including, for example, sampling equipment, and 
footwear) shall be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits a report describing the 
activities undertaken to the appropriate authority.  Such reports should include, as appropriate, the 
information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties should maintain a record of 
such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of 
activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow 
evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit 
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage. 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Bonner, W.N. and Smith, R.I.L. (Eds) 1985.  Conservation areas in the Antarctic. Cambridge, SCAR: 73-84. 
British Antarctic Survey. 1981. British Antarctic Territory Geological Map (Scale 1:500 000).  Series BAS 500G 
Sheet 3, Edn 1. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Brown, J.W. 1967. The petrology of Signy and Coronation Islands, South Orkney Islands. Unpublished MSc thesis, 
University of Birmingham. 
Convey, P. 1997. Report on visits to Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in the South Orkney Islands, January 1997. 
Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey: unpublished internal report. 
Dalziel, I.W.D., Elliot, D.H., Thomson, J.W., Thomson, M.R.A., Wells, N.A. and Zinsmeister, W.J. 1977. Geologic 
studies in the South Orkney Islands: RN Hero  Cruise 77-1, January 1977. Antarctic Journal of the United 
States, 12(4): 98-101. 
DRAFT 
Matthews, xx. 1956. 
Shears, J.R. and Downie, R.H. 1998. Oil spill contingency plan, Signy Research Station. 2nd edition. Cambridge, 
British Antarctic Survey 
Tanner, P.W.G., Pankhurst, R.J. and Hyden, G. 1982. Radiometric evidence for the age of the subduction complex 
in the South Orkney and South Shetland islands, West Antarctica. Journal of the Geological Society of 
London, 139(6): 683-690. 
Thomson, J.W. 1974. The geology of the South Orkney Islands: III. Coronation Island. British Antarctic Survey 
Scientific Reports 86. 
Signy
Island
Signy (UK)
Orcadas
(Arg)
Robertson
Islands
Powell
Island
Laurie
Island
Saddle 
Island
60°30'S
60°40'S
60°50'S
45°00'W
46°00'W
45°30'
ASPA No.109
Moe Island
ASPA No.110
Lynch Island
ASPA No. 111
Southern Powell
Island
Sou
   
   
th
Orkney
Islands
ASPA No. 114
Northern Coronation
Island
80°W
60°W
40°W
60°S
70°S
South
Orkney
Islands
0
25
Km
C
o
r
o
na
t
i
o
n 
   Isl
a
n
d
Map 1. Northern Coronation Island, ASPA No. 114, location map
DRAFT 
 
 
 
Map 2.  ASPA 114, North Coronation Island 
 
ASPA 114
