ATCM XXV
Working Paper WP-049
Agenda Item ATCM 4b
AUSTRALIA
Original language: English

STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT

1. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting hereby establishes a Standing Committee 
on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

2. Any Party to the Treaty entitled to appoint representatives in accordance with Article 
IX.2 of the Treaty is entitled to be a member of the Committee. A quorum of the 
Committee shall be comprised of 2/3 of members.

3. The members of the Committee shall elect a Chair from among themselves.

4. During each ATCM, the Committee shall advise the ATCM on the organization, 
administration and activities of the Secretariat including, but not limited to:

    (a) the financial status and performance of the Secretariat;
    (b) the allocation of the Secretariat’s budget, including allocations from the 
        contingency fund;
    (c) any actual or potential legal proceedings involving the Secretariat;
    (d) any other matter affecting the efficient operation of the ATCM.

5. In the period between ATCMs the Chair of the Committee may, on the advice of the 
Executive Secretary and on behalf of the ATCM -

    (a) approve variations to the allocation of budget items, provided that the aggregate of 
        such variations does not exceed X% of the Secretariat’s budget in any one financial year;
    (b) where the aggregate of variations exceeds X in any one year, approve variations to the 
        allocation of budget items to a further X%, provided that there is no objection from any 
        other members of the Committee;
    (c) instruct the Secretariat in relation to any matters involving potential or actual legal 
        proceedings to which the Secretariat may be a party;
    (d) instruct the Secretariat in relation to any exercise of the Secretariat’s legal capacity;
    (e) approve acquisitions or dispositions by the Secretariat of immovable property 
        exceeding the value of X% of the Secretariat’s budget;
    (f) approve any other proposals relevant to the activities and interests of the Secretariat, 
        provided that there is no objection from any other members of the Committee.

6. The Committee may appoint from amongst its members smaller, informal groups to 
give preliminary consideration, in consultation with the Executive Secretary of the 
Secretariat, to matters before it.
7. The Standing Committee shall prepare a report on its activities and deliberations to each ATCM.
