XXV ATCM 
Working Paper WP-25 
Agenda Item:.......... 
COMNAP 
Original: English 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
ATCM XXV 
Warsaw  Poland 
10-20 September 2002 
 
 
 
Working Paper on 
“Worst Case” & “Less than Worst Case” 
Environmental scenarios 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
During discussions on the “Liability Annex” at ATCM XXIV in St Petersburg, the meeting 
requested: 
 
“COMNAP, in consultation with SCAR, to provide the following information in respect of national 
program operations, for the purpose of establishing limits on financial liability, compensation, and 
insurability. 
 
(a) 
“Worst case scenarios” for land-based and sea-based environmental emergencies in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area including the probability of occurrence and estimated cost for responses action; 
(b) 
For the purposes of illustration, a range of scenarios less than worst case that might result in 
environmental impacts, including probability of occurrence and estimated cost of response actions; 
(c) 
Scenarios similar to those in (a) and (b) for which response action would not be possible.” 
 
2. 
This paper essentially represents “work in progress”.   It gives information on the types of 
scenarios that are considered to be likely, but does not provide information yet on probability or cost.  
Work still remains to be done on the latter and COMNAP intends to produce a further response, including 
comment on these important issues, in due course. 
 
 
INTERIM RESPONSE 
 
(a) 
“Worst case scenarios” for land based and sea based environmental emergencies in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
The worst case scenario for a sea-based environmental emergency would be a vessel that sinks, 
and breaks up, releasing it’s bunkers (ship’s fuel) or cargo fuel being carried for the resupply of a 
station(s), that impacts on an environmentally sensitive area, where response is not possible.  In the 
Antarctic, the ship’s bunkers or fuel being carried to resupply a station is considered to be the most likely 
material that can result in “worst case” environmental damage, because other materials are normally 
carried in much lower quantities.  This is considered also to be the case with tour vessels. 
 
4. 
Three points were raised in the discussion of this scenario that are relevant: 
 
• 
A vessel that sinks and breaks up at sea well away from environmentally sensitive areas – where 
its fuel will evaporate or be dispersed due to winds and sea conditions, is less likely to create an 
environmental emergency. 
• 
Ship size and amount of fuel carried was discussed.  While an important factor, this is considered 
secondary to the area that is impacted; i.e. a relatively small amount of fuel that impacts a 
sensitive area can result in damage that would exceed a large volume of fuel dispersed over a less 
sensitive area. 
• 
Most vessels used by national operators in Antarctic waters use arctic diesel fuel which tends to 
disperse and evaporate more quickly than heavy fuel, thus reducing the severity and duration of 
environmental impact.  This may not be the case however for vessels engaged in tourist 
operations. 
 
5. 
For information, in the last twenty years two national program vessels  – the Gotlund II and Bahia 
Paraiso – and one private expedition  – Southern Quest – are known to have sunk.   
In the case of the Bahia Paraiso, there was a prolonged multi-national recovery and clean-up operation 
which involved a total cost of approximately $US3M in 1989 dollars. 
 
6. 
Several “worse case” scenarios can be imagined for land based environmental emergencies, 
namely: 
• 
An air crash by helicopter or fixed wing aircraft into an environmentally sensitive area; e.g.. the 
Dry Valleys, lakes or rookeries. 
• 
The rupture/breach of an uncontained fuel storage tank.. 
• 
The introduction of non-indigeneous species or disease.  This third item is mentioned for the sake 
of completeness.  While documented cases of rat and cat infestations on the sub-Antarctic islands 
are available, there are no known cases of any viable presence of non-indigeneous species on the 
Antarctic or the islands of the northern Antarctic.  Similarly there are no known cases for the 
introduction of diseases. 
 
7. 
The release of other hazardous materials has also been discussed, and includes chemicals, 
solvents, hydraulic fluids, radio nuclide tracers, etc.  These substances are typically used in small 
quantities in laboratories or within station boundaries.  Exceptions are the use of chemicals at field 
laboratory sites and hydraulic fluids in vehicles. Release to the environment is possible, but in amounts 
that would have an insignificant environmental impact but potentially a significant scientific impact   In 
addition to preventive measures and contingency plans to avoid release to the environment of these 
substances, such precautions are also recommended from the perspective of the safety and health of the 
workforce.  
 
8. 
COMNAP guidelines recommend containing fuel storage tanks through the construction of 
catchment basins or the use of double walled storage tanks.  The volume of the containment area needs to 
equal the total amount of fuel to be contained.  Since the introduction of the COMNAP guidelines , there 
have been no known incidents in Antarctica where the containment for storage tanks has been breached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
For the purpose of illustration, a range of scenarios less than worse case that might result in 
environmental impacts. 
 
9. 
The range of scenarios less than worse case that might result in environmental impacts and the 
probability that those impacts could result in environmental harm has been qualitatively described in the 
ATCM XXIII/WP14 and are given in the attached Table. 
(c) 
Scenarios similar to those in a) and b) for which response action would not be possible. 
 
10. 
In preparation for ATCM XXIV, and in response to the question “Whether, and under what 
circumstances, would it be possible and/or practicable to take containment, mitigation or clean up action, 
and whether, and under what circumstances, would it be possible to restore the environment?”  COMNAP 
defined the terms containment, mitigation, clean-up, and restoration.  A clear distinction became apparent 
between primary actions (containment; mitigation), and follow-up actions (clean-up; restoration).  
 
11. 
Primary actions would be comparable to immediate response actions which focus on 
“assessments first of risk to safety and life, and second to the practicality of any intervention under 
existing conditions of weather, and environment”.  Follow-up actions would result after “an assessment of 
whether such actions are feasible, cost effective, appreciably affect the natural rate of recovery, or will 
cause more harm than the impact of the incident.” 
 
12. 
Referring to the examples of incidents that could cause environment harm, of the fourteen given 
in the attached Table, six are identified for which primary actions would not be possible because of 
several factors including search and rescue, time, whether or not preventive measures or contingency 
plans have been put in place.  These are Items (1), (2), (5), (7), (10) and (11). 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
13. 
This paper notes the possible worse case and less than worse case scenarios that could lead to 
environmental emergencies in Antarctica.  It is difficult to estimate the probability of occurrence and cost 
of response to such scenarios because few incidents have occurred in the history of Antarctic research and 
exploration in modern times.  This risk assessment is further complicated by the consideration that the 
probability of occurrence of incidents in these scenarios could decrease.  Several reasons could contribute 
to such a decrease in the probability of occurrence. These are:  
 
• 
the adoption and application of the COMNAP guidelines for spill prevention and contingency 
planning (land and sea);  
• 
adoption and application of appropriate construction design criteria for ships, and  
• 
the increasing application of satellite imagery and other remote sensing techniques for navigation 
and aviation forecasting in the polar environment. 
   
14. 
Whilst COMNAP can provide historical information to help determine probability and cost based 
on the experience of its members, determination of these factors for actuarial purposes does not lie within 
the areas of competence of COMNAP. Nevertheless, COMNAP/SCALOP will assemble and make 
available the necessary historical data to assist in this process. These data will be presented in a follow-up 
paper in due course.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 
Examples of  Incidents that could Cause Environmental Harm 
 
 
Function 
Location 
Incident (examples) 
Response 
 
1) Aircraft 
Operations 
Flying over the coastal 
zone (ice covered; or ice 
free) 
Crash involving 
spillage of fuel which 
can approach 20K liters 
Only likely response is clean-up.  
Initial action will be search and rescue.  
Because of time involved in initial 
recovery operations, containment; and 
mitigation measures will not be possible. 
2) Aircraft 
Operations 
Flying over ice free 
inland locations 
Crash of small aircraft 
or helicopters with spill 
<1000 liters 
Only likely response is clean-up.  
Initial action will be search and rescue.  
Because of time involved in initial 
recovery operations, containment; and 
mitigation measures will not be possible. 
3) Ship 
Operations 
 
 
Loading or unloading 
fuel at the base or 
facility 
Fuel hose ruptures  
Base operations should be able to 
contain, mitigate, and clean-up the 
spill.  Contingency plans should identify 
this possibility, erect containment booms 
or have response teams at the ready 
during this operation.   
4) Ship 
Operations 
Enroute to a base or 
facility along the coast 
Ship going aground or 
impacting ice away 
from the station 
The ship should have some response 
capability that would enable them to 
contain a spill in a limited fashion.  
Mitigation, and clean-up would likely 
have to be done with outside assistance. 
5) Vehicle 
Operations 
 
 
Operating in an ice-
free inland area 
Vehicle overturns or 
otherwise spills fuel 
The only likely response is clean-up, 
although some mitigation may be 
possible if the spill is small (<10liters).  
Other response capability is not likely to 
be available. 
6) Fuel Storage 
Fuel Storage tanks 
located on bases or 
facilities 
Rupture of a storage 
tank 
Preventive measures and contingency 
plans should enable containment, 
mitigation, and clean-up.  Storage 
tanks should be double walled or bermed 
to contain fuel should the tank rupture.  
If mitigative measures are needed, the 
station response team should be able to 
handle contingencies, and clean-up 
should follow. 
7) Fuel storage 
Fuel caches located 
away from bases or 
facilities 
Leakage of unattended 
drums or storage 
containers 
The only likely response is clean-up.  
Fuel caches are typically unattended 
and in 200 l. drums.  Leaks are not 
likely to be noted until the cache is 
visited and therefore the remedy for 
leakage is clean-up.  Preventive 
measures are relatively simple, and 
would minimize leaks to the 
environment. 
8) Sewage/waste 
water 
Waste utility lines at 
bases and facilities 
Failed lines resulting in 
leaks or dumping from 
Preventive measures and contingency 
plans should enable containment, 
 
 
 
 
 
the sewage system onto 
ice or ice free land 
mitigation, and clean-up. Sewage and 
waste water lines should be valved so 
they may be closed and repaired and 
mitigation and clean-up initiated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Function 
 
Location 
Incident (example) 
Response 
9) Waste 
Disposal 
Trash and debris at 
bases and facilities 
Improper handling of 
waste resulting in 
material being 
dispersed by the wind 
This can be readily prevented through 
containment.  Mitigation and clean-
up would be more difficult since 
materials would be very widely 
dispersed. 
10) Abandoned 
Bases and 
Facilities 
Varied.  Can be 
coastal,  or inland 
Melt water through 
abandoned tips 
(landfills), and leaks 
from abandoned fuel 
tanks 
Because these facilities are abandoned, 
assessments will have to be made on 
potential risks, and costs.  Mitigation 
and clean-up would be the possible 
responses, since containment may no 
longer be possible.  
11) Transport 
In the coastal zone on 
the sea-ice 
Vehicles working on or 
transiting across the 
sea ice and falls 
through 
Fuel and chemicals that may be aboard 
the vehicle pose the risk to the 
environment.  If significant, efforts could 
be made to recover the vehicle and cargo 
to mitigate and clean-up the spill. 
12) Fuel 
Handling 
Fuel tanks and 
distribution lines at 
stations and bases 
Spills resulting from 
overfilling of tanks; 
failure in pipe 
connections; punctured 
storage drums 
At bases and facilities, is likely that 
preventive measures, materials, and 
personnel are available and in place to 
enable containment, mitigation, and 
clean-up 
13) Fuel 
Handling away 
from bases and 
facilities 
Fuel drums and small 
storage tanks at 
remote field sites 
Spills resulting from 
sloppy fuel transfers 
and leaking drums 
Since these facilities are typically 
manned and preventive measures and 
contingency plans should have been 
adopted for the operation of these sites, 
containment, mitigation and clean-
up should be possible. 
14) Scientific 
Activities 
Laboratories and field 
sites in ice free inland 
locations 
Chemical and other 
hazardous material 
spills 
Since these facilities are typically 
manned and preventive measures and 
contingency plans should have been 
adopted for the operation of these sites, 
containment, mitigation and clean-
up should be possible. 
 
 
 
