XXV ATCM/WP1
Working Paper WP-044
Agenda Item: 
ITALY
Original : English







XXV ATCM
Working Paper presented by Italy














Chairman´s Report on the
Informal Meeting of the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty on the Establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
Buenos Aires, June 24-27, 2002.

1)	Opening of the Meeting:  

The Meeting was opened by Min. Rubén Patto, Head of the Antarctic Bureau and Amb. Victorio Taccetti, Undersecretary for Latin American Policy, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship, on behalf of the Argentine Government. Participants were welcome to the city of Buenos Aires where the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty will be hosted.

2.i) Appointment of the Chair:  

On a proposal by Min. Patto, which was supported by several delegations, Prof. Francesco Francioni was elected as Chairman of the meeting and requested to present a Report of the Meeting. Prof. Francioni accepted and thanked the delegations. 

2.ii) Adoption of the Agenda: 

The Agenda prepared for the Meeting was adopted with the understanding that some rearrangements of the schedule might be necessary in some items.

3.i.) Constitutive Instrument:  

Discussions on the constitutive instrument considered options to establish the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty within the existing legal framework of the Treaty.  All Parties agreed that the Secretariat should be small and cost-effective.

Most Parties suggested either  the establishment of a Secretariat by a “decision” of the Antartic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) or by a “measure”. Many objected to make any amendments or fundamental changes to the legal framework of the AntarticTreaty.

Those Parties in favor of a “decision” argued that it would allow an immediate start-up for the activities of the Secretariat, while the adoption of a “measure” will require more time to come into force, since they require the approval of all Consultative Parties.

Those Parties in favor of a “measure” argued that this would allow internal procedural mechanisms (such as Parliamentary approval) to guarantee the provision of financial resources and it would allow the granting of privileges and immunities.

Some countries suggested that an interim arrangement (by way of a Decision) could provide a way for a quick start-up of the Secretariat, and that financial resources could be provided on a provisional basis by voluntary contributions of Parties.  The Host country offered to assume some unilateral obligations to allow the start-up of the Secretariat until formal steps such as a “measure” may come into force. In order to identify the legal tools and modalities to ensure such interim arrangements, the Chairman proposed the convening of a small contact group, to try to bring out a consensus agreement on the issues that could form part of the interim arrangement to start the work of the Secretariat. The group met and the Chairman reported that a document would be circulated for discussion.   

During Wednesday the draft decision being discussed in the Contact Group was brought to the attention of the Plenary.  Parties commented on its text, and the Contact Group on the constitutive instrument agreed to meet again on Thursday morning to try to finalize the text.

On Thursday a draft decesion, as well as a draft letter of commitment by the Government of Argentina, agreed by the Contact Group, were brought to the table. After some discussion, the Parties agreed to submit both documents to the next ATCM in Warsaw. The Japanese Delegation expressed reservations about the legal personality of the ATCM. On the same issue, Bulgaria suggested that the ATCM should itself address the issue of personality during the Warsaw meeting.  At the end of the discussion the meeting agreed on a Draft Decision and a Draft Letter of Commitment whose text is set forth in Annex I.

3.ii.)  Legal Personality/ Legal Capacity:

The discussions on this issue centered on whether the establishment of the Secretariat required the granting of some form of legal capacity in international law or under national law only. 
 
	All countries agreed that during the preliminary phase, the Secretariat should be recognized legal capacity under the Host country’s domestic law.  
	
Most countries stated that, if an international legal entity were to be created, the ATCM or the ATCPs collectively should be the legal entity under international law, which creates the Secretariat as one of its organs.  Some countries expressed the view that the ATCM already possesses this capacity and therefore there was no need for any formal recognition of its legal personality under international law. 

Two Consultative Parties spoke in favor of expressly recognizing the ATCM as an international organization and based this on the need to grant privileges and immunities to staff and infrastructure under international law.  The need to define which entity will sign the Headquarters’ Agreement was raised also as an argument to recognize the ATCM as an international legal entity.

Finally, all delegations agreed that the Secretariat needed as a minimum domestic legal entity to be able to function (contract personnel, goods and services) and that on the international plane it should be responsive and accountable to the ATCM.  They also agreed not to award the Secretariat international legal personality but rather to design it as an organ of the ATCM. The Chair suggested that, in any event, the ATCM could take a decision stating that for the purposes of the day-to-day working of the Secretariat, the ATCM should be treated as an entity endowed with legal capacity in domestic law. 
  
Argentina suggested that under national law it could recognize both the ATCM and the Secretariat as legal entities.  

The issue of who will sign the Headquarters agreement was left for further discussion.	

3.iii) Functions:  

The Chairman illustrated the range of tasks and responsibilities that might be attributed to the Secretariat. After a general discussion on the linkage between functions and budget, the meeting agreed, on a proposal by the Chairman, to set up a contact group with the task of preparing a detailed list of functions on the basis of the existing papers and proposals. The contact group was asked to meet an hour before the meeting of the Plenary on June 25. 

During June 25 the Plenary discussed the text on functions presented by the contact group and agreed on the final text for the identification of the functions of the Secretariat.  This text is annexed to this Report (see Annex II).

3. iv) Privileges and Immunities:

Since this issue is addressed within the draft Headquarters Agreement, the meeting decided to make their comments when discussing this agreement.

3. v) Headquarters Agreement.

The Chairman introduced the Draft Headquarters Agreement, and gave the floor to the delegation of Argentina, which explained the process followed in incorporating comments and views from the Parties into the footnotes of the original text.  Parties discussed and made comments to the Document on the Draft Headquarters Agreements.

Discussions included the title of the Agreement, and it was decided by consensus to make the Argentine Republic and the ATCM Parties to this Agreement.

On the issue of the signature of the agreement it was suggested that the ATCM should give a mandate to its Chair to sign this Agreement on behalf of the ATCM.

On Wednesday discussions continued on the text of the Draft Headquarters’ Agreement. There was a general agreement the Secretariat should have the legal status of an organ of the ATCM. Different opinions on the legal status of the Secretariat in Argentina are reflected in footnotes on the pertinent part of the text.

On the section regarding the flag and emblem, Parties suggested that the ATCM should take a decision officially identifying such symbols.

Finally the meeting approved the draft amended text of the Headquarter’s Agreement including the comments and views of the Parties. (See Annex 3)  In addition, the meeting noted a new draft text of art. 1 (definitions) which was elaborated by Argentina and the United Kingdom, (see Annex 4).
 
4.i) Financial regulations:

The discussion on Financial Regulations for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat was based on a paper submitted by Germany and circulated as document BAIRES/15.  The Chairman thanked Germany for providing this paper.

Comments by Parties on the German paper were based on two main issues:

The first was whether institutions deriving from the ATCM, such as an Open-Ended Group on Financial Regulations should be identified in the Financial Regulations.

The second was whether these regulations should provide the formula for ¨cost sharing”. 

Some Consultative Parties referred to the intervention of institutions as an Executive Board, but there was consensus that the ATCM should be the only institution identified in the rules.  The ATCM may then decide how it organizes its work regarding financial matters.

On the issue of cost sharing, several Parties expressed that the concept of “equal shares” should be applicable during the transitional period of three years until the ATCM can decide on a system of “equitable sharing.”  According to their opinion there was an agreement on this point at the Venice meeting.  Several other Parties expressed the view that, taking into account that this meeting took place more than ten years ago, circumstances had changed and that agreement was not applicable.  Other formulas were proposed, such as using the United Nations scale of contributions.  Taking into account that there was no consensus on this point, all Parties agreed by consensus to delete the reference to “equal shares” from the financial regulations, leaving the issue of “cost-sharing” for further evaluation and decision by the ATCM.  

The Chair suggested that language for this clause could read: “Each Contracting Party shall contribute to the budget in accordance with a decision by the ATCM.”

Other issues commented upon referred to the setting up of a working capital Fund.  Relating to art. 4.5 Parties expressed that surplus should not be returned to members but channeled to the working capital Fund.  Parties suggested ways to build this capital fund on the first year, but there was agreement that this issue could not be decided until the functions and approximate budget of the Secretariat to cover those functions was decided.  The need to identify whether or not the Secretariat will have to assume interpretation and translation costs during the transitional period was mentioned as a key issue to determine the funds that would be needed.  

Some Parties finally suggested that it would be useful to have comments on the points where these regulations differ from the CCAMLR financial regulations and the reasons for these changes.  Australia presented a paper on this issue, which was circulated to the delegates for further discussion at the next ATCM.

During Wednesday, Brazil presented a text regarding its position on the issue of cost-sharing.  This text was distributed among all Parties. 

5.i) Procedure for the Appointment of the Executive Secretary

The meeting considered discussion on this item to be premature and referred its consideration to the next ATCM

5.ii) Composition and appointment of additional Staff

Argentina presented a paper on the appointment of Staff and a second one on translations. Different opinions were expressed on the convenience of having translating staff on a permanent basis or on part time scheme.  The Netherlands delegation expressed a preference for a form of out sourcing of this service. One delegation called the attention of the meeting to the need of ensuring equitable geographic representation in the appointment of Secretariat staff. The Norwegian delegation mentioned that environmental and information officers, as well as a legal expert, might be needed.

It was agreed that Argentina would receive comments during the intersesional period in view of preparing a document to be discussed at the next ATCM.

The UK delegation brought the attention to a document from the CCAMLR Secretariat on staff appointments and suggested it could be used as a working paper. It was agreed to invite the UK delegation to such document to the mentioned Secretariat for discussion at the next ATCM.

5.iii) Staff Regulations.

	A non-paper was presented by Australia, representing work in progress. The UK delegation stressed the importance of the issue and suggested that comments on the Australian paper could be sent to the Australian delegation. Australia accepted to receive these comments. The Netherlands mentioned that the draft on staff regulations  staff should refer to the “interests of the ATCM” instead of the “interests of the Secretariat”.

It was agreed that Australia would collect these comments during the intersesional period and would prepare a new version of the paper incorporating those comments.

6) Other Business.

At the invitation of the Chair, Poland made comments on the arrangements for the next ATCM. In this respect, the polish delegate informed the Parties that a venue had been selected and that staff and translators had been appointed.

He also informed that a website had been opened as follows:

www.25atcm.gov.pl
Login: 25atcm
Password: arctowski

	The time table for the meeting would be the same as previous meetings. The meeting expressed the view that the issue of the Secretariat was a priority in the organisation of the ATCM but such priority needed to be balanced with other tasks such as the pending work on liability. Regarding liability, New Zealand informed that Ambassador McKay would be submitting a document in about two weeks.

	The United Kingdom suggested that a short informal meeting (about an hour) should take place on the first day of the ATCM, in order to give the Parties an update on the situation. This suggestion was accepted by the Parties. 

Poland also informed that following consutations among the Parties, Malaysia will be invited to observe  the XXV ATCM. Modalities of Malaysia’s participation are to be decided at the beginning of the next ATCM. 

7) Presentation of the Chair´s Report

The Chair informed the meeting that he would ensure the completion of the drafting of the report in the afternoon, which will be circulated among the delegations still present at the end of the meeting or otherwise, be email.




8) Closing of the Meeting.

The meeting was closed at 2 pm, June 27th 2002.

Prof. Francesco Francioni
Chairman



ANNEX 1
Draft letter of commitment of the Argentine Government

Addressed to the President of XXV ATCM (Warsaw):

	I address to you, in your capacity of President of the XXVth Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCM), in recognition of Decision No. 1 of XXIV ATCM and taking into consideration the need to provide for certain interim arrangements concerning the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat in order to assist the ATCM and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) until a Measure of the ATCM regarding the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat has become effective. 

	I hereby propose the following arrangements, which would  be applicable to the interim period referred above: 

- The premises located at 884 Leandro N. Alem Ave., 4th floor, Buenos Aires, Argentina, shall be available –free of charge-  as soon as it is necessary for the interim functioning of the Secretariat.

- The Argentine Government shall provide –free of charge- the administrative staff essential for the interim functioning of the Secretariat during the interim period. 

- The Argentine Government hereby undertakes an obligation binding in international law to give effect, in the law of the Argentine Republic, to the legal personality of the [ATCM, including its] Secretariat, with such legal capacity as may be necessary to perform the functions assigned to it by the ATCM. The Secretariat shall, in particular, enjoy legal capacity to: 
i) contract;
ii) acquire and dispose of immovable and movable propery;
iii) institute administrative and legal proceedings.

- The Argentine Government shall accord to the ATCM, including its Secretariat (the Executive Secretary, staff members and experts), and to the Representatives and delegates of the States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, mutatis mutandis, the privileges and immunities provided for in the CCAMLR Headquarters Agreement concluded on September 8, 1986 between the Government of Australia and the Commission. 

	The Government of the Argentine Republic shall consider itself bound by the interim arrangements proposed above upon the approval of such proposal by the ATCM.
Draft Decision
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat interim arrangements

The ATCM

Recalling Decision No. 1 of the XXIV ATCM on the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Convinced of the need to provide for certain interim arrangements concerning the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat until [a] Measure [No....] of [the] [XXV] ATCM regarding the establishment and functioning of the Secretariat has become effective. 


Decides that: 

1. The Secretariat is hereby located in Buenos Aires. It shall function during an interim period in accordance with the following arrangements.

2. The Secretariat shall, under the direction and supervision of the ATCM and on the basis of the resources available in accordance with paragraph 7 below, carry out the following functions:
 
A.	Provide, with assistance from the host government, secretariat support for meetings held under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and others meetings in conjunction with the ATCM. Secretariat support to include:

i)	Collate information for ATCM / CEP meetings e.g. Environmental Impact Assessments and Management Plans
ii)	Preparatory work for and distribution of the meeting agendas and reports.
iii)	Translation of meeting documents 
iv)	Provision of interpretation services.
v)	Copy, organize and distribute meeting documents.
vi)	Assist the ATCM in the drafting of the meeting documents including the final report.

B.	Support for coordination of inter-sessional work of the ATCM and the CEP by facilitating the exchange of information, organizing meeting facilities and providing other secretariat support as directed by the ATCM.

C.	Facilitate and coordinate communications and exchange of information amongst Parties on all exchanges required under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

D.	Under guidance from the ATCM, provide the necessary coordination and contact with other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System and other relevant international bodies and other organizations as appropriate.

E.	Establish, maintain, develop and, as appropriate publish, databases relevant to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

F.	Circulate amongst the Parties any other relevant information and disseminate information on activities in Antarctica.

G.	Record, maintain and publish, as appropriate, the records of ATCMs and of other Meetings convened under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

H.	Facilitate the availability of information about the Antarctic Treaty System.

I.	Prepare reports on its activities and present them to the ATCM.

J.	Assist the ATCM in reviewing the status of past Recommendations and Measures adopted under Article IX of the Treaty.

K.	Under the guidance of the ATCM, take-up responsibility of maintaining and updating an Antarctic Treaty System “Handbook”.

L. Perform such other functions relevant to the purpose of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty as may be determined by the ATCM.

3. The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive Secretary who shall be appointed by the ATCM from candidates to be proposed by Consultative Parties for a specified term of office during the interim period. 
	Other staff members and experts essential for the carrying out of the functions of the Secretariat during the interim period shall be appointed by the Executive Secretary. 

4. Interim staff and financial regulations are hereby adopted and attached –respectively- as annexes 1 and 2 to this Decision.

5. The legal capacity of the [ATCM, including its] Secretariat, as well as [their/the] privileges and immunities and those of the Executive Secretary and other staff members and delegates of the States Parties in the territory of the host State shall be provided for in a Headquarters Agreement to be concluded between the ATCM and the Argentine Republic. Until the entry into force of the Headquarters Agreement, these matters shall be governed by the terms of the letter of commitment of the Argentine Government which is hereby approved and attached to this Decision.

6. The Secretariat shall operate in a cost-effective manner.

7. The Secretariat shall, during the interim period, be supported by financial or other contributions voluntarily made by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

8. This Decision will cease to be effective at the moment a Measure regarding the establishment and permanent functioning of the Secretariat becomes effective. 








ANNEX 2

FUNCTIONS OF THE SECRETARIAT


The Secretariat shall perform those functions in support of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which are entrusted to it by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Under the direction and supervision of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting the Secretariat shall, in particular:

A.	Provide, with assistance from the host government, secretariat support for meetings held under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and others meetings in conjunction with the ATCM. Secretariat support to include:

i)	Collate information for ATCM / CEP meetings e.g. Environmental Impact Assessments and Management Plans
ii)	Preparatory work for and distribution of the meeting agendas and reports.
iii)	Translation of meeting documents 
iv)	Provision of interpretation services.
v)	Copy, organize and distribute meeting documents.
vi)	Assist the ATCM in the drafting the meeting documents including the final report.


B.	Supporting inter-sessional work of the ATCM and the CEP by facilitating the exchange of information, organizing meeting facilities and providing other secretariat support as directed by the ATCM.

C.	Facilitating and coordinate communications and exchange of information amongst Parties on all exchanges required under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

D.	Under guidance from the ATCM, providing the necessary coordination and contact with other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System and other relevant international bodies and other organizations as appropriate.

E.	Establishing, maintaining, developing and, as appropriate publishing, databases relevant to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

F.	Circulating amongst the Parties any other relevant information and disseminate information on activities in Antarctica.

G.	Recording, maintaining and publishing, as appropriate, the records of ATCMs and of other Meetings convened under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

H.	Facilitating the availability of information about the Antarctic Treaty System.

I.	Preparing reports on its activities and presenting them to the ATCM.

J.	Assisting the ATCM in reviewing the status of past Recommendations and Measures adopted under Article IX of the Treaty.

K.	Under the guidance of the ATCM, taking up responsibility of maintaining and updating and an Antarctic Treaty System “Handbook”.

L.	Performing such other functions relevant to the purpose of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty as may be determined by the ATCM.





































ANNEX 3

DRAFT HEADQUARTERS AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING 
AND 
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC [ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ITS SECRETARIAT.]
PREAMBLE:

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Argentine Republic;

Convinced of the need to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty System;

Bearing in mind the special legal and political status of the Antarctica and the special responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to ensure that all activities in Antarctica are consistent with the purposes and principles of the Antarctic Treaty; and its Protocol on Environmental Protection;

Having regard to decision 1 (2001), Decision ...(2002) which provide for the establishment of a Permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty at Buenos Aires, Argentina;

[Desiring to define the legal capacity, privileges, and immunities of the [Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and its]1 Permanent Secretariat and the privileges and immunities to be enjoyed by the staff of the Permanent Secretariat in the Argentine Republic; and]

[Wishing to provide for the privileges and immunities of certain other persons in the interest of facilitating the performance by the Permanent Secretariat of its functions under Measure...(2002), and]

Interpreting this agreement in the light of its primary objectives of enabling the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Permanent Secretariat to fully and efficiently discharges its responsibilities and fulfill its purposes and functions;2

Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement:

    a) ‘Government’ means the Government of the Argentine Republic;

    b) ‘Secretariat’ means the Permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;

    d) ‘Antarctic Treaty’ (The Treaty) means the Antarctic Treaty signed in Washington, on December 1, 1959;

    d) ‘Headquarters’ means premises of the Secretariat including the buildings or parts of buildings, and the land ancillary thereto, irrespective of ownership, occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities;

    e) ‘appropriate authorities’ means the national, provincial, or local authorities of the Argentine Republic in accordance with the laws of the Argentine Republic;

    f) ‘archives’ includes all records, correspondence, documents, manuscripts, photographs, computer data storage, films and recordings belonging to or held by the Secretariat;

    g)  ‘Envoy’ means a diplomatic agent;

    h) ‘Executive Secretary’ means the Executive Secretary appointed by the ATCM to head the Secretariat according to the instrument establishing the Secretariat;

    i) ‘Official Activities’ means all activities undertaken pursuant to the Treaty, and the Protocol including the Secretariat’s administrative activities;

    j) ‘Parties’ means State Parties to the Antarctic Treaty;

    k) ‘Representatives’ means representatives of Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in attendance at Conferences or meetings [convened by the Secretariat] and includes delegates, alternates, advisers, and secretaries of delegations;

l) ‘Staff member’ means the Executive Secretary and all persons appointed for employment with the Secretariat and subject to its Staff Regulations, but does not include persons recruited locally and assigned to hourly rates of pay; and

m) ‘Expert’ means a person performing short term or temporary projects on behalf of the Secretariat or participating in the work of or performing a mission on behalf of the Secretariat, without necessarily receiving remuneration from the Secretariat, but does not include staff members.
ARTICLE 2. SUPPRESSED.

ARTICLE 3. LEGAL CAPACITY

The Secretariat3 has full legal personality and capacity to perform its functions.  It has, in particular, the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property, and to institute and be a party to legal proceedings .

ARTICLE 4. HEADQUARTERS

1. The Headquarters shall be inviolable and shall be under the full authority of the Secretariat.

2. The Government shall provide premises  ( at a nominal rent),  in the City of Buenos Aires, Argentine Republic, suitable as the Secretariat’s headquarters.

3. The Government shall take all appropriate steps to protect the Headquarters against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any impairment of its dignity.

4. The Government shall arrange for the Headquarters to be supplied by the appropriate authorities with available public services, such as electricity, water, sewage, gas, mail, telephone, telegraph, drainage, garbage collection and fire protection, on terms no less favourable than those enjoyed by the Government.

5. Through the ATCM, the Secretariat shall make known to the Government the need for any changes to the location or extent of its permanent premises or archives and of any temporary occupation of premises for the performance of its official activities.  Where any premises other than those arranged under Article 4(2) of this Agreement are used or occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities, such premises shall, with the concurrence of the Government, be accorded the status of official premises of the Secretariat.  Where any permanent or temporary changes are made to the premises of the Secretariat in accordance with this paragraph, any additional premises occupied by the Secretariat shall not necessarily be provided by the Government at nominal rent.

6. Without prejudice to the terms of this Agreement, the Secretariat shall not permit the Headquarters to become a refuge from justice for persons avoiding arrest or service of legal process or against whom an order of extradition or deportation has been issued.4

7. The appropriate authorities may enter the Headquarters to carry out their duties only with the consent of the Executive Secretary and under the conditions agreed by him/her. The Executive Secretary’s consent shall be deemed to have been given in the case of fire or other occurrence which may require immediate protective action.5






ARTICLE 5.  IMMUNITIES 

1. Subject to what is provided for in the Treaty, the Environmental Protocol, or this Agreement, the activities of the Secretariat in Argentina shall be governed by the Argentine domestic law consistent with International Law
2. Within the scope of its official activities the [ATCM and its Secretariat6 and its property, premises and assets shall have immunity of jurisdiction in judicial and administrative proceedings except:

    a) to the extent that the Secretariat expressly waives such immunity in each particular case;

    b) in respect of any contract for the supply of goods or services and any loan or other transaction for the provision of finance and any guarantee or indemnity in respect of any such transaction or of any other financial obligation;

    c) in respect of a civil action by a third party for death, damage or personal injury arising from an accident caused by a motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Secretariat;

    d) in respect of a motor vehicle offence involving a motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Secretariat;

    e) in the event of a claim for salaries, wages or other emoluments owed by the Secretariat;

    f) in respect of a counter-claim directly connected with proceedings initiated by the Secretariat; 

    g) in respect of claims made on real estate situated on Argentine territory;

    h) in respect of actions based on the Secretariat’s as heir or beneficiary of property situated on Argentine territory.

i) in respect of the enforcement of an arbitration award made under Article 20(3) or 24 of this Agreement. 


3. The Secretariat’s 7 property, premises and assets, wherever situated, shall have immunity from any form of restrictions or controls such as requisition, confiscation, expropriation or attachment.  They shall also be immune from any form of administrative or judicial constraint provided that motor vehicles belonging to or operated on behalf of the Secretariat shall not be immune from administrative or judicial constraint when temporarily necessary in connection with the prevention of, and investigation into, accidents involving such motor vehicles.




ARTICLE 6. ARCHIVES

The archives kept by the Secretariat  shall be inviolable wherever they are.


ARTICLE 7. LOGO AND EMBLEM

The Secretariat shall be entitled to display the Treaty flag and emblem  on the premises and means of transport of the Secretariat and of the Executive Secretary.8


ARTICLE 8. EXEMPTION FROM DIRECT TAXES

Within the scope of its official activities, the Secretariat, its property, premises and assets, and its income (including contributions made to the Secretariat as the result of any agreement arrived at by the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty) shall be exempt from all direct taxes including income tax, capital gains tax and all State taxes.  The Secretariat shall be exempt from municipal taxes with the exception of those which constitute payment for specific services rendered in accordance with Article 4(4)of this Agreement.


ARTICLE 9. EXEMPTION FROM CUSTOMS AND EXCISE DUTIES AND VALUE ADDED TAX

1. The ATCM and the property used by the Secretariat  necessary for  its official activities ( including the ATCM publications, motor vehicles and items for official entertaiment purposes) shall be exempt from all Customs and Excise Duties.

2. The Secretariat shall be exempt from the value added tax, or other similar taxes, for  services and goods , including publications and other information material, motor vehicles and items for official entertainment purposes, if the goods so purchased by the Secretariat are necessary for its official use.


ARTICLE 10. EXEMPTION FROM RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS

Goods imported or exported for9the official activities of the Secretariat shall be exempt from prohibitions and restrictions applicable to such goods on grounds of national origin.


ARTICLE 11. RE-SALE

Goods which have been acquired or imported by theSecretariat to which exemptions under Article 9 of this Agreement apply and goods acquired or imported by the Executive Secretary or other staff members to which the exemptions under Article 16 or Article 17 of this Agreement apply, shall not be given away, sold, lent, hired out or otherwise disposed of in Argentina, except under conditions agreed in advance with the Government.


ARTICLE 12. CURRENCY AND EXCHANGE

The Secretariat shall be exempt from currency and exchange restrictions, including those in respect of funds, currency and securities received, acquired, held or disposed of.  The Secretariat may also operate without restrictions bank or other accounts for its official use in any currency, and have them transferred freely within Argentina or to any other country.


ARTICLE 13. COMMUNICATIONS

1. With regard to its official communications and the transfer of all its documents, the Secretariat shall enjoy treatment not less favourable than that generally accorded by the Government to any other government, including the latter´s diplomatic mission, in the matter of priorities, rates and taxes on mails and all forms of telecommunications.

2. The Secretariat may employ all appropriate means of communication, including messages in code or cipher.  The Government shall not impose any restriction on the official communications of the Secretariat or on the circulation of its publications.

3. The Secretariat may install and use radio transmitters only with the consent of the Government.

4. Official correspondence and other official communications of the Secretariat are not subject to censorship and will enjoy all the guarantees established by the National Constitution and the Argentine legislation.


ARTICLE 14. PUBLICATIONS

The importation and exportation of the Secretariat’s publications and other information material imported or exported by the Secretariat within the scope of its official activities shall not be restricted in any way.


ARTICLE 15. REPRESENTATIVES10 IN ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS11 

1. Representatives of the Parties shall enjoy, while exercising their functions in Argentina, or while travelling in the exercise of their functions in Argentina, the privileges and immunities existing for diplomatic officials and their family members as established in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, signed on April 18, 1961.

2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be applicable irrespective of the relations existing between the governments which the persons referred to represent and the Argentine Government, and are without prejudice to any additional immunities to which such persons may be entitled.

3. The privileges and immunities described in paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be accorded to any representative of the Government or to any Argentine or foreign citizen with permanent residence in the Argentine Republic.

4. The Government shall treat representatives with all due respect and shall take all necessary measures to prevent encroachment on their person, freedom and dignity.  Where it appears that an offence may have been committed against a representative, steps shall be taken in accordance with Argentine legal proceedings to investigate the matter and to ensure that appropriate action is taken with respect to the prosecution of the alleged offender.


ARTICLE 16. EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

In addition to the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities provided for in Article 17 of this Agreement, the Executive Secretary, unless he/she is an Argentine citizen or a permanent resident in Argentina, shall enjoy the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities to which a diplomatic agent  in the Argentine Republic is entitled, including privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities in respect of a spouse and dependent children under the age of eighteen years.


ARTICLE 17. STAFF MEMBERS

Staff members of the Secretariat12:

    a) shall have, even after the termination of their service with the Secretariat, immunity from suit and other legal process in respect of acts and things done by them in the exercise of their official functions, including words written or spoken.  This wouls also apply to the Executive Secretary without regard to his nationality or permanent residence; 

    b) the immunity set out in the previosu paragraph shall not, however, apply in the case of a motor vehicle offence committed by such a staff member or the Executive Secretary nor in the case of civil or administrative proceedings arising out of death, damage or personal injury caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by him or her;

c) shall be exempt from any obligations in respect of military service and all other kinds of mandatory service, unless they are Argentine citizens or permanent residents in the Argentine Republic

d) shall be exempt from the application of laws relating to the registration of aliens and immigration; the spouse and dependent children under the age of eighteen years shall enjoy the same exemptions;

e) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, they shall be accorded the same exemption from currency and exchange restrictions as is accorded to an official of comparable rank from an international agency in the Argentine Republic,

f) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, they  shall when taking up their post in the Argentine Republic for the first time, be exempt from customs duties and other such charges (except payments for services) in respect of import of furniture, motor vehicles and other personal effects in their ownership or possession or already ordered by them and intended for their personal use or for their establishment; such goods shall be imported within six months of a staff member’s first entry into the Argentine Republic but in exceptional circumstances an extension of this period shall be granted by the Government; goods which have been acquired or imported by staff members and to which exemptions under this sub‑paragraph apply shall not be given away, sold, lent, hired out, or otherwise disposed of except under conditions agreed in advance with the Government; furniture and personal effects may be exported free of duties when leaving the Argentine Republic on the termination of the official functions of the staff member;

g) shall be exempt from all taxes on income received from the Secretariat. This exemption shall not apply to staff members who are residents in the Argentine Republic for services rendered in Argentina, and

h) shall have similar repatriation facilities, including such facilities in respect of a spouse and dependent relatives, as are accorded to representatives of international agencies in times of international crisis.

i) Shall have personal inviolability with respect to any form of personal arrest or detention or seizure of their personal baggage13





ARTICLE 18. EXPERTS

1. In the exercise of their functions experts shall enjoy the following privileges and immunities to the extent necessary for the carrying out of their functions, including while travelling in Argentina to that effect:

    a) immunity from judicical process  in judicial and administrative proceedings in respect of acts and things done in the exercise of their official functions, including words written or spoken; this immunity shall not, however, apply in the case of a motor vehicle offence committed by such a staff member, nor in the case of civil or administrative proceedings arising out of death, damage or personal injury caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by him/her; such immunity shall continue after the expert´s function in relation to the Secretariat have ceased 

    b) inviolability for all their official papers and documents;

    c) unless they are citizens of or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic, the same exemption from currency and exchange restrictions as is accorded to a representative of a foreign Government on a temporary mission in Argentina on behalf of that Government; and

    d) unless they are citizens of or permanent residents of the Argentine Republic, immunity from personal arrest and detention and from attachment of personal luggage except when found committing, attempting to commit or just having committed a criminal offence14


ARTICLE 19. VISAS

1. All persons having official business with the Secretariat, namely (a) representatives of the Parties (and their spouses and dependant children under the age of eighteen),  (b) staff members of the Secretariat (and their spouses and dependent children under the age of eighteen), and c) the experts referred to in article 18 shall have the right of entry into and exit from the Argentine Republic.

2. The Government shall take all measures necessary to facilitate the entry into the Argentine territory, the sojourn on that territory and the exit therefrom of all persons mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Visas, where required, shall be granted without wait or delay, and without fee, on production of a certificate that the applicant is a person described in the preceding paragraph. In addition, the Argentine Government will facilitate for such persons speedy travel within the territory of the Argentine Republic.


ARTICLE 20. OBJECTIVE OF PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES

(1) Privileges and Immunities provided for in this Agreement are granted to ensure the unimpeded functioning of the ATCM and the Secretariat and the complete independence of the persons to whom they are accorded. They are not granted for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. 

(2) Such privileges and immunities may be waived:

(a) In the case of the Executive Secretary, his or her spouse and dependent children under 18 years, by the ATCM,

(b) In the case of staff members, their spouses and dependent children under the age of 18 years, by the Executive Secretary, 

(c) In the case of Representatives, by the State Party represented;
And there is a duty to do so in any particular case where the privileges and immunities would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the purpose for which they are accorded.15


ARTICLE  21. COOPERATION

The Secretariat shall coopere fully at all times with the appropriate authorities in order to prevent any abuse of the privileges, immunities and facilities provided for in this Agreement.  The Government reserves its sovereign right to take reasonable measures to preserve security.  Nothing in this Agreement prevents the application of  laws necessary  for health and quarantine or, in respect to the Secretariat and its officials, laws relating to public order. 


ARTICLE 22. NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS. IDENTITY CARDS

1 The Secretariat shall notify the Government when a staff member takes up or relinquishes his or her post or when an expert starts or finishes a project or mission.

2. The Secretariat shall twice a year send to the Government a list of all experts and staff members, their spouses and dependent children under the age of eighteen years accompanying them in the Argentine Republic. In each case the Secretariat shall indicate whether such persons are Argentine citizens or permanently resident in the Argentine Republic.

3. The Government shall issue to all staff members and experts as soon as practicable after notification of their appointment, a card bearing the photograph of the holder and identifying him/her as a staff member or expert as the case may be.  This card shall be accepted by the appropriate authorities as evidence of identity and appointment.  The Secretariat shall return the card to the Government when the staff member or expert relinquishes his/her duties.  The spouse and dependent children under the age of eighteen years of staff members shall also be issued with an identity card, which shall be returned to the Government when the staff member relinquishes his/her duties.


ARTICLE 22 BIS CONSULTATION

The Government and the Secretariat16 shall consult at the request of either of them concerning matters arising under this Agreement.


ARTICLE 23. AMENDMENT

This Agreement may be amended by agreement between the Government and the ATCM.


ARTICLE 24. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES17 

Any dispute between the Government and the Secretariat18 concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement or any question affecting the relations between the Government and the Secretariat19 which is not settled by consultation or negotiation or by some other mutually acceptable method shall be referred to an arbitral tribunal according to the following rules: 
1.	The arbitral tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators who shall be appointed as follows:
a)	The Party commencing proceedings shall communicate the name of an arbitrator to the other Party which, in turn, within a period of forty days following such notification, shall communicate the name of the second arbitrator. The Parties shall, within a period of sixty days following the appointment of the second arbitrator, who shall not be a national of either Party and shall not be of the same nationality as either of the first two arbitrators. The third arbitrator shall preside over the tribunal;
b)	If the second arbitrator has not been appointed within the prescribed period, or if the Parties have not reached agreement within the prescribed period on the appointment of the third arbitrator, that arbitrator shall be appointed, at the request of either Party, by the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, fron among persons of international standing not having the nationality of a State which is a Party to this Agreement.
2.	The arbitral tribunal shall decide where its headquarters will be located and shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
3.	The award of the tribunal shall be made by a majority of its members, who may not abstain from voting.
4.	Any Contracting Party which is not a Party to the dispute may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the arbitral tribunal.
5.	The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding on all Parties to the dispute and on any Party which intervenes in the proceedings and shall be complied with without delay. The arbitral tribunal shall interpret the award at the request of one of the Parties to the dispute or of any intervening Party.
6.	Unless the arbitral tribunal determines otherwise because of the particular circumstances of the case, the expenses of the tribunal, including the remuneration of its members, shall be borne by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.

ARTICLE 25. ENTRY INTO FORCE AND TERMINATION. 

This Agreement shall enter into force on the date when the Government notifies to the depositary Government of the Treaty that all constitutional requirements to that effect have been met.

This Agreement may be terminated by a joint decision of the Argentine Republic and the ATCM.  In the event of the Headquarters being moved from Argentina, this Agreement shall, after a period reasonable required for such transfer and the disposal of the property of the Secretariat in Argentina, cease to be in force.  In either event, the date of which the Agreement terminates shall be confirmed by an exchange of notes between the Government and the Secretariat.

DONE in Buenos Aires, on ...................... in two original copies in the Spanish and English20 languages, both being equally authentic.


























ANNEX 4
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement:

a)	´Antarctic Treaty´ (The Treaty) means the Antarctic Treaty signed in Washington. on December 1, 1959;

b)	‘Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) refers collectively to the Parties which meet pursuant to Article IX of the Treaty.

c)	‘Appropriate authorities’ means the national, provincial, or local authorities of the Argentine Republic in accordance with the laws of the Argentine Republic:

d)	‘archives’ means ah correspondence, documents, manuscripts. photographs. Computer data storage, films, recordings and any other records, in paper. electronic or any other form, belonging to or held by the Secretariat;

e)	‘Committee for the Environmental Protection’ (CEP) means the Committee established under Article 11 of the Protocol;

f)	‘Delegates’ means Representatives. Alternate Representatives. Advisers and an~ other persons who represent the Parties at meetings of the ATCM or at any meeting held under its auspices;

g)	‘Executive Secretary’ means the Executive Secretary appointed by the ATCM to head the Secretariat according to the instrument establishing the Secretariat;

h)	‘Expert’ means a person performing short term or temporary projects en behalf of the Secretariat or participating in the work of or performing a mission on behalf of the Secretariat. without necessarily receiving remuneration from the Secretariat, hut docs not include staff members.

i)	´Government’ means the Government of the Argentine Republic:

j)	Headquarters means premises of the Secretariat including the buildings or parts el buildings. and the land ancillary thereto. irrespective of ownership. occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities2:

k)	´Officia1 Activities’ means all activities undertaken pursuant to the Treaty and the Protocol including the Secretariat’ s administrative activities;

1 AUSTRALIA proposes to add a definition of “serious offence’ (similarly to article 1 (n) of CCAMLR HQ Agreement) which would read:
“An offence under any law of Argentina for which a person convicted would be liable on a first conviction to imprisonment for a period of at least five years”.
The only reference to serious offence” in the draft Agreement  was made in article 18.d) As the concept of “serious offence” does not exist in the Argentine Criminal Code, article 18 d) was amended to read “criminal offence” (delito penal in Spanish).With such an amendment, the proposed definition becomes unnecessary.

2 SWEDEN: to be discussed further.
The UK suggests to amend the definition of ‘headquarters’ in the light of what was suggested in relation to the nature of the Secretariat (see note 1, page 1 Annex 3). The proposed definition reads as follows:
““Headquarters” means the premises of the ATCM, occupied by the Secretariat for the performance of its official activities”.


1)	‘Parties’ means State Parties to the Antarctic Treaty;

m)	‘Protocol’ means the Protocol en Environmental Protection to the Antarctic ‘Treaty, adopted at Madrid en 4 October 1991;

n)	‘Secretariat’ means the Permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;

o)	‘Staff member’ means the Executive Secretary and all persons appointed for employment with the Secretariat and subject to its Staff Regulations, but does not include persons recruited locally and assigned to hourly rates of pay.









