XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-005
Agenda Item: ATCM 4a
UNITED KINGDOM
Original : English

To be translated soon


Emblem of the Antarctic Treaty

Working Paper
Submitted by the United Kingdom

Rationale

Although traditionally the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have employed the well known blue and white silhouette of Antarctica design1 on, for example, the final reports of ATCMs and other reports, papers and publications, no formal status has been accorded to the design.

Article 7 of the draft Headquarters Agreement between the ATCM and the Argentine Republic and currently under discussion indicates that:

	“The Secretariat shall be entitled to display the Treaty flag and emblem
	  on the premises and means of transport of the Secretariat and of the
	  Executive Secretary.”

The attached draft Decision proposes that the design annexed to it should be adopted formally as the emblem of the Antarctic Treaty.

Parties in considering this matter may wish also to give consideration as to whether such an emblem should be protected, for example, through registration with national Patent Offices?


Emblem of the Antarctic Treaty

Draft Decision nn (2002):

Desiring to provide a clear identity to the work of the ATCM and its Secretariat;

Conscious that there exists a design traditionally employed by the Antarctic Treaty Parties to identify their work, but that the design has no formal status;

Believing that the adoption of such a design would enhance presentationally the work of the ATCM and its Secretariat when located in Buenos Aires; 

Decide:

1.  That the design annexed to this Decision shall constitute the formal emblem of the
Antarctic Treaty.  

2.  That it may be used by: -

    • The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;
    • The host state of the  ATCM in the period of preparation for and during a Consultative Meeting;
    • By any other Consultative Party when hosting other meetings under the auspices of the Antarctic Treaty or its Environmental Protocol.

    • [by others with the express permission of either the ATCM or the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat].

3.  That the design shall be shown on the official Reports of the ATCM and may be employed at the premises of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, on its official means of transport, as well as on stationery, electronic communications, reports, flags, signs, etc.





Annex.  Emblem of the Antarctic Treaty





