XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-032
Agenda Item: ATCM 4
CHILE
Original : English






THE   INQUIRY   PROCEDURE   OF   ARTICLE   18.


INTRODUCTION

    1. During the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Chile introduced Information Paper IP-27, in the context of Agenda Item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty) entitled “The Enquiry Procedure of Article 18). That document  referred to the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Madrid, October 1991) which contains a number of agreed understandings and commitments recorded by the Meeting, and  whose purpose is to facilitate the interpretation and application of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection and of its Annexes.   

    2. Among these, the Meeting agreed, with reference to Article 18, that an Inquiry Procedure  would be elaborated in order to facilitate the solution of controversies with regard to the interpretation and application of Article 3, regarding activities undertaken or planned to be undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty Area..

    3. In order to fully grasp the importance of this commitment, which remains unfulfilled, it is indispensable to understand as well the centrality of Article 3. The norm in question contains, in addition to certain fundamental environmental principles, the basic tenets of a conduct, planned and conducted with the intent of avoiding certain adverse effects and promoting others that may be considered beneficial to the global, comprehensive and systematic environmental protection envisaged by the Protocol and its Annexes.

    4. Firm obligations such as those contained in Articles 7, 8 and 15, or in the relevant provisions of Annexes I to V,   and Article 13, which develops a general framework for compliance, may all be subject to the full dispute settlement regime. A Liability Annex would allow for dispute settlement either under Article 19, or otherwise a special regime which might be established for adjudications concerning issues not involving States and other more complex matters. It is rather difficult to ascertain to what extent Articles 6 (Cooperation) or Article 14 (Inspection) given their very special nature, are pliable to arbitration .  

    5. Both the provisions of the Protocol and the mandate contained in the Madrid Final Act clearly point to a “soft” procedure for any issue arising between Parties to the Protocol with regard to the interpretation or application of its Article 3. The additional element of the distinct treatment awarded to Liability and to the Environmental Principles of Article 3, reinforces this interpretation. The Madrid Meeting decided that an Annex on Liability, including liability for damage to the environment, could be negotiated. Simultaneously, it also decided that no Annex would be elaborated to make more precise and enforceable as legal obligations the principles contained in Article 3, but that one of the procedures mentioned by Article 18, should be developed by the Parties to the Protocol as a formal inquiry procedure.

    6. Chile has suggested that this unfinished assignment to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol Parties should be undertaken and, pursuant to some intersessional consultations, now proposes that the XXVth ATCM be requested to set up a Working Group tasked with the elaboration of the above mentioned Inquiry Prtocedure and approve its terms of reference. Further suggestions are outlined  to that end in this paper.

THE VALUE OF INQUIRY IN INTERNATIONAL DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

    7. “Inquiry”, as a term of art conveys two distinct but related senses. In the broader sense it refers to the process that is performed whenever a court or other body endeavours to resolve a disputed issue of fact. It is then a major component of other means of dispute settlement, such as conciliation. But inquiry in the context of article 18, and the mandate of the Madrid Final Act, is obviously something different. It is a specific institutional arrangement which States may select in preference to arbitration because they desire to have some disputed issue independently investigated by a commission or other body rather than judicially settled by a court.

    8. Therefore, the mandate in the Final Act, which refers to the elaboration of an inquiry procedure, also draws us into the institutional profile  of this legal institution within the domain of  international dispute settlement since it was introduced by the 1899 Hague Convention. An inquiry procedure must necessarily be performed by an Inquiry Commission, Committee or other body designed to that end.

    9. In the sequence of dispute settlement instrumentalities, inquiry goes beyond negotiation and stops short of conciliation, but many treaties contain provisions associating both options and collective bodies created to perform monitoring functions and to search for amicable solutions are often endowed with a mixed fact-finding and conciliatory capacity.

    10.  When a disagreement arises between States on some issue of fact, law or policy, bilateral negotiation is the standard procedure. However, if the controversy concerns rights and obligations of the respective Parties within a multilateral framework, the procedure must be multilateral in character and duly take into account the interests of all Parties within such multilateral framework. Negotiation must proceed through multilateral channels. Nevertheless, if the contentious matter has already crystallized into a controversy, multilateral negotiation, even if assisted by good offices or mediation, cannot be regarded by itself as a sufficient or adequate means of resolving such disputes.

    11. Clearly Article 18 leaves  the iniciative to the Parties  in a controversy the choice of any of the “soft” means of dispute settlement mentioned in that provision. However, the XI Special Consultative Meeting decided that if the issue concerns either the interpretation or the application of Article 3, such matters should be addressed by the means of inquiry, and that the Consultative Parties should develop a standard procedure to uniformly deal with all cases related to Article 3.

    12.  Explanatory reasons for this decision are less obvious. The use of a “soft approach” to dispute settlement in international environmental law disputes is a recognized practice. Soft settlement, when it leads to the development of “soft law” standards can channel negotiations and lead to a peaceful and durable adjustment. A number of treaties have established bodies for collecting informations, reporting, carrying inspections of a party performance, or for  inquiry, conciliation and monitoring for compliance. There is, however, an open question concerning the capabilities of inquiry, in the classic pattern of inquiry commissions, to effectively generate standards equivalent to “soft law”.

    13. Such doubts concern the record of commissions of inquiry set up under  the 1899 Hague Convention (i.e. The Dogger Bank Inquiry in 1904) and particularly the inquiries held under the 1907 Hague Convention (the Tavignano, the Tiger, the Tubantia, and the Red Crusader cases). Relative success of these commissions as well as those set up by the League of Nations ( Aaland Islands and Mosul) and the United Nations (Seychelles, 1982) and (Use of chemical weapons during the Irak-Iran war, 1984) and afterwards the Specialized Agencies, specially ILO and ICAO, has been based on a combination of circumstances: in most cases the dispute is largely one of fact, the Parties can agree to an authoritative version of events, and the decision does not generate a strong precedent.



PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS

14.If the inquiry procedure does not produce generally accepted “Standards” and therefore does not generate the equivalent to a “soft law” complementary interpretation, furthering uniform application of the Principles and other contents of Article 3, the objectives pursued by SATCM XI would not be attained. While its is true that procedures included in Article 18 are not necessarily intended to produce or generate such standards and soft law, in the very special circumstance of an adjudication affecting the contents of Article 3, such performance should be considered unsatisfactory, in the light of the objectives which the Parties contemplated in the Madrid Final Act.

15. On the other hand, there is imperatively a need to comply with the mandate of the Madrid Final Act; to assist in solving and still better in preventing disputes arising on the interpretation and application of Article 3; in promoting the Principles contained in Article 3; and, last but not least, in contributing to the search for consensus solutions to some of the more complex issues of  liability for damage to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, as well as i.a. negotiable compensation, unrepaired damage, or damage to ecosystems beyond 60° S.

16.One possible approach, trying to bridge the gap between  mere fact-finding and the building-up of “standards” and precedents, is to regard the inquiry procedure to be established by the Consultative Parties as a more ecclectic and  developed method, incorporating some ingredients of conciliation and, possibly, some broad guidance and recommendations concerning the operation of an Antarctic Inquiry Commission, its relation to the Antarctic Treaty System and the support which the Secretariat would provide to assist the Commission.

17. In this context, one key element remains the fact-finding exercise that is the essence of inquiry. The institutional component (a commission of inquiry, either on a permanent or an ad-hoc basis) is historically also an essential part of the inquiry procedure.  Mention has been made of conciliation (a procedure established for the first time in a treaty between Sweden and Chile in 1920). The assumption in this context is that, beyond the impartial examination of the dispute, the Inquiry Commission should also attempt to define the terms of settlement susceptible of being accepted by the Parties and of constituting a contribution to the interpretation and application of Article 3, in a manner consistent with its provisions and gathering sufficient support for its acceptance by the Consultative Meeting.

18. At this stage, it is suggested that the Consultative Meeting consider establishing a Working Group tasked with defining the precise nature of the inquiry procedure, the requirement for any commission or committee of inquiry and its relationship to the ATS (possibly a subsidiary body of the CEP but which could also continue for the time being as a working or task force of the ATCM) as well as its terms of reference.
 
    



  
