Page 1 of 12 
 
XXV ATCM 
Working Paper WP-031 rev. 1 
Agenda Item: CEP 6 
SCAR 
Original : English 
 
 
SCOPING THE DATA FOR A 
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT 
 
 
Introduction 
1. 
At XXI ATCM SCAR presented WP 19 that suggested a possible structure for a State 
of the Antarctic Environment Report.  In taking forward the discussions arising from 
this the CEP established an Inter-sessional Open-ended Contact Group, co-ordinated by 
Sweden, to examine the arguments for such a report and the elements that needed to be 
included. 
2. 
The Group reported at CEP II (XXIII ATCM) listing five objectives: 
a. provide a current status of the Antarctic environment; summarize current scientific 
knowledge of the environment, identifying major areas of uncertainty and gaps in 
knowledge, draw on reviews/audits and monitoring programmes; 
b. identify and document principal pressures and their consequences (past, present and 
possible future) on the Antarctic environment including threats from local, regional 
and global activities; 
c. provide the basis for identifying a core set of key environmental indicators for the 
Antarctic; 
d. identify significant trends in the Antarctic environment reflected in the information 
and key data sets compiled in a & b; 
e. provide recommendations for the actions to address any significant environmental 
issues identified in the report, including monitoring programmes, scientific 
research, guidelines and international agreements. 
3. 
In the SCAR response (XXIII ATCM / WP 6) SCAR agreed with the five objectives; 
concluded that such an approach would have both scientific value as well as meeting 
Protocol and international requirements; suggested that the audience should be decision 
and policy makers (including governments and the CEP); and asserted that the Polar 
Front was the most scientifically acceptable boundary.  Noting that any continent-wide 
synthesis was a major undertaking that would require adequate resourcing, SCAR 
offered to prepare a scoping study that would: 
a. describe the key environmental variables that should be considered in assessing the 
status of the Antarctic environment; 
b. identify past and future threats to the environment; 
c. indicate how these link to state of the environment reports for other parts of the 
world. 
Page 2 of 12 
4. 
CCAMLR, COMNAP and WMO offered to lend support as required.  SCAR organized 
a special discussion workshop at XXVI SCAR in Tokyo to consider some of the diverse 
scientific elements and has consulted with a number of experts around the world. 
5. 
This paper provides only an initial qualitative assessment of the three elements 
requested as any attempt to investigate the data sources more deeply or to provide 
consideration of trends is considered beyond the scoping exercise and would require 
significant resource commitment.  No such resources have been made available. 
6. 
In a paper to XXIII ATCM (IP 1) New Zealand outlined its decision to independently 
prepare a State of the Environment Report for the Ross Sea Region as a valuable step 
towards a continent-wide report.  This report was published in November 2001 and its 
contents have provided a significant element in the preparation of this Scoping Paper. 
 
The key environmental variables 
7. 
In its original paper SCAR considered that the present status of the environment could 
be adequately described under three major headings: terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems 
(including ice shelves and ice sheets), marine systems (including sea ice) and the 
atmosphere.  This was the framework also adopted by New Zealand. 
8. 
It is essential to recognize that the SAER is not intended to be a complete description of 
everything that is known about the Antarctic environment but rather an informed 
selection of those variables that would provide information for management purposes.  
Since this report would be part of a global assessment some of the elements are likely to 
have much more than regional significance, providing important baseline data for 
trends of global significance. 
9. 
SCAR has made an initial selection for the sections that follow.  The paper briefly 
describes the variables and sketches out the extent of knowledge in the fields relevant to 
understanding both the regional and global elements of Antarctica. 
Terrestrial and freshwater systems 
10. Ice shelves.  The stability of the ice shelves fringing Antarctica is of importance both as 
valuable indicators of coastal warming and the potential effects that recession and loss 
could have on the flow of land-based ice into the sea.  In terms of the data available 
major change has been confined so far to ice shelves around the Antarctic Peninsula.  
Loss of the Wordie Ice Shelf over a period of 40 years, has been followed more 
recently by first the loss of Larsen A Ice Shelf and now the loss of Larsen B Ice Shelf in 
2002.  Sediment cores from beneath the Larsen ice shelves have shown that such a 
recession has not occurred for at least 5,000 years.  As yet there are no clear data 
showing any major changes in the extent of the major shelves in the Ross and Weddell 
seas.  Satellite monitoring of the continent will provide a continuing opportunity to 
identify trends in this variable. 
11. Ice sheets.  In a world increasingly concerned with the effects of global change the 
Antarctic can make several unique contributions to understanding trends.  Ice sheets 
contain records of past environmental events and thus provide a record of long-term 
changes in atmospheric gases, major events such as volcanic eruptions and mean 
atmospheric temperature.  From the SAER point of view their importance lies both in 
the reconstruction of palaeoclimatic patterns as well as more immediate concerns about 
the stability and mass balance of the ice sheet.  The palaeoclimatic time scale currently 
Page 3 of 12 
available is 480,000 years from the Vostok core, but the forthcoming analyses on the 
Dome C core, when drilling is complete, should extend the time series back more than 
750,000 years.  Temporal accuracy varies with depth.  Mean temperature data from 
oxygen isotope proxies published so far show previous warming and cooling events.  
These data need to be supplemented more fully with deep cores from elsewhere in East 
Antarctica as well as shallow cores from a wider range of sites to provide a continent-
wide picture of the degree of variability.  The historical atmospheric composition is 
derived from gas extracted from bubbles in the core and provides data on carbon 
dioxide and methane.  Published data show concordance between carbon dioxide 
concentrations and changes in global mean temperature, with high concentrations 
coinciding with warm periods.  Assumptions underlying the representativeness of the 
gases in these bubbles remain to be rigorously tested as the processes of gas exchange 
at the snow surface and the inclusion of gases in the bubbles are inadequately 
understood. 
12. Glaciers and ice sheets on the sub-Antarctic islands all show significant recession over 
the past 50 years, a trend also demonstrated on the maritime Antarctic islands in the 
South Orkney and the South Shetland islands for which data are available. 
13. Great efforts have been made to provide an accurate mass balance for the Antarctic ice 
sheet, as relatively minor changes in its volume will have a significant effect on global 
sea level.  The recent compilation by SCAR (BEDMAP) of all available data for sub-
ice topography has provided an improved baseline against which to measure ice depth 
but has also demonstrated the inequality of coverage for the more remote parts of the 
continent.  Improved height measurements for the ice sheet are now possible from 
satellite monitoring so that the estimates of volume changes should steadily improve. 
14. Ice-free areas.  The ice-free areas of the Antarctic account for only 0.35% of the area of 
the continent and islands.  However, since they provide the breeding areas for many 
animals, the location of the terrestrial ecosystems and the sites for many of the 
scientific research stations they assume an importance much greater than their area 
would suggest.  Damage to these areas can have serious consequences for the biota.  
Most of the snow-free areas have now been at least initially surveyed and sampled by 
biologists.  The use of molecular tools has also begun to suggest the origin of the flora 
and provide an indication about the rate of evolutionary change in some species.  This 
should allow the more accurate identification of the rate of natural and anthropogenic 
introductions into the Antarctic area.  Data for micro-invertebrates and for microbial 
groups are significantly incomplete for most areas making it difficult to be certain 
which species are native and which are introduced.  Changes in the extent of plant 
communities and the increasing ability of particular species to reproduce sexually has 
been taken as an indicator of microclimatic improvements and a proxy for localized 
climate change, especially in the Antarctic Peninsula. The data on birds, in terms of 
distribution and populations trends, are the best and most detailed.  The work of the 
SCAR Bird Biology Subcommittee has provided a continent-wide synthesis of all 
available data which provides a useful monitoring tool for change – although the 
significance of the changes is limited by the accuracy of the census data and a clear 
understanding of the way in which ecosystem variables affect individuals and 
populations. 
15. Lakes and streams.  Lakes, especially those in the maritime Antarctic islands and the 
oasis areas of the continent, have been subject to considerable research.  The diversity 
of their flora and fauna is now beginning to be adequately established, especially with 
Page 4 of 12 
the increasing use of molecular tools.  Their value for determining environmental 
change is that time series of environmental measurements, as at Signy Island, can 
provide detailed resolution of the effects of short-term climate change whilst the 
sediments provide historical records of previous local environments for a period of up 
to 10,000 years.  The sediments are effectively an integrated measurement of change 
within the catchment of a particular lake, so that comparison of the sediments from 
many lakes can provide a detailed insight into the variability of change with locale.  
Monitoring of lakes can also provide proxy indicators of the effects of climate change 
on species whose principal environment is elsewhere, for example in the changes in fur 
seal populations in the South Orkney Islands over a period of hundreds of years.  Data 
on stream flow and the persistence of ice on the lakes have also provided indications of 
localized climate change but these are limited to very few sites of which the most 
significant are the Signy Island lakes, some lakes and the Onyx River in the McMurdo 
Dry Valleys. 
Marine systems 
16. Physical oceanography.  The Southern Ocean comprises at least 10% of the world’s 
oceans and, since it connects them all, has a major effect on their physical and 
biological characteristics.  Its most obvious major feature is the Antarctic Circumpolar 
Current.  Bounded to the north by the Polar Front the water is cold, rich in oxygen and 
in parts rich in nutrients.  The Antarctic Bottom Water, formed by the melting of ice at 
the base of the Filchner and Ronne ice shelves in the Weddell Sea, provides a major 
input into the global thermohaline circulation and is a key element in energy and 
nutrient transport between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.  Major international studies 
such as the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC), Global Ocean Data 
Assimilation (GODAE), World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), and  Southern 
Ocean Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (SO-JGOFS) will in due course provide 
improved models for describing many of the processes in the Southern Ocean and link 
the Southern Ocean more closely into world circulation patterns. 
17. Sea ice.  The sea ice that surrounds Antarctica varies from c. 4 million km2 in summer 
to c. 20 million km2 in winter and represents one of the largest and most dynamic 
ecosystems on Earth.  Data on its extent and the changes in that extent were derived 
initially from ship reconnaissance but since 1972 have been acquired by increasingly 
sophisticated satellite sensors.  The changes in sea ice affect both the climatic patterns 
in the Southern Hemisphere and the whole functionality of the Southern Ocean 
ecosystem.  Investigations into the physics and biology of sea ice have demonstrated 
extremely complex and rapidly changing systems where our understanding of the 
linkages between the processes is still at an early stage.  Recent satellite studies have 
shown that the total extent of sea ice has increased by more than 1% a decade since 
1979.  However, in one area, the Bellinghausen Sea, the sea ice has decreased over the 
same period.  At present it would appear that the continued monitoring of trends in sea 
ice extent is likely to be a useful index of environmental change. 
18. Marine chemistry.  The concentrations of major nutrients are high in the Southern 
Ocean but for much of the area the phytoplankton concentrations are low.  The potential 
for greater rates of carbon fixation by phytoplankton is thought to exist and if so the 
Southern Ocean could prove a major sink for uptake of excess carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere.  However, it is possible that wind generated mixing takes the plankton too 
deep for photosynthesis and very low concentrations of micronutrients, especially iron, 
Page 5 of 12 
limit phytoplankton activity.  Better models of carbon pathways and usage are needed.  
Biogeochemistry of sulphur is also of considerable significance.  The production of 
dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) by phytoplankton is believed to be closely linked to 
precipitation since the DMSO provides nuclei around which water molecules can 
condense.  Initial studies indicate that the Southern Ocean phytoplankton may play an 
important role in this process. 
19. Pelagic marine ecosystems.  The Antarctic marine food web is distinct and different to 
that in other oceans.  The species of krill (Euphausia spp.) are the central element of the 
food chain and critical to higher predators including birds, seals, whales, and fish.  
Distribution of krill is patchy and varies between years, making it difficult to estimate 
the stock size.  Its life cycle is intimately linked to sea ice.  Fishing for krill thus has the 
potential to impact all higher levels of the marine food web.  The diversity in fish is 
limited to c.120 species, several of which are caught commercially, as are several of the 
squid species.  Whilst there are relatively good data on the biology of several of the 
commercially important species there is little or no information about many of the 
others.  Cooperative international surveys are beginning to provide more realistic 
estimates of the stock size of krill in some regions but linking these to population 
models is at an early stage.  Knox (1994) provided an overview and synthesis of 
available published data on all aspects of the Southern Ocean, both pelagic and benthic.   
20. If seals are considered as part of the pelagic ecosystem there are good data on life cycle 
and diet for several species, and there are some historical data on population numbers 
for specific localities so that trends are available, for example for both elephant seal and 
fur seal populations.  The recent international SCAR Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) 
programme will shortly provide the most detailed estimates so far for all Antarctic 
seals, including the Ross seal of which little is known.  Seals are protected under the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), but there has been no 
recent meeting of the Convention Parties to consider the present levels of seal stocks. 
21. Benthic marine ecosystems.  The biodiversity in benthic systems appears to be high, 
although the pattern of dominant groups and the speciation within the cold environment 
has produced a distinctly different range of communities to those in other oceans.  New 
species continue to be described every year and this is likely to continue as few areas 
have been examined in detail.  Recent work has suggested that these cold adapted 
species have very low tolerance for temperature change and that small changes in ocean 
temperature may produce dramatic effects.  Detailed investigation of several species of 
mollusc has indicated a potential for biomonitoring of heavy metals and hydrocarbons 
in the marine environment. 
Atmosphere 
22. Atmospheric dynamics.  Data on Antarctic climate are limited with almost all the 
longest data sets being less than 40 years.  The collation and validation of all these data, 
from both research stations and automatic weather stations, is at present being 
undertaken by SCAR to provide an international basis for analysing trends and patterns.  
A recent volume (King 2000) provides an excellent synthesis of data on Antarctic 
climate and provides listings of previous published literature.  At present the data 
indicate a complex picture with a significant degree of short term warming in the 
Antarctic Peninsula area, no change or cooling in some areas of East Antarctica and 
changes in precipitation that are linked to thickening of the ice sheet in some localities.  
The existing climate models are not able to reflect this pattern accurately. 
Page 6 of 12 
23. Atmospheric trace gases.  The changes in global concentrations of key atmospheric 
constituents have been monitored in the Antarctic since 1956.  Apart from the 
continuous data from South Pole Station there is an extensive bottle sampling system 
providing spot data from a wide range of other Antarctic sites.  Gases covered include 
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen oxides and CFCs.  These data have already been 
extensively used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
24. Radiation.  Ultra violet radiation is damaging to biological systems.  It is normally 
absorbed by the ozone in the outer atmosphere (stratosphere) but this is now known to 
be destroyed by man-made compounds.  Dobson measurements of total column ozone 
in the Antarctic began in 1956, supplemented initially by ozone sondes and now since 
1978 by data from the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer satellites.  In addition 
several research stations are measuring incident UV at various wavelengths using 
scanning spectroradiometers.  These daily data exist for the extent of ozone depletion in 
the outer atmosphere over the whole of the Southern Hemisphere and there are spot 
data for UV incident at ground level.  The size and the depth of the ozone “hole” vary 
annually resulting in considerable prediction difficulties.  The effects of the increased 
UV on Antarctic biota are under continuing research with some initial evidence that 
some species can make protective compounds that screen out the effects of UV.  
However, in some communities there appear to be changes in species composition as 
susceptible species are damaged by the increased UV. 
 
Past and future threats to the environment 
25. In its original paper SCAR divided the threats into five major groups: science and 
support activities, fishing, tourism, long range pollutants and cumulative pressures.  To 
these must also be added whaling and sealing.  The pollutants issue is not amenable to 
ATS management decisions as its origins are outside the Antarctic area yet it is a 
continuing threat to the integrity of the Antarctic ecosystem and needs to be included.  
The interaction between threats and the cumulative effects of individual threats are not 
dealt with here but will become of concern in any SAER as the linkages between 
various types of data are assessed.  Each of the other areas will be examined in turn to 
assess the extent of available data and the key areas for which data are missing. 
Science and support activities 
26. The longest-term local impact/threat to the environment has been the science and 
supporting logistic activities, mainly undertaken in the last 50 years, although there are 
some activities in the Antarctic Peninsula region that began earlier.  Although the 
impacts are almost entirely very localized they are widespread.  Scientific data are 
available for pollution associated with some stations (eg. McMurdo, Rothera, Terra 
Nova Bay) and for some major incidents such as the sinking of the Bahia Paraiso.  
ATCM information exchange requires all Consultative Parties to provide annually a 
range of details on their Antarctic activities.  Thus data exist already in those categories 
and could be collated to provide some information but in terms of calculating actual 
human impact there are few published data.  What are required for full evaluation are 
the records of numbers of people, locations of activities, types of activities and their 
duration.  From these can be calculated measures of impact on particular localities.  The 
only synthesis of human population data is that provided by Beltramino (1993) who 
gave the approximate figures for winter and summer populations at all stations between 
1904 and 1990.  He also gave the locations of all permanent and field stations he could 
Page 7 of 12 
trace, many of which have since been removed or destroyed.  No published data appear 
to exist on fuel consumption each season but COMNAP has compiled some indicative 
data for recent years.  It may be assumed that, until the advent of the Protocol, most 
waste generated by science and logistic activities was dumped in the Antarctic.  No 
accessible records appear to exist of the types and amounts of wastes disposed of in this 
way.  As far as transport is concerned there is no complete list of all the ships involved 
in supporting Antarctic activities but there are at least partial lists of the aircraft types 
and major vehicle types used in each season and some records of the flight paths and 
over-snow activities.  Wildlife disturbance is a feature of some types of research, either 
deliberately as when studies are undertaken on birds and seals, or inadvertently as 
collateral damage when logistic or non-biological research is undertaken.  Limited data 
are available on the effects of disturbance on birds (in particular by aircraft and station 
activities) and there are some observations on damage to terrestrial communities by 
both scientific sampling and logistic traverse.  There are few data on which to base any 
estimate of damage by ship activities but it would appear that damage from anchors and 
trawling of the seabed is minor compared with the natural damage inflicted by ice 
scour.  The recent investigation of marine acoustic impacts also suggests that this is not 
damaging.  Overall, there are few data on which to make assessments in this field. 
Fishing 
27. Whilst there was no regulation on the early commercial development of Antarctic 
fisheries the establishment of CCAMLR in 1980 has since provided an international 
mechanism both for collecting and synthesizing data on the fisheries and for managing 
and regulating the catches.  In terms of assessing the impacts on the environment of 
human activities there are better and more extensive data for fishing than almost any 
other activity.  CCAMLR has so far published 12 volumes of a Statistical Bulletin 
providing historical data on catch and effort for all reported catches of finfish and 
invertebrates within the Convention Area.  The CCAMLR Secretariat in Hobart 
maintains extensive databases on all aspects of the fisheries and publishes the journal 
CCAMLR Science as a source of new information and trends.  The CCAMLR Scientific 
Committee meets each year and publishes the scientific papers submitted for its 
consideration.  It also organizes an international monitoring system (CEMP) at a 
number of core sites using selected species of birds and marine mammals to assess the 
effects of fishing activities on higher predator populations.  Work is continuing on ways 
in which these annual ecosystem assessments could be parameterized to produce an 
index useful in fisheries management. 
28. Finfish.  Although some fish were caught as early as 1906 the commercial exploitation 
of finfish began in the late 1960s around South Georgia, moving south to the South 
Orkney Islands in the mid 1970s and off the coast of the continent by the early 1980s.  
Until the mid-1980s the fishery was entirely a trawl fishery but in the mid-1980s long-
lining was introduced.  Increasing use of this method for catching Patagonian toothfish 
has resulted in the incidental mortality of substantial numbers of albatrosses and petrels.  
Unregulated and unreported fishing is currently a major problem threatening both the 
future existence of key stocks of toothfish and the basis of CCAMLR management. 
29. Krill.  Commercial krill fishing began in 1972/73 mainly in the South Atlantic Ocean 
sector.  Peak catches were more than 500,000 tonnes in 1981–82 and have since 
declined to less than 100,000 tonnes.  Its potential for use in aquaculture feed and for 
biochemical products may cause increased interest in utilization. 
Page 8 of 12 
30. Squid.  Most of the squid fishing at present is outside the CCAMLR area although there 
is some interest in developing a winter fishery around South Georgia. 
Whaling and sealing 
31. The responsibility for management of whaling has lain with the International Whaling 
Commission (IWC) since 1946.  Detailed data on whale catches exist in IWC 
publications.  Since 1986 there has been a moratorium on commercial whaling, 
although there has been regular whaling by Japan under the scientific whaling 
exemption clause. 
32. Sealing began in 1778 at South Georgia initially for fur seals and later for elephant 
seals, and spread around the Antarctic.  There are few data on how many seals were 
taken but it appears to have reduced the populations of fur seals in particular to a very 
small number.  It became uneconomic to hunt seals in the latter half of the 19th century.  
The fur seal was formally protected at South Georgia in 1909 and in the early part of 
the 20th century licensed sealing for elephant seals began and lasted until 1964 on South 
Georgia under government control.  Detailed data exist for this period.  A trial Soviet 
sealing project took 4000 seals but this was not continued. 
Tourism 
33. Regular commercial tourism began in 1970 with the Linblad Explorer, principally 
around South Georgia and the Antarctic Peninsula.  This ship-borne tourism has 
expanded greatly since then and now includes increasing numbers of small yachts.  
Airborne tourists also now visit the continent each year.  Detailed data are available on 
tourism numbers and the sites visited, collated by NSF Office of Polar Programs and 
IAATO.  In addition some countries maintain more detailed tourism databases, place 
government observers on ships and all now require post-visit reports.  Monitoring of 
tourism impacts has been addressed in a number of ways and the most extensive studies 
have been those by Oceanites on the individual sites visited, together with a number of 
academic studies on the behaviour of passengers ashore and their management by the 
tourist companies. 
Long-range pollutants 
34. As long ago as 1969 the presence of pollutants derived from outside the Antarctic was 
observed in marine species.  Persistent organic pollutants, initially DDT and PCBs, but 
now organochlorines and other complex compounds, can be found in krill, fish and 
marine mammals.  Levels are low but as Antarctic organisms are slow growing and 
long-lived they may accumulate more than their counterparts in temperate ecosystems.  
A survey of the extent of available data and its implications has just been completed for 
UNEP and will provide the baseline for future studies. 
Databases 
35. SCAR and COMNAP support a joint committee that provides a single searchable entry 
point (Antarctic Master Directory) to over 2500 relevant data sets.  In addition the 
World Data Centres also contain relevant data as do the individual national Antarctic 
data centres.  For identifying the relevant Antarctic literature the COLD database 
supported by the Office of Polar Programs in the USA provides access to all the 
relevant Antarctic literature up to 2001.  There exists a wealth of material for the 
preparation of an SAER. 
Page 9 of 12 
Relationship to other state of the environment reporting 
36. The United Nations Environment Programme intends to continue with its task of 
providing a global overview of the state of the environment using whatever material is 
available.  In some instances it has stimulated groups of nations to work towards a 
regional synthesis, whilst in other cases it has relied on data produced by authoritative 
agencies of government departments. 
37. State of the Environment Reporting varies across the world with global and regional 
overviews prepared by UNEP, a wide range of national reports from over 60 countries 
and more detailed activity within some countries.  In this latter case the United States 
has been the most active with state of the environment reports from over 20 states.  The 
frequency of review varies with some providing annual or biennial updates and others 
having so far produced only one report.  The agencies responsible for the work are 
often specific environmental agencies such as European Environment Agency or the 
Environment Agency in the UK.  In the USA the oversight is through the Council on 
Environmental Quality charged with reporting direct to the President. 
38. A listing of most national and international State of the Environment Reports is 
maintained by the National Council for Science and the Environment in Washington 
DC.  Many but not all the reports are available on the Web and many of the most recent 
ones are constructed around a baseline survey followed by monitoring of a restricted 
range of environmental indicators . 
39. Below are some extracts taken from individual reports that illustrate the approaches 
taken, the audience for the reports and the method of production. 
European Arctic Environment 
This report gives a brief overview of the environmental situation in the European Arctic.  It 
presents the main environmental challenges for the region, and recommendations for policies 
and management.  Several European nations have been and are still active in exploration, 
resource exploitation, and research in the region.  This international activity is likely to 
increase.  As such, the European Arctic is a part of Europe's common environmental and 
cultural heritage.  The aim of this report is to increase the European awareness of the fact that 
the region is of great value to all of Europe, and that it is also facing serious environmental 
threats.  Therefore there is a strong need for a common European effort to manage the Arctic 
environment in a sustainable manner for the future.  The report does not attempt to give a 
fully comprehensive picture of the region, its ecosystems, or its plant and animal species.  It 
is produced over a brief time period, based on the information available.  The references are 
restricted to the most basic literature.  The background text is primarily intended to facilitate 
an understanding of the important and characteristic features of the European Arctic 
environment, and the impacts of human activity upon it. 
India 
The state of the environment report prepared for India broadly covers the five priority issues 
pertaining to the environment, identified by the Government of India as per the UNEP 
guidelines.  In addition, other issues addressing economic and social development are also 
included.  The five priority issues are (1) land degradation, (2) biodiversity, (3) air pollution 
with special reference to vehicular pollution in cities, (4) management of fresh water 
resources, and (5) hazardous waste management with special reference to municipal solid 
waste management.  The report on priority issues was prepared following the PSIR (pressure-
Page 10 of 12 
state-impact-response) framework.  The various issues are discussed in different chapters of 
the report. 
New Zealand 
New Zealand's national system for reporting on the state of the environment is being 
developed by the Ministry for the Environment in collaboration with other agencies.  It is 
known as the Environmental Performance Indicators Programme.  A state of the environment 
reporting system provides the regular information needed to identify environmental problems 
and coordinate the appropriate response.  This allows assessments of whether the overall 
quality of the environment is improving or deteriorating and provides information New 
Zealand must supply to international organisations such as the OECD.  The first report was 
published in 1997 and it is available both in hard copy and on the Web.  The focus on 
continuing to update this is managed through an agreed set of Environmental Indicators. 
Norway 
GRID-Arendal - the Global Resource Information Database in Arendal, Norway, is 
responsible for the development of this report.  The work has been done in close cooperation 
with the Norwegian Mapping Authority’s Environmental Unit (SKMe).  Other cooperating 
partners are Statistics Norway, Norwegian Pollution Control Authority, Directorate for 
Nature Management, Ministry of the Environment, National Centre for Educational 
Resources and the Norwegian Marine Research Centre at Bergen.  The report is available on 
the Web. 
The first page lists eleven different problem areas or topics.  The cooperating partners are 
shown as hyperlinks.  The first article gives a short trend description or a summary overview 
of the problem.  The information is then grouped in three categories according to the 
pressure, state, and response indicators.  Main target groups for SoE Norway are: the general 
public and decision makers, nationally and internationally, schools from the ninth year of 
schooling and upwards.  UNEP and users of UNEP information are also an important target 
group.  Environmental indicators used by GRID-Arendal are similar to the Nordic 
environmental indicators.  Indicators of particular interest to Norway have been included. 
United Kingdom 
This report provides an overview of the state of the environment in England and Wales.  It 
looks at the environment from several points of view and at how it has changed over time.  It 
summarizes the pressures acting on the environment from natural forces and human activities 
and shows how these are projected to change. 
It concludes by identifying a set of priority issues that require further action and key 
challenges that must be addressed.  It is an essential supporting document for the Agency’s 
new Vision for the Environment, which sets out long-term aims and a new thematic approach 
for managing the environment. The success of the thematic approach will be assessed 
through a set of environmental indicators.  These will allow progress to be tracked in terms of 
reducing environmental pressures and improving the state of the environment in areas related 
to each of the nine themes.  Recognizing that the severity and extent of environmental issues 
vary across the different regions in England and Wales, the indicators will also be broken 
down to the regional level to support management decisions on relative priorities and 
resource allocation. 
 
Page 11 of 12 
40. Useful Web sites 
Science data 
Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics  
 
www.pml.ac.uk/globec 
Joint Geochemical Ocean Flux Study 
 
http://ads.smv.uib.no/jgofs 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
 
www.soe.soton.ac.uk/OTHERS/woceipo 
Climate Variability and Predictability 
 
www.clivar.org 
Global Ocean Data Assimilation 
 
www.bom.gov.au/bmve/ocean/GODAE 
World Meteorological Organization 
 
www.wmo.ch 
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 
 
www.iaato.org 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
 
www.scar.org 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
 
www.ccamlr.org 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
 
www.comnap.aq 
Antarctic Master Directory 
 
http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/Data/portals/amd/index.html 
Cryosphere 
 
http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/Data/portals/gcmd/param_search/CRYOSPHERE 
Carbon Dioxide 
 
http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/trends/co2/sio-spl.htm 
 
www.cmdl.noaa.gov/info/spo2000.html 
Antarctic Climate 
 
www.antarctica.ac.uk/met/metlog 
 
www.met.reading.ac.uk/~brugge/antarctic.html 
State of the Environment reporting 
Ministry of the Environment, New Zealand 
 
www.mfe.govt.nz 
GRID –Arendal 
 
www.grida.no 
National Council for Science and the Environment 
 
www.cnie.org/NCSE/SciencePolicy/StateOfEnvironment.cfm 
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme 
 
www.amap.no/assess/assess.htm 
European Environment Agency 
 
www.eea.eu.int 
Page 12 of 12 
United Nations Environment Programme 
 
www.unep.org 
 
http://arctic.unep.net 
 
www.unep.org/dewa/index.asp 
 
 
Acronyms and Abbreviations 
APIS 
Antarctic Pack Ice Seals 
ATCM 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
ATS 
Antarctic Treaty System 
BEDMAP 
Antarctic Bedrock Mapping Project 
CCAMLR 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
CCAS 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
CEMP 
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme 
CEP 
Committee for Environmental Protection 
CFC 
Chlorofluorocarbon 
COLD 
Cold Regions Science and Technology Bibliography 
COMNAP 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
DDT 
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
DMSO 
dimethylsulphoxide 
GLOBEC 
Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics 
GODAE 
Global Ocean Data Assimilation 
GRID 
Global Resource Information Database 
IAATO 
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
IWC 
International Whaling Commission 
NSF 
National Science Foundation 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
PCB 
Polychlorinated biphenyl 
PSIR 
pressure-state-impact-response 
SAER 
State of the Antarctic Environment Report 
SCAR 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
SKMe 
Statens Kartverk Miljøenheten (Norwegian Mapping Authority’s 
Environmental Unit) 
SoE 
State of the Environment 
SO-JGOFS 
Southern Ocean Joint Global Ocean Flux Study 
UNEP 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UV 
Ultra violet 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organization 
WOCE 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
WP 
Working Paper 
 
