XXV ATCM/WP1
Working Paper WP-001
Agenda Item: ATCM 16
FRANCE
Original : French


Working Paper Submitted by France to the Twenty fifth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Warsaw, 2002)


Contribution to the preparation of a draft annex on liability for pollution, in the framework of the Protocol on Environmental Protection in Antarctica.


The Madrid Protocol on environmental protection in Antarctica forbids for 50 the years any operation tapping the mineral resources of the region, and submits all other activities, including scientific ones, to a strict regulation in order to prevent any degradation of the continent by pollution. Article 16 of the Protocol foresees the adoption of a sixth annex aimed at establishing an international liability regime for damage to the environment arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic. 

The liability issue is not new. It has been subjected to many comments and discussions for the past three years between Consultative Parties. At the end of the ATCM held in Lima in 1999, Mr. Don Mc Kay, the New Zealand President of Working Group n°. 1, had been granted terms of reference to prepare one or more draft annexes on liability. In doing so, he was convinced that the gap between those in favor of an annex stemming from the sole obligations contained in Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol in case of environmental emergency response actions as well as the legal consequences derived from not adopting them, on the one hand, and those in favor of preparing rules and procedures on the liability for damages derived from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area in compliance with Article 16 of the Protocol, on the other, had to be overcome.

From this perspective, the purpose of the New Zealand procedure is to strike a balance in the framework of a draft annex that would establish certain wide principles and define the tasks to be accomplished in the future on the issues on which there is still no consensus (rehabilitating damaged sites, regime applicable to the non-repaired damage).

A draft annex on liability for pollution linked to environmental emergencies as written by the chairman of Working Group Nº. 1 (ATCM XXIV/WP17) was examined during the 24th ATCM held in St. Petersburg in 2001. This initiative stems from the will to get out of the deadlock as observed during the meeting in The Hague when the draft annex submitted by the USA was discussed (ATCM XXIV/WP6). That document was deemed too restrictive as it touched upon the issue of liability for pollution only from the perspective of the obligations derived from the emergency environmental measures contained in Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol and excluding all references to the implementation modes of a liability regime, the principle of which has been established in Article 16 of the Protocol.

The French Authorities wish to underscore the position they had adopted during the ATCM held in Lima, i.e., to define in one and the same annex a liability regime that would cover both the preventive measures as defined by Article 15 of the Protocol and repair measures envisaged in Article 16 of the Protocol. Only such an approach, both global and consistent, may facilitate the preparation of a comprehensive legal regime on prevention and liability for environmental damages, whether they are due to accidental, chronic or gradual causes.

It is indeed an illusion to limit the field of application of a liability regime only to those actions belonging to the realm of environmental emergencies. Such an approach would be a curtailing and insufficient one. Actually, studies have shown that the number of accidents calling for emergency response actions is very limited. Besides, over and beyond their spectacular nature, accidental damages are not as serious from a pollution perspective as the gradual ones, which may have dramatic consequences on the contamination of the Antarctic environment in the long run. Finally, one may fear that the implementation of the exemption due to Force Majeure of such damages as upheld by the Mc Kay project leads to a quasi systematic exemption of the operators' responsibilities.

Hence, the French Authorities are determined to participate in a constructive manner to the continuation of negotiations on the progressive and firm preparation of a liability regime regarding the activities carried out in Antarctica. That is why they fully subscribe to the stepwise approach as developed by the Don Mc Kay draft annex, which consists in relying in a first stage on Article 15 of the Protocol. However, the French Authorities subordinate their agreement to this approach to the fact that the contents of the following stages (i.e., taking into account the operative part of Article 16 of the Protocol) and their scaling over time be accurately examined from a legal perspective during the upcoming consultative meetings. In this vein it is mandatory to elicit that the issues which have not reached a consensus position in the framework of the negotiations on the annex will be dealt with later on.

The French Authorities are determined to make sure the liability issue is dealt with globally, taking into account the indivisible nature of the obligation imposed on the State by virtue of the enforcement of Article 16 of the Madrid Protocol. In this perspective, the French Authorities consider that the modified draft annex introduced by Mr. Mc Kay regarding the definition of the liability rules in the field of environmental emergency situations complies only partially with this goal. This project is only a first stage in the preparation of a comprehensive liability regime. Other stages, to be introduced later on, are necessary in order to reach this goal and France is determined to pledge its full contribution to this exercise.


Comments on Mr. Don Mc Kay's revised draft project:
________


The revised New Zealand draft document (July 12, 2002) puts forward a certain number of new elements with respect to the document tabled at the St. Petersburg meeting of Consultative Parties. The title itself casts no doubts: it talks to the issue of liability problems linked to environmental emergency matters as envisaged by Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol. Its purpose is not to set up a global damage liability regime in the framework of Article 16 of the Protocol specifically aimed at repairing environmental damages arising from activities carried out by public or private operators in the Antarctic Treaty area. However, the main virtue of this project is to open the way for a potential compromise solution to these two approaches.

Even though this ambitious approach does embed a certain degree of ambiguity, this draft annex deserves to be reflected upon to the extent it favors a pragmatic and gradual approach with the aim of defining certain basic principles which may be agreed upon by the Consultative Parties.

This step by step strategy obviously entails, in spite of its slowness, a positive effect if one considers the last version of the draft annex, which constitutes an undeniable progress for the implementation of the Madrid Protocol compared to the previous draft offered to the delegations during the last meting of Consultative Parties. The French authorities notice with satisfaction a certain number of headways on various central issues of the New Zealand draft's operative part. This document acknowledges that this draft annex constitutes the first element of a comprehensive system regarding the implementation of a liability regime and that other stages will have to be introduced in order to wind it up. This draft provides a deeper definition of the operators' liability and of its implementation mechanisms. On the other hand it mentions the residual liability of the State and defines more accurately the redress operations modalities in the framework of preventive measures, emergency response measures or compensation conditions for non-repaired damage.

In order to specify and complete certain provisions of this draft, some amendments should be introduced. The amendments to this draft annex suggested by the French authorities are based upon the necessary consideration of three basic principles of any environmental liability regime: on the one hand to make good the principle of the operator's primary liability, liable for the environmental damage following the Polluter Pays principle; on the other hand the intent is to provide content to the emergency response actions devolving upon the operators by including minimal repair measures of the damage caused. Finally, to strengthen the financial compensation mechanisms in order to guarantee the cost of measures taken to repair the damage.



Amendments proposed:


The French authorities welcome the introduction of a Preamble the declared purpose of which, according to Mr. Don Mc Kay, is to reassign this work in its context and to reflect the delegations' points of view. Unfortunately, as presented, it carries a certain ambiguity to the extent it mentions Article 16 of the Madrid Protocol in the framework of a draft annex dealing exclusively with environmental emergency cases in accordance with Article 15 of said Protocol. On the other hand, although the Parties' desire to make progress in the future in order to wind up this annex is ultimately mentioned, the areas covered by this review clause remain inexplicit.


Under these circumstances, it would be advisable to rewrite this Preamble as follows:

. Preamble:

The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
. Calling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in Article 3 (3) of the Protocol;
. Recognising the importance to take action to promote environmental protection concerning prevention and minimise of damage, contingency planning to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol;
. Further recognising the necessity of establishing comprehensive legal regimes to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
. Recalling the engagement of the Parties to elaborate to further steps in the future rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with Article 16 of the Protocol;

Have agreed as follows:

. Article 1 - Scope

The text proposed by this article is too general. It would be advisable to "densify" it by including the notion of damage linked to environmental emergency conditions as well as that of compensation for clean up actions or environmental redress. It would therefore be advisable to write this article as follows: 

The objective of this annex is to provide for a comprehensive regime for environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which arise from operator’s activities covered by the Protocol and for adequate and prompt compensation for damage resulting from such emergencies.

. Article 2 - Definitions.

The proposed definitions are an interesting basis even though some of them might deserve further precision.

On the other hand, it would be good to finalize this article by adding a definition of the terms damage and clean-up mentioned in the draft annex:

    1) - the notion of damage as used in the annex Preamble should have a significant and sustainable nature and should cover the cost of the response actions and those to clean up. The clean-up measures should also be defined as those measures aimed at cleaning up or repairing the damaged or destroyed elements of the dependant and associated ecosystems or to introduce, whenever that is reasonable, the equivalent of these elements in the environment in Antarctica or in these ecosystems. The French Authorities consider, on the other hand, that if a significant and sustainable impact arises from an activity which was submitted to a preliminary impact evaluation study and that this damage could reasonably be predicted under the present state of scientific knowledge, the operator's liability may be claimed. The definition of damage notion could be written as follows

.- damage means : any hazardous impact on the Antarctic environment that has a significant and sustainable nature. It concerns:
. the loss of human lives or any bodily harm, 
. the loss of goods or damages caused to goods belonging or not to the liable operator,
. the cost of clean-up measures as well as the cost of preventive measures and response actions taken by the operator or, failing that, by a Party.

2) - the notion of clean up is found in articles 2-d and 12-2.b of the draft annex. This notion could be defined as follows :

. clean-up measures means :
 all reasonable measures to quickly and efficiently in case of emergency to clean up the environment.

The definitions mentioned under article 2 of the draft annex call for the following comments:

b- « Environmental Contingency » This definition aims at the consequences of any accidental event. The French authorities consider this definition to be too restrictive as it leads to excluding intentional malicious acts. It would therefore be advisable to spell out this definition by indicating that it does not encompass those activities which have expressly been authorized in the following sense:

 « (…) means any accidental, or intentional event (…)».

c- « operator » The French authorities consider that it would be good to make a distinction between the State's international liability in the framework of compliance with its international commitments and its own liability when it plays a direct role as a private operator in Antarctica. The proposed definition is a step forward on this issue as it speaks to any person, whether governmental or non. This definition might be further completed by specifying (...) any natural or private or public legal person, whether governmental or non governmental who operates or controls an activity (…)»

Regarding the definition of the legal link between the operator and the State, it is important for the French authorities that the operator remains under the jurisdiction of one of the Parties to the Protocol. The French authorities uphold either the principle of territorial tie (expedition organized with the territory of a Party as a starting point), or personal tie (such as the case of an expedition organized with the territory of a Party as a starting point) or, should the occasion arise, a tie to the State of the last harbor (transit of the operator through that State).

(e) « response action »: the definition provided here covers the reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency. The French authorities welcome the possible new preliminary rehabilitation actions such as clean-up encompassed by this new definition. On the other hand, they are concerned about the contents of the terms « appropriate circumstances » which tend to weaken the scope of this extension. It would be desirable, therefore, to specify under which conditions clean-up measures shall have to be taken by way of response actions. 


. Article 3 - Preventive Measures: 

The operative part of this article may be rectified by setting out the principle of primary liability of the operator. The beginning of article 3-1 should therefore be amended as follows: «an operator shall take to the maximum extent practicable reasonable preventive measures (…).

It would be desirable to further the text of this article by going back to article 15 1-a of the Protocol. This article speaks to measures for prompt and effective response action to such emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Treaty area for which advance notice is required under Article VI, paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities.

. Article 4 - Contingency Plans: 

This article embodies the provisions of article 15 paragraphs 1-a and b of the Madrid Protocol. It is important however to determine who should establish these contingency plans. The Mc Kay draft puts this responsibility on the operator while according to article 15 1-a and b every State Party to the Madrid Protocol must establish its own contingency plans.

It would therefore be good for 1 to specify that it is the operators who prepare contingency plans and to add a second sub-paragraph to 1 stating that these plans must have been previously approved by the concerned Party and that, on the other hand, operators will have to comply with these contingency plans in the framework of their activities, as otherwise their liability will be at stake in accordance with article 6 of the draft annex.


. Article 5 - Response action. 

It would be convenient to reassign the liability of the operator at a primary level by indicating in the beginning of 1: « The operators shall take prompt and effective response action (…) ».

On the other hand, it is appropriate to keep the link between the operator and the Party that has authorized said activity. French authorities are in favor of the State that has granted the authorization to the operator being the first in line to step in lieu of the operator in case of failure to comply. Under these conditions, article 5.2 should be spelled out as follows:

The Party who has authorised an operator to exercise an activity may at any time:

(a)	require the operator to take the necessary preventive measures;
(b)	give instructions to the operator to be followed on the necessary preventive measures to be taken; 
(c)	or itself take the necessary preventive measures if the operator fails to comply with this obligation.


. Article 6 – Liability for failure to adopt contingency measures. 

It would be helpful to modify the wording of this article by spelling out under paragraph 1 the operator's liability principle regarding the damaging effect associated with his failure to take response action measures in case of environmental contingency conditions.

The French authorities welcome the joint and several liability regime introduced in article 6.5 of the new version. It would be useful to introduce the following wording:

« When damage has been caused by two or more operators, they will be jointly and severally liable for such damage. However, the operator who proves that only part of the damage was caused by him, shall be liable for that part of the damage only».

On the other hand, regarding article 9 of the draft annex on compensation limits, it would be beneficial to indicate that an operator cannot be bound to pay a compensation above its limit of liability. This principle could be spelled out at the end of paragraph 5 as follows: 

«Each operator shall be entitled to the limits of liability applicable to each of them».

Besides, it should be noted that the implementation of this joint and several liability regime is valid without prejudice to the right acknowledged for each operator to file recourses against other liable operators. This principle could be spelled out as follows: «Nothing in the application of this article shall prejudice any right of recourse of an operator against any third party».


. Article 7 – Actions for compensation.

Paragraph 1-a should be amended to read as follows: «where the operator has his habitual residence or his principal place of business». The last sentence of this paragraph 1 should also be amended as follows: 

« All actions for compensation shall be brought within three years from the date on which the person bringing the action knew or ought reasonably to have known of the environmental emergency and of the identity of the operator».

On the other hand, paragraphs 4 and 5 of this article should be placed under a new article, 13, dealing with Disputes.


. Article 8 – Exemptions from Liability.

Actually, if one were to uphold a liability regime focused on the response action, it would be convenient to delete this article, as the exemptions from liability causes mentioned therein are only valid for general liability regimes, which is not the case here.

A compromise wording might be the following:
« an operator shall not be liable for damage caused by the environmental emergency if he proves that this environmental emergency is caused by an act in a case of emergency to save human life or safety unless the emergency giving rise to the exemption was caused by the operator».

Deletion of paragraph b.


. Article 9 – Limits on compensation.

This article sets a different amount in case the response action has not been taken by the operator (6.1) as compared to the situation whereby such a response action could not be taken (6.2). It would be logical to set a rather moderate upper limit for a and a higher limit for b.


. Article 10 – State liability.

This new element of the draft annex is interesting but needs further clarification, especially regarding the issue of who can challenge this State liability. Should this action be restricted to the benefit of any State Party or open it towards any operator having endured a damage? In any event, it would be advisable to complete this article with a paragraph 2 indicating that no provision of this article has any bearing on the enforcement of the common law regime of the international liability of States. Such a paragraph could be written as follows: «Nothing in paragraph 1 above shall affect the application of rules of international law on State responsibility ».


. Article 11 – Insurance.

It is worth mentioning under § 2 that private operators are bound to have underwritten an insurance policy covering liability for damage and the cost of a response action. The sub-paragraph could be written as follows: The operator shall establish and maintain during the period of the time limit of liability financial security as insurance, bonds or other financial guarantees to cover liability for damage and for the costs of response action up to the limits specified in Article 9 ».


. Article 12 – Environmental Protection Fund.

The draft annex adopts the proposal of the American document envisaging the creation of an environmental protection Fund, the principle of which was accepted by all delegations. The French authorities consider the creation of this Fund as a necessity in order to manage the compensation modalities linked to the implementation of response actions by the Parties in lieu and place of the liable operator or the payment of clean-up operations.

Likewise, it would seem necessary to place the operator's liability on the first level. Thus, it is suggested that paragraph 2 a be changed as follows:

« (…) in accordance with Article 5.2, if :
	i - the operator fails to comply with the obligations laid down in article 5.1, or
	ii – the identity of the operator cannot be established, or
	iii – the costs of the response action exceed the limit of liability in accordance with article 9.

The draft annex provides a new element when it states that the Fund shall be administered by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty. However, for the moment being the text is quite vague regarding the exact functioning mode of this Fund and the way its financial resources are to be managed. The discussion on the nature and structure of this Fund (simple bank account or exclusive organ) was not finalized by the Consultative Parties at the St Petersburg meeting. Mr. Mc Kay's draft does not choose between these two options. It is indeed an important issue to resolve although it is true that the whole issue of the management of this Fund is largely dependent on the outcome of the present discussion on the acknowledgment of a legal personality for the Consultative meeting of the Parties and on the terms of reference to be granted to its future Secretary General.

The article does not mention where the contributions to the Fund are going to be coming from. It would be advisable to refer in this article to paragraphs 2 and 3 of article 6 as they touch on the cases where the operator must make payments into the Fund.


. Article 13 - Disputes.

It would be good to complete the wording of this article by pointing out: Disputes between Parties concerning the interpretation and application of this annex shall be resolved in accordance with Articles 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol.

On the other hand, it would be good to incorporate paragraphs 4 and 5 of article 7 in this article while enlarging the possibility of a potential recourse to arbitration in compliance with provisions set forth in articles 3, 4 and 5 of the draft annex. Both paragraphs might be merged as follows: 

« Actions for compensation under article 7 or for measures under Article 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Annex, involving one or more Parties, shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the schedule to the Protocol on Arbitration».

It would be good to point out that the award made by the arbitration board will have the same legal authority as a ruling by a court of final resort. This item could be written as follows:

 « The judgment of the arbitral Tribunal shall be binding and enforceable in each Party as if it were a final judgment of its highest court ».


DRAFT ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY


LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES
______________


The amendments proposed by the French authorities to Mr. Don Mc Kay's revised draft are in Italics and underlined.


Preamble :

The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
. Calling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in Article 3 (3) of the Protocol;
. Recognising the importance to take action to promote environmental protection concerning prevention and minimise of damage, contingency planning to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems in accordance with article 15 of the Protocol;
. Further recognising the necessity of establishing comprehensive legal regimes to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
. Recalling the engagement of the Parties to elaborate to further steps in the future rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with article 16 of the Protocol;

Have agreed as follow :


Article 1 – Scope.

The scope of this annex is to provide for a comprehensive regime for environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty which arise from operator’s activities covered by the Protocol and for adequate and prompt compensation for damage resulting from such emergencies.


Article 2 – Definitions.

For the purposes of this Annex :

(a) «Agreed Measures» means measures adopted pursuant to Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

(b) «Environmental Emergency» means any accidental, or intentional event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment;

(c) «Operator» means any natural, private or public legal person, whether governmental or non governmental, which carries out or controls an activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area pursuant to an environmental impact assessment of its activity. When the term «operator» is used in conjunction with «Party», it means an operator which is subject to the laws and regulations of that Party in implementing the Protocol, including environmental impact assessment;

(d) «Response action» means any reasonable measures taken by any person in response to an environmental emergency to prevent, minimise or mitigate damage due to the impact of the environmental emergency, or to arrange for environmental clean-up»

(e) «Reasonable» in the context of (d) includes objective criteria such as the risk to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, the rate of its natural recovery, any risk to human life and safety, technological and economic feasibility, practicability and proportionality.

(f) «Damage» means any harmful impact on the Antarctic environment which is significant and lasting:
- loss of life and personal injury;
- loss of, or damage to, property other than property held by the person liable;
- the cost of measures of reinstatement and the cost of response measures taken by the operator or Parties;

(g) «clean up» means any prompt and effective reasonable measures to prevent environmental emergencies;


. Article 3 – Preventative measures.
1. Operators shall undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.
:
2. Preventative measures may include :
	a. specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities, such as secondary containment, drainage controls, or security devices to prevent inadvertent operation;

	b. specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities such as transfer operation procedures or inspections of storage areas;

	c. specialised training of personnel.


. Article 4 – Contingency Plans.

1. Operators shall 
a) establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependant or associated ecosystems and 

b) cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.


2. Contingency plans will be advance approved by the concerned Party


3. Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components :

a. procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;

	b. notification procedures;

	c. identification and mobilisation of resources;

	d. response plans;

e. training;

	f. record-keeping

	g. demobilisation.

4. Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

. Article 5 – Response action.
1. Operators shall take prompt and effective response action to emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research programs, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty.

2. The Party who has authorised an operator to exercise an activity may at any time :
a.	require the operator to take the necessary preventive measures;
b.	give instructions to the operator to be followed on the necessary preventive measures to be taken; 
c.	or itself take the necessary preventive measures if the operator fails to comply with this obligation.

3. In the event that prompt and effective response action is not taken, the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, including through their agents ans operators acting under their control.

4. Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand; unless threat to the environment is imminent and il would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

5. Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant guidance provided by expert groups including observer delegations to the Antarctic Treaty consultative Meeting, such as COMNAP and SCAR.


.Article 6 – Liability.
1. An operator shall be strict liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5 (2).

2. When prompt and effective response action was possible but has not been taken, the operator shall be strict liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the environmental Protection Fond established in article 12.

3 When prompt and effective response action was not possible, and the resultant harmful impact on the environment is significant and lasting, the operator shall be liable to make payment to the Environmental Protection Fund in accordance with Agreed Measures to be developed and adopted. The amount of such payment shall take into account :

	i. the nature and significance of thee harmful impact, as assessed by expert groups such as SCAR
	ii. the extent to which the activity was in furtherance of the conduct of scientific research in accordance with the priority given by Article 3 (3) of the Protocol;
	iii. the extent to which fault on the part of the operator contributed to the environmental emergency;

4. deleted

5. « When damage has been caused by two or more operators, they will be jointly and severally liable for such damage. However, the operator who proves that only part of the damage was caused by him, shall be liable for that part of the damage only». Each operator shall be entitled to the limits of liability applicable to each of them.


6. Nothing in the application of paragraph 5 above shall prejudice any right of recourse of an operator against any thirst party.

7. Notwithstanding that a Party shall be liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.


. Article 7 – Actions for compensation.
1. Subject to paragraph 2, actions against an operator which is liable under Article 6 may be brought in the courts of a Party : where the operator has his habitual residence or has its principal place of business or which conducted the environmental impact assessment of the activities leading to the environmental emergency. All actions for compensation shall be brought within three years from the date on which the person bringing the action knew or ought reasonably to have known of the environmental emergency and of the identity of the operator».

2. A Party in its discretion may provide that actions against that Party for liability under Article 6 may be brought in the courts of that Party, in accordance with procedures under its domestic law, provided that no Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

3. Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain such actions under paragraph 1 and, where applicable, paragraph 2.

4. included in Article 13 (Disputes)

5. included in Article 13 (Disputes)


. Article 8 - Exemptions from Liability.
1. An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 for damage caused by the environmental emergency if he proves that this environmental emergency is caused 
a. by an act in a case of emergency to save human life or safety unless the emergengy giving rise to the exemption was caused by the operator.

b. deleted

2. A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5 (2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.


. Article 9 – Limits on Compensation.
The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be limited to $……………under article 6 (1) and (2) and to $……………under Article 6 (3).


. Article 10 – State Liability.
1. A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator(other than a governmental operator) to take response action to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13 (1) of the Protocol.

2. Nothing in paragraph 1 above shall affect the application of rules of international law on State responsibility. 


. Article 11 – Insurance.
1. The operator shall establish and maintain during the period of the time limit of liability financial security as insurance, bonds or other financial guarantees to cover liability for damage and for the costs of response action up to the limits specified in Article 9.


. Article 12 – Environmental Protection Fund. 
1. An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established.

2. The purposes of the Fund shall be :

	(a) To provide for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5 (2), if :

	i – the operator fails to comply with the obligations laid down in article 5.1 or
	ii – the identify of the operator cannot be established, or
	iii – the costs of the response action exceed the limit of liability in accordance with article 9.

	(b) environmental clean-up in Antarctica or dependent and associated ecosystems;

	(c) any purpose in furtherance of the Protocol.

3. The Fund shall be administered by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty in accordance with terms of reference and decisions to be adopted by the Parties by consensus.

3. Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement or projects to be paid from the Fund. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

4. Contributions to the Fund shall be made in accordance with article 6.2 and 6.3 of the present annex. The Fund is authorized to receive voluntary contributions from any State or person.


. Article 13 – Disputes.
1. Disputes between Parties concerning the interpretation and application of this annex shall be resolved in accordance with Articles 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol.

2. Actions for compensation under article 7 or for measures under Article 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Annex, involving one or more Parties, shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the schedule to the Protocol on Arbitration».

3. The judgment of the arbitral Tribunal shall be binding and enforceable in each Party as if it were a final judgment of its highest court.


. Article 14 – Amendment or Modification.
1. This annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it unable to approve the measure.

2. Any amendment or modification of this annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.


