Five year review of
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 130 (SSSI No. 11),
Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island

Working Paper
New Zealand

Introduction

The lower end of Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus was originally designated as a Site of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 11)
after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual
ecosystem of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and
microbiologists. Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is one of only three known high altitude
localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the Antarctic.

The plan was revised in 1995 in accordance with the provisions Annex V of the
Environmental Protocol. Following entry into force of Annex V, SSSI 11 has been
renamed and renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 130.
New Zealand has recently undertaken a five-year review of the management plan for
ASPA 130 in accordance with the provisions of Article 6(3) of Annex V. This paper
reports on the outcomes of this review and proposes minor revisions to the
management plan and maps (attached).

Review of Activities

In the period since the last revision of the management plan for ASPA 130, the United
States has issued three permits to enter the Area. Only one New Zealand science
group has been inside the Area during the period. Small soil samples were taken and
incubated in-situ to study thermophiles and pseudonomads. There was no entry to the
prohibited zone.

A review of relevant literature suggests that the biological community at the Area
remains unusual and of scientific interest, particularly for comparative study with Mt
Melbourne (protected as ASPA 118 (SPA No. 22 and SSSI No.24)) and Mt Rittman
as knowledge increases of these high altitude warm ground Antarctic habitats.

In addition to biological studies, the Area has been used for temperature recording to
monitor volcanic activity on Mt Erebus. The Area has the highest surface soil
temperatures on the mountain. Visits have also been made to the Area to measure
CO_(2) to gain information on the degassing behaviour of the magmatic system
underlying Mount Erebus.

No significant management activity has been undertaken in the Area. This level of
activity is considered appropriate due to the low use of the Area over this period and
its sensitivity to visitation.

1
Consultation with the Science Community

New Zealand and United States researchers known to have worked in the Area since 
its designation were contacted to gauge whether information in the management plan 
was still current and whether the values identified had changed since the last revision. 
In general, the biological values of the Area were considered to remain sufficiently 
important to warrant protection. One respondent raised concerns as to the 
practicalities of the restrictions on the Area for non-biological scientific disciplines, 
and whether they were justified given historic activities in the area. For example, past 
actions which could have introduced foreign species.

Proposed Revision

The main question arising from consultation which required consideration was 
whether the designation is unnecessarily restrictive of non-biological scientific 
studies. However, no substantive changes to the management plan are proposed for 
the following reasons:
-   The plan does not exclude non-biological studies: permits can be issued for any 
    "compelling scientific or management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere" 
    and necessary equipment can be brought into the Area under permit;
-   The requirements for sterilisation of equipment, footwear and bags are "to the 
    maximum extent practicable" rather than absolutely prescriptive and are 
    implemented successfully at other sites such as Mt Melbourne; and
-   Although precautions to prevent introduction of organisms were not taken prior to 
    designation, any new species brought in would seriously detract from the Area's 
    value.

The management plan text has been modified slightly to be more explicit about the 
physical science studies which may be valid within the Area. The maps and figures 
have been updated to reflect the new naming and numbering system under Annex V.

In addition, two further changes were considered:

The requirement to visit the Area every five years for management review is proposed 
to be removed, as unnecessary activity could damage the ecosystem, visitation is low, 
and information from scientists who have studied the area is likely to be of most 
value. The other suggested management activities, although not all currently 
implemented, should be retained in case of increased visitation to the Area.

The minimum height for overflight of the Area is proposed to be raised from 30 m to 
50 m, consistent with other recently revised protected area management plans and 
based on calculations of rotor wash caused by helicopter types currently operational in 
the vicinity.

A bibliography of relevant literature (see below) has also been added to the 
management plan.

2
Relevant Literature

Bargagli, R., Broady, P.A., Walton, D.W.H. 1996. Preliminary investigation of the 
thermal biosystem of Mount Rittman fumaroles (Northern Victoria Land, 
Antarctica). Antarctic Science, 8, (2), 121-126.

Broady, P.A. 1993. Soils heated by volcanism. Antarctic Microbiology, ed. 
Friedmann, E.I. Wiley, New York, 413-432.

Broady, P.A., Greenfield, L.G., Given, D. and Thompson, K. 1987. The biota and 
environment of fumaroles on Mount Melbourne, northern Victoria Land. 
Polar Biology, 7, 97-113.

Broady, P.A. 1984. Taxonomic and ecological investigations of algae on steam-
warmed soil on Mt Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica. Phycologia, 23, (3), 257-
271.

Melick, D.R., Broady, P.A., Rowan, K.S. 1991. Morphological and physiological 
characteristics of a non-heterocystous strain of the cyanobacterium 
Mastigocladus laminosus Cohn from fumarolic soil on Mt Erebus, Antarctica. 
Polar Biology, 11, (2), 81-89.

Sheppard D.S. Le Guern F. Christenson B.W. 1994. Compositions and mass fluxes of 
the Mount Erebus volcanic plume. Volcanological and environmental studies 
of Mount Erebus, Antarctica. Antarctic research series 66. Washington, 
American Geophysical Union.

Skotnicki ML, Selkirk PM, Broady PA, Adam KD, Ninham JA. 2001. Dispersal of 
the moss Campylopus pyriformis on geothermal ground near the summits of 
Mount Erebus and Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Antarctic 
Science, 13, (3), 280-285.

Lesser MP, Barry TM, Banaszak AT. 2002. Effects of UV radiation on a chlorophyte 
alga (Scenedesmus sp.) isolated from the fumarole fields of Mt. Erebus, 
Antarctica. Journal of Phycology 38: 473-481.

3
Management Plan
for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 130

TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

1. Description of values to be protected
The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, 
SSSI No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual 
ecosystem of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists. Mt. 
Erebus (3794 m) is one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and 
associated vegetation in the Antarctic (Mt Erebus, Mt Melbourne and Mt Rittman).

Tramway Ridge is an ice-free area of gently sloping warm ground 1.5 km to the Northwest of the 
main crater of Mt. Erebus, located at an elevation of between 3350 m and 3400 m. The area has 
significant gas emission and its soil has the highest surface temperatures on Mt Erebus, making it of 
interest to volcanologists as well as biologists.

The single, as yet unidentified, moss species found in the Area is unusual in that it persists in the 
protonematal stage. An unusual variety of a common thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially 
noteworthy. The plant communities which have developed on the fumarolic soils within the Area 
differ significantly from those found elsewhere in Antarctica. The regional uniqueness of the 
communities is of substantial scientific interest and value. The very limited geographical extent of 
the ecosystem, its unusual biological features, its exceptional scientific values and the ease with 
which it could be disturbed through trampling or alien introductions, are such that the Area requires 
long-term special protection.

2. Aims and objectives
Management at Tramway Ridge aims to:
•   avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
•   prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
•   permit research on the unique physical environment and associated vegetation and microbial 
    communities while ensuring they are protected from over-sampling;
•   minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;
•   preserve a part of the Area, which is declared a Prohibited Zone, as a reference site for future 
    studies;
•   permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
1
-     Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing 
      site whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings near the Area in a given 
      season. These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.

      -     Markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the 
            environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.

      -     A line of flags should be placed to mark the preferred snowmobile route (Map A) between the 
            USAP Upper and Lower Erebus Huts, which should pass no closer than 200 m to the Area.

      -     Signs illustrating the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed 
            on posts marking the boundaries of the Area.

      -     Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
            displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan should be kept available, in all of 
            the research hut facilities located close to the summit of Mt. Erebus.

      -     Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes 
            shall be maintained in good condition.

      -     Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the 
            Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management 
            and maintenance measures are adequate.

      -     National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with a view to 
            ensuring these steps are carried out.

4. Period of designation

      Designated for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs

      Map A:  Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location image map. Image is rectified by affine 
            transformation and scale is approximate. Photography USGS/DOSLI (SN7842) 11 
            November 1993.

      Map B:  Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, location contour map. Contours are derived from a digital 
            elevation model generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map A. Precise 
            area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.

      Map C:  Tramway Ridge, site image map. Orthophoto and protected area boundary coordinates 
            are tied to the Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, a local framework, using the WGS72 
            spheroid. Precise GPS coordinates for the site will differ: these were unavailable at the 
            time of mapping. Photography US Navy (SN6480) 9 February 1980.

      Map D:  Tramway Ridge, site contour map. Contours are derived from a digital elevation model 
            generated using a 10 m grid for the orthophotograph in Map B: accuracy ±2m. Precise 
            area of warm ground is subject to variation seasonally and inter-annually.
Figure 1:  Perspective view of the Tramway Ridge area from an elevation of 6200 m, 5000 m out 
from the Area at a bearing of 215°SW, showing the protected area boundary, the 
location of the USAP Erebus huts, and the preferred helicopter landing site and 
snowmobile route. Image source: Map A.

6.  Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

The boundary of the designated Area is defined as a square of 200 m by 200.8 m which 
encompasses most of the warm ground area of lower Tramway Ridge (167°06'35"E, 77°31'05"S: 
Map B). The Area is divided into two parts of almost equal size, the northern half being a 
Prohibited Zone. The boundaries of the Area and the Prohibited Zone (marked by signposts at each 
corner) and prominent features are shown on Map B. Several boundary signposts have been offset 
owing to dangerous ground at the actual corner point.

The Area is in general on a gentle slope of about 5°, with much of the ice-free ground in the 
form of terraces which have a typical vertical height of about 0.5 m and steeper sides of up to 30° in 
slope. The steep sides of the terraces have the maximum development of crusts of vegetation, and 
it is from these sides that visible steam emissions occur. Visible vegetation covers about 16% of 
the Area. Low ice hummocks of up to about 1 m high are distributed over the Area where steam 
has frozen. Surface ground temperatures are up to about 75°C.

The steam-warmed lithosols in the Area provide an unusual habitat of limited extent. The 
acid reaction of the soils, the constant supply of moisture by condensation of steam and the regular 
supply of geothermal heat produce conditions which contrast markedly with most Antarctic soils. 
There is no evidence of the presence of microinvertebrate animals in the soils. The vegetation 
comprises protonematal moss and diverse microalgae, which has developed on the fumarolic soils 
and differs significantly from other Antarctic plant communities. The single moss species, which 
has not yet been identified-Campylopus pyriformis, is unusual in that it has never been seen to 
produce leaves but persists in the protonematal stage. The vegetation occurs in zones related to 
surface temperature. Warmest ground, from about 35 to 60°C, is colonised by dark blue-green and 
reddish-brown mats of cyanobacteria, whereas cooler surfaces of about 10 to 30°C are dominated 
by green crusts of coccoid chlorophytes and moss protonema. Bare ground lacking a 
macroscopically visible vegetation occurs between 0 and 20°C.

The algal flora comprises four-six cyanobacteria and 11-eeceid-five chlorophytes. The 
presence of a thermophilic cyanobacterium is especially noteworthy as it is an unusual variety of the 
hot spring cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus, which is common elsewhere in the world. 
Thermophilic bacteria have been isolated at 60°C. These include heterotrophic and a thiosulfate-
utilising autotrophic species. Heterotrophic microflora include six fungi, three actinomyces and 
five bacteria.

6(ii) Prohibited, restricted or managed zones within the Area
The northern half of the Area is designated a Prohibited Zone in order to preserve part of the Area 
as a reference site for future comparative studies, while the southern half of the Area (which is 
essentially similar in biology, features and character) is available for research programmes and 
sample collection. The south boundary of the Prohibited Zone is defined by a line that bisects the 
Area into two halves (Map B), and is marked at both ends by signposts. This boundary may be 
identified on the ground approximately as an extension westwards of the south ridge line of lower 
Tramway Ridge. The other three boundaries of the Prohibited Zone are defined by the boundaries 
of the Area. Access to the Prohibited Zone is strictly prohibited until such time it is agreed by 
management plan review that access should be allowed.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
Signposts mark the corner points of the boundaries. The USAP Lower and Upper Erebus Huts are 
located approximately 1 km to the Northeast (3400 m) and Southeast (3612.5 m) respectively.

6(iv) Location of other ASPAs within close proximity of the Area
None.The closest ASPAs are the historic huts at Cape Evans (ASPA No. 154) and Cape Royds 
(ASPA No. 156) approximately 20 km south west.

7. Permit conditions
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Article 7 of 
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Conditions for 
issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
•   it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, or for a compelling scientific or 
    management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
•   access to the Prohibited Zone shall be prohibited;
•   the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the natural ecological system or scientific 
    values of the Area;
•   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
•   the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
•   any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Landing of helicopters within the Area is strictly prohibited. Helicopter overflight of the Area 
should be avoided, except for essential scientific or management purposes when helicopters shall in 
no instance fly lower than 30-50 m above the ground surface of the Area. Use of helicopter smoke 
bombs is strictly prohibited within 200 m of the Area. For short-duration visits which do not 
require camp establishment, access by helicopter should be to a designated landing site, located 
outside of the Area and 300 m to the Northwest (Map A and Figure 1). For visits which require 
camp establishment, helicopter access should be to the USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts, and 
thence on foot or by land vehicle to the edge of the Area at Tramway Ridge. Landing of helicopters 
4
at other sites close to the Area is strongly discouraged. Only those persons specifically authorised by Permit are allowed to enter the Area. No special restrictions apply to the air or land routes used to move to and from the Area, although those traveling between the Upper and Lower Erebus Huts should keep to the preferred snowmobile route and, wherever practicable, stay at least 200 m from the protected area boundary.

Access into the Area shall be on foot and land vehicles are prohibited. Visitors should avoid walking on visible vegetation and, as far as practicable, areas of warm ground. Visitors should be aware that walking in the Area can compact soil, alter temperature gradients (which may change rates of steam release), and break thin ice crusts which may form over warm ground, with resulting damage to soil and biota below. The presence of snow or ice surfaces is not a guaranteed indication of a suitable pathway: therefore every reasonable effort should be made to minimise the effects of walking activity. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place

-   Scientific research which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area
-   Essential management activities, including monitoring
-   Entry to the Prohibited Zone is prohibited.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the authority which granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping required for work in the Area should be near the existing USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Hut sites, and is discouraged anywhere within 500 m of the boundaries of the Area (Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected no living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuels are not to be brought into the Area.  Food shall not be consumed within the Area. Equipment and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential

5
purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials 
introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that 
stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment 
is minimised.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna

Taking of or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with 
a Permit. Where taking of animals or harmful interference is involved this should be in accordance 
with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a 
minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material of 
human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to compromise 
the values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area, including the Prohibited Zone.

7(viii) Disposal of waste

All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Excretion of human 
wastes is prohibited within the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan 
can continue to be met

1. The Permit, or an authorised copy, must be carried within the Antarctic Specially Protected 
Area.

2. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological or physical monitoring and 
site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or 
audit, to erect or maintain signposts, or protective measures.

3. To help maintain the scientific value derived from the unique communities found at Tramway 
Ridge visitors shall take special precautions against introductions, especially when visiting 
several thermal regions in a season. Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation 
introductions sourced from:
      •    thermal areas, both Antarctic and non-Antarctic;
      •    soils at any other Antarctic sites, including those near stations;
      •    soils from regions outside Antarctica.

To this end, visitors shall take the following measures to minimise the risk of introductions:

(a) Any sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area shall be sterilised and maintained 
in a sterile condition before being used within the Area. To the maximum extent practicable, 
footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including backpacks or carry- 
                                                                                                                         6
bags) shall be thoroughly cleaned or sterilised and maintained in this condition before entering 
the Area;

(b) Sterilisation should be by an acceptable method, such as by UV light, autoclave or by washing 
exposed surfaces in 70% ethanol solution in water.

(c) Sterile protective overclothing shall be worn. The overclothing shall be suitable for working 
at temperatures of -20°C or below and comprise at a minimum sterile overalls to cover arms, 
legs and body and sterile gloves suitable for placing over the top of cold-weather gloves.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties shall ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, 
the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties shall maintain a 
record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, shall provide summary 
descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to 
allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, 
deposit originals or copies of such reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of 
usage, to be used both for review of the Management Plan and in organising the scientific use of the 
site.

8. Bibliography

Bargagli, R., Broady, P.A., Walton, D.W.H. 1996. Preliminary investigation of the thermal 
biosystem of Mount Rittman fumaroles (Northern Victoria Land, Antarctica). Antarctic 
Science, 8, (2), 121-126.

Broady, P.A. 1993. Soils heated by volcanism. Antarctic Microbiology, ed. Friedmann, E.I. 
Wiley, New York, 413-432.

Broady, P.A., Greenfield, L.G., Given, D. and Thompson, K. 1987. The biota and environment of 
fumaroles on Mount Melbourne, northern Victoria Land. Polar Biology, 7, 97-113.

Broady, P.A. 1984. Taxonomic and ecological investigations of algae on steam-warmed soil on Mt 
Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica. Phycologia, 23, (3), 257-271.

Melick, D.R., Broady, P.A., Rowan, K.S. 1991. Morphological and physiological characteristics of 
a non-heterocystous strain of the cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus Cohn from 
fumarolic soil on Mt Erebus, Antarctica. Polar Biology, 11, (2), 81-89.

Sheppard D.S. Le Guern F. Christenson B.W. 1994. Compositions and mass fluxes of the Mount 
Erebus volcanic plume. Volcanological and environmental studies of Mount Erebus, 
Antarctica. Antarctic research series 66. Washington, American Geophysical Union.

Skotnicki ML, Selkirk PM, Broady PA, Adam KD, Ninham JA. 2001. Dispersal of the moss 
Campylopus pyriformis on geothermal ground near the summits of Mount Erebus and 
Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 13, (3), 280-285.

7
Lesser MP, Barry TM, Banaszak AT. 2002. Effects of UV radiation on a chlorophyte alga 
(Scenedesmus sp.) isolated from the fumarole fields of Mt. Erebus, Antarctica. Journal of 
Phycology 38: 473-481.

                                                                                              8
Figure 1 - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus Antarctic Specially Protected Area 130: Perspective view
Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus: 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area 130 
location image-map

Helicopter Pad
(GZ)
Tramway 
Ridge
Lower Erebus Hut (USAP)

Upper Erebus Hut (USAP)

Mt Erebus 
Crater

Photography, 11 November 1993: rectified using affine transformation.

Approximate scale 
0      Metres       500
         ──────────────                  ────────────────────
         Protected area boundary        Preferred snowmobile route
         ────────────────────        ──────────────────────
                                         Camping discouraged inside of this area
Map B Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus :
Antarctic Specially Managed Area 130
location contour map.

Inset: Ross Island showing sites of nearby
protected areas and stations

          10 km

ROSS SEA

New College
Valley

Lewis Bay

Cape
Royds

Tramway Ridge
Mt Erebus

Cape Crozier

Ross Island

McMurdo
Station

Arrival Heights

Scott Base

Ross Ice Shelf

Contour interval: 25m
0         metres         500
(Approximate scale)

Protected area boundary
Preferred snowmobile route
Camping discouraged inside of this area
Map C - Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus: Antarctic Specially Protected Area 130 site image map

                                                                                
77°31'11.853" S                                 77°31'01.974" S               
167°08'21.251" E                                167°09'51.974" E              
                 200.0m                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 100.8m          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 N              
                              100.8m                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
77°31'05.224" S                                 77°31'03.248" S               
167°09'50.732" E                                167°09'50.522" E              
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
Photography, 9 Febuary 1980                        Orthophoto positional accuracy: +/- 2m
0        metres       100                      Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates:
                                               Station EB, Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, WGS72
- Protected area boundary                      DOSLI survey: 37/142
l Survey marks
x Boundary signpost
Map D - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Managed Area 130 site contour map


                                                                                  'N' (N.Z.G.S.)

77°31'01".853 S                         Prohibited Zone                     77°31'01".974 S
167°06'21".251 E                       (Entry Prohibited)                  167°06'51".074 E

                                                                                     O.I.S.
                                                                                     O.I.T.

77°31'05".103 S                                                  77°31'05".224 S
167°06'20".968 E                                                 167°06'50".792 E
Corner not pegged                                               
dangerous ground                                                
Peg to boundary 30m                                             

(Entry by Permit)                                               Warm Ground

77°31'08".327 S                                                  77°31'08".448 S
167°06'20".686 E                                                 167°06'50".512 E
                                                                 Corner not pegged
                                                                 dangerous ground.
                                                                 Peg to boundary 2.3m

Contour interval : 2m

0                metres             100

  Protected area boundary
●   Survey marks
X   Boundary signpost

                                                                 Tramway Ridge

Planimetric positional accuracy : +/- 2m
Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates : 
Station E8, Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, WGS72.
DOSLI survey: 37/142
Area of warm ground subject to change.
