 
1
FINAL REPORT  
OF THE INTER-SESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP  
ON SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
 
1. Background 
 
During CEP II (1999), the United Kingdom presented WP 24 “Specially Protected 
Species in Antarctica”, stressing the need to revise the list of Specially Protected 
Species (SPS) of Appendix A, Annex II of the Protocol. As a result of that, the 
Committee adopted Resolution 2 (1999), charging SCAR with such a revision. 
Likewise, at CEP III, Argentina presented WP 17 “Considerations about the protection 
of native Antarctic flora and fauna”, which noted that the category of “Antarctic 
Specially Protected Species” provided neither criteria nor mechanisms to ensure 
additional protection to species so designated.  
 
The CEP III Final Report states: “The Committee noted that Article 3 of Annex II needs 
clarification in relation to the nature of the special protection afforded by designation 
as an Antarctic Protected Species”. 
 
As a consequence, the CEP established an Inter-sessional Contact Group and charged it 
with the following Terms of Reference (TORs): 
 
a) Consider if some Antarctic native species require additional protection by 
designation beyond that afforded to all native species by the Madrid Protocol, and the 
reasons for this;  
 
b) Identify criteria that could be used for assessing a species  for inclusion in this 
category, if additional protection is considered necessary; 
 
c) Propose practical mechanisms that might be implemented to provide the appropriate 
level of extra protection; and 
 
d) Consider if the status of Antarctic Specially Protected Species should be applicable 
to classes of Antarctic organisms besides birds, mammals, and flora. 
 
At CEP IV, the ICG tabled a Progress Report (WP 5), where some of the issues 
connected to the above TORs had been resolved, while other still needed further 
elaboration. Furthermore, during the first round of discussions, new matters were raised 
within the ICG. Therefore, CEP IV charged the Group with the following new TORs:  
 
1. Consider further how the IUCN “red list” criteria could be used to assist in the 
identification of species, which might be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected 
Species. 
2. Recommend legal and practical mechanisms that could be implemented to provide 
the special protection to those species proposed for designation as Specially 
Protected Species. 
3. Consider if the status of Special Protected Species should be applicable to Antarctic 
species other than native mammals, birds and plants. 
 
2
The ICG had six rounds of discussions, divided into two inter-sessional periods. Each 
round was triggered by a series of key questions, associated with the requirements of 
each TOR.  
 
During these two rounds of discussions, the following Parties and Observers have 
participated of this group: Argentina (coordination), Australia, Chile, New Zealand, 
Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, SCAR, ASOC, and IUCN. 
 
The ICG submits this Final Report, which amalgamates the results of both periods, to 
the CEP for consideration. This document represents a summary of the issues the group 
has debated; based on the TORs the CEP has charged it with.  
 
Since some of the TORs of both periods partly overlap, and in order to facilitate the 
reading, the Chapter 2 “Discussion” has been split into five thematic sub-items, whose 
titles refer directly to the original TORs. In addition, a section including the main 
recommendations stemming from the work of this ICG has been included, as Chapter 3, 
at the end of the Document. 
 
 
2. Discussion 
 
2.1 Need and reasons for the existence of the category “Specially Protected 
Species” (TOR a], first round) 
  
There was general agreement in that the SPS category is needed. Different reasons were 
presented supporting the continued existence of the SPS category: 
  
• It may be helpful to have a particular category open to taxa, which (for 
whatever reason) appear to be at particular risk.  
• The existing elements of the ATS are not giving adequate protection to flora 
and fauna, evidence of which is the fact that several species of Antarctic 
seabirds are being significantly reduced by human activities with the result that 
these species are now assessed as vulnerable to extinction. 
• The Protocol, through its Article 3(2), establishes the need to avoid detrimental 
changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species or populations 
of flora and fauna and further jeopardize endangered or threatened species. In 
this sense: 
⇒ The SPS category will assist in creating an environment that could help in 
reversing a declining trend. 
⇒ Giving a species a special protection will result in a higher threshold for 
planned activities with expected impacts, compared with non-SPS; and 
will put higher emphasis for monitoring and research activities on these 
species. 
• Special protection will give an extra focus on certain species and, therefore, 
will strengthen implementation of other provisions of the Protocol. 
• Since some species migrate outside the AT Area, this category may give 
incentives for nations or international bodies outside the AT Area to take 
appropriate action. 
 
3
• The SPS category could provide the means by which both the CEP and other 
instruments with jurisdiction work together to identify common issues, develop 
conservation measures and monitor their success. 
• Categorizing species as SPS (or similar) is the most widely used conservation 
tool available in the world. 
 
 
 
2.2 Applicability of the SPS category (TOR d], first round; TOR 3], second round) 
 
There was agreement within the ICG that, from scientific and conservation perspectives, 
the Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex II should, in principle, be extended 
to all species indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area (or occurring there seasonally 
through natural migrations). 
 
The ICG also noted that Article 3(4) of Annex II excludes native (terrestrial and 
freshwater) invertebrates, as defined in Article 1(d) of Annex II to the Protocol, from its 
provisions. 
 
However, recognizing that jurisdictional/legal issues are associated with this matter, the 
ICG considered that it would be appropriate that the CEP advised the ATCM to take 
early steps to seek the agreement of CCAMLR, CCAS (and possibly the IWC) to 
establish cooperative working relationships and to ensure that common goals are 
achieved, when addressing SPS proposals for designation of species in Antarctic marine 
environments.   
 
 
2.3 Identification of Criteria for designating  SPS (TOR b] first round) 
 
All participants have agreed to support the use of IUCN criteria as a basis for assessing 
the need for special protection in the Antarctic continent, mainly based on the following 
reasons: 
 
• IUCN criteria are scientific, have been developed in robust fora under intense 
scrutiny, have high objectivity and comparability, and can be used in many 
situations. 
• The system for documenting assessments and guidelines for the IUCN criteria 
would be essential to ensure transparency and to facilitate the exchange of 
information. 
• IUCN criteria deal with data-deficient species in a systematic manner, giving a 
strong incentive to the Parties to increase data collection, and possibly research, 
on these species. 
• SCAR has considered their use appropriate to Antarctica. 
 
 
The group has also agreed that, if gaps existed in the IUCN criteria, specific Antarctic 
criteria may need to be developed. 
 
 
 
4
2.4 Use of the IUCN criteria to designate SPS (TOR 1, second round) 
 
The group considered that the most appropriate process of identification of species, 
which might be designated as SPS, would be for the CEP to request SCAR to:  
 
• 
assist it in reviewing (in close cooperation with IUCN) the current situation of 
all Antarctic species included as “vulnerable” (or above) in the IUCN Red List.  
 
• 
conduct a similar review for those Antarctic species included in the IUCN Red 
List as “data deficient” or “near threatened”. 
 
• 
undertake, as a final step, a further assessment of all other indigenous 
Antarctic species not included in such categories of the IUCN Red List, but 
likely to show declines in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  
 
The aim of such reviews will be to determine whether the species under review merit 
designation as an Antarctic SPS. If that were not the case, but additional protection were 
still regarded as necessary, further measures might be considered, which may include 
habitat conservation strategies, using other protection provisions included in the 
Protocol, data gathering, etc. 
 
The ICG considers that, to justify designation, the situation of each indigenous species 
within the Antarctic Treaty Area should be assessed, taking into account IUCN criteria 
used to evaluate designation as (at least) “vulnerable” in the Red List scheme, and based 
on the above-described process.  
 
According to this ICG, if one or more of the IUCN criteria/sub-criteria (to designate a 
species as “vulnerable” or higher within the Red List scheme) is met, the species should 
be recommended for designation as an Antarctic SPS.  
 
The ICG further noted that it would be convenient that the corresponding IUCN 
category (vulnerable, endangered, or critically endangered) be included between 
brackets. This recognizes that species facing different level of threat are likely to require 
different measures of management or protection; and it will prompt actions tailored to 
the level of endangerment for the species in question (see table 1, as a useful example 
proposing appropriate management or protection options).  
 
Any Party could also make proposals for designation of Specially Protected Species to 
the CEP, based on adequate scientific information and taking into account IUCN 
criteria. 
 
The ICG also noted that the SPS category would normally be applied for the whole of 
Antarctica. However, it was recognised that, in certain cases, a regional (or local) 
approach would be more appropriate. For example, a regional/local decline in numbers 
of a particular species might be addressed by practical means (e.g. implementing 
specific protection measures/management actions). If it was found that such specific 
management actions were not helping a species to recover, designation of the species as 
SPS should then be considered.  
 
Finally, to ensure that this review process can develop continuously, the Group agreed 
 
5
that it would be useful that the CEP places the issue of SPS as a Standing item on its 
agenda. 
 
 
2.5 Practical and legal mechanisms to provide special Protection to SPS (TOR c] 
first round; TOR 2] second round) 
 
There has been general agreement that additional protection mechanisms for species 
designated as SPS are needed. 
 
The ICG recognizes that suitable mechanisms of protection will depend on the 
characteristics of the species concerned as well as the status of the species, (e.g. a 
species that is low and declining in numbers may require different actions than for a 
species with low but stable numbers).  
 
Protection mechanisms will also need to take into account the nature of human impacts 
or other threats to the species.   
 
Suggestions of likely practical mechanisms of additional protection to be applied to any 
species designated as SPS, include:    
 
• 
Require that lethal techniques might only be used for species designated as 
SPSs only for compelling scientific reasons (e.g. scientific activities whose 
goal is strictly related to the implementation of conservation strategies).  
• 
Prepare guidelines to help Parties decide if issuing permits to “take” or cause 
“harmful interference” to species designated as SPSs is appropriate. 
• 
Prepare guidelines on how to approach and/or handle species designated as 
SPSs, once permits have been issued. 
Other practical measures would also include: 
• 
Designation of Protected Areas for species/habitat protection purposes, 
• 
Increased or more targeted monitoring activities, 
• 
Preparation and implementation of education/awareness programs, 
• 
Development of action-focused Species’ Recovery Plans, possibly as part of 
Conservation Management Plans, that may well include some or all of the 
above. 
 
 
6
Depending on the level of endangerment of a certain SPS (vulnerable, endangered or 
critically endangered), different options of management/conservation can be 
implemented:  
 
 
Species status 
Action to be taken 
SPS (Vulnerable) 
CEP should:  
• 
Seek specialist advice from SCAR, or others, to identify 
causes of decline and possible measures to reverse such 
declines;  
• 
review the status every 3 years depending on life 
cycle/practicality. 
 
SPS (Endangered) CEP should:  
• 
seek specialist advice from SCAR, or others, to identify 
causes of decline and measures to reverse it as a priority in a 
Species Recovery Plan (SRP) for the species,  
• 
consider recommending increased restrictions on taking or 
harmful interference, in formulating its advice to the
ATCM, and 
• 
establish in the SRP a yearly review of SPS status. 
 
SPS  
(Critically 
Endangered) 
CEP should:  
• 
seek specialist advice from SCAR, or others, to identify 
causes of decline and most efficient measures to reverse it as 
a priority in a SRP for the species,  
• 
propose establishment of a contact group to implement 
these measures as an urgent priority,  
• 
consider recommending increased restrictions on taking or 
harmful interference in formulating its advice to the ATCM, 
and, 
• 
review  status annually. 
 
  
Regarding likely legal mechanisms to provide extra protection to SPSs, the ICG agreed 
that the CEP should incorporate the recommendations that stem from the work of this 
contact group, in the review of Annex II (to be initiated at CEP V), and advise the 
ATCM accordingly. Additionally, the CEP should consider in future reviews of 
Protocol Annexes how extra protection might be afforded to Specially Protected 
Species.  
 
7
3. Summary of Recommendations  
 
The ICG recommends that: 
 
1. The CEP maintains the category of SPS in the framework of Annex II. 
2. Article 3(4) of Annex II be amended so as to include native (terrestrial and 
freshwater) invertebrates, as defined in Article 1(d) of Annex II to the Protocol. 
3. The CEP advises the ATCM to take early steps to seek the agreement of CCAMLR, 
CCAS (and possibly the IWC) to establish cooperative working relationships and to 
ensure that common goals are achieved, when addressing SPS proposals for 
designation of species in Antarctic marine environments.   
4. The CEP uses the IUCN criteria when assessing designation of SPS, when 
appropriate. 
5. The situation of each indigenous species within the Antarctic Treaty Area be 
assessed, to justify designation as SPS, taking into account IUCN criteria used to 
evaluate designation as (at least) “vulnerable” in the Red List scheme, and based on 
a process, which would be for the CEP to request SCAR to: 
• 
assist it in reviewing (in close cooperation with IUCN) the current situation of 
all Antarctic species included as “vulnerable” (or above) in the IUCN Red List.  
• 
conduct a similar review for those Antarctic species included in the IUCN Red 
List as “data deficient” or “near threatened”. 
• 
undertake, as a final step, a further assessment of all other indigenous Antarctic 
species not included in such categories of the IUCN Red List, but likely to show 
declines in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  
6. The corresponding IUCN category (vulnerable, endangered, or critically 
endangered) be included between brackets, when a species is recommended for 
designation as an Antarctic SPS.  
7. The characteristics of the species, its status, as well as the nature of human impacts 
or other threats imposed to it, be taken into account, when addressing likely 
mechanisms of protection to Antarctic SPS.  
8. The CEP considers the implementation of the management options, included as 
suggestions under point 2.5 of this Document. 
9. The CEP places the issue of SPS as a Standing item on its agenda. 
10. The CEP incorporates the above recommendations in the review of Annex II (to be 
initiated at CEP V), and advises the ATCM accordingly. 
 
4. The way forward 
The group concluded that it is necessary to establish a proper framework to ensure that 
the implementation of the SPS category is feasible, practical and effective. Although, at 
this respect different alternatives had been proposed within this ICG, the proposal of 
reviewing Annex II, raised at CEP IV by the Committee, offers an excellent opportunity 
to initiate a proper discussion of the recommendations merging from this document. 
