ANNEX II: REASONS FOR A REVIEW 
CEP V (Warsaw, Poland) 
Submitted by Argentina 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Given that the Committee of Environmental Protection has decided to conduct a rolling 
review of the Protocol’s Annexes, starting at CEP V with Annex II (see paragraph [6] CEP 
IV Final Report), Argentina considers that this initiative represents a valuable opportunity 
to raise issues of Annex II requiring further discussions, whose likely results would turn out 
to provide a more effective framework for the protection of the Antarctic flora and fauna.  
 
As a general principle, Argentina notes that Annex II does not currently allow an easy 
understanding of its provisions, since it does not conveniently address the following issues: 
 
1. WHAT is being protected?  
The scope of the Annex, i.e. what Antarctic species are protected by its provisions. 
 
2. FROM WHAT is it protected? 
The identification of human activities / actions that might become a threat to Antarctic 
species. 
 
3. HOW is it protected? 
The mechanisms by which Antarctic species can be afforded with proper protection.  
 
 
Bearing this basic scheme in mind, this WP aims to identify, in detail, issues of Annex II 
that should be properly revised. To our understanding, these include:   
 
 
1. Scope of Annex II 
 
At present, Annex II defines (under Article 1[a] to [d]) four categories of flora and fauna to 
be protected, which, from the taxonomic point of view, are not comprehensive enough. 
Thus, Article 1 of Annex II specifically refers to:  
 
• Two taxonomic categories: classes Aves (birds) and Mammalia (mammals), 
while other classes of Antarctic vertebrates are not mentioned.   
• An informal category called “native plant”, which includes terrestrial and 
freshwater vegetation but omits to mention marine vegetation.  
• Another informal category named “invertebrates”, whose definition does not 
include marine invertebrates.  
 
In addition, if definitions of “taking”, “harmful interference” and “specially protected 
species” (all mechanisms to protect Antarctic species included in Annex II) are analysed, it 
results that they only apply to the species listed above (the case of “native invertebrates” is 
worth being mentioned, since they have been excluded from the definition of “taking” and 
“specially protected species”). Then, the current scope of Annex II does not adequately 
match the environmental principles stated in both Article 3 of the Protocol, and Article 3, 
paragraph 3[c] of Annex II:  
 
• Throughout Article 3 of the Protocol there are several references to the protection 
of (and the need to limit adverse impacts on) the “Antarctic environment”. This 
term is used without any restriction; therefore, it is reasonable to assume that all 
Antarctic species are included in the definition of such a term. Moreover, Article 3 
(par. 2[b]iii and iv) calls for avoiding changes on terrestrial (including aquatic) and 
marine environments, as well as on flora and fauna. Again, these terms have been 
included without placing any restriction on them, from which it can be assumed 
that all of their components are indeed part of the considerations of the Protocol.   
 
• Article 3, paragraph 3[c] of Annex II, when imposing restrictions to the issue of 
permits to take and to cause harmful interference on Antarctic species, stresses the 
need to maintain the habitats essential to their existence, and the balance of 
ecological systems in the Antarctic Treaty Area. This would be certainly 
unfeasible if some components of the Antarctic habitats were left behind, when 
analyzing mechanisms of protection.  
    
Therefore, from an environmental point of view, the fact that the scope of Annex II is 
restricted only to certain species (those defined in its Article 1) confronts basic ecological 
principles and impedes a proper compliance with the environmental principles of the 
Protocol. 
 
 
2. Identification of likely threats: need for proper definitions and a new 
structure  
 
Definitions 
Argentina considers that some key definitions of Annex II present inconveniencies. For 
instance, “taking” seems to be a too-wide concept, involving very different actions, such as 
killing, handling, molesting, etc, which can cause different effects on a given species. The 
term “harmful interference” is not even defined in Annex II: Article 1 [h] only lists certain 
actions that could cause "harmful interference", which, on occasions, overlap the definition 
of taking (e.g. in paragraph 1[g] “take” is defined as “… to damage such quantities of 
native plants that their local distribution or abundance would be significantly affected”, 
while in paragraph 1[h]v. “harmful interference” is illustrated as “significantly damaging 
concentrations of native terrestrial plants by landing aircraft,…or by other means”). 
Lastly, the term “introduction of non-native species” has neither been defined. Although 
such a definition may seem obvious, its accurate reach may not be.  
 
Structure  
After reading Annex II, it can be reasonably inferred that taking flora and/or fauna, causing 
any harmful interference on them, and introducing non-native species to the Antarctic 
Treaty Area constitute human actions that might threaten Antarctic species. 
However, such actions are not currently clustered under a single umbrella: while the first 
two are defined, among other definitions, in Article 1, the latter constitutes a full article 
(number 4). Therefore, a new structure reflecting the common nature of taking, harmful 
interference and introduction of alien species as likely threats to Antarctic species would be 
certainly needed.  
 
 
Argentina believes that clear (and adequately organized) definitions will provide Antarctic 
operators with a proper framework in which they can rely on, when planning their activities 
in the Antarctic continent.   
 
 
3. Mechanisms of protection 
 
Currently, Annex II proposes (although scattered in paragraphs 3[1]; 3[4] and 4[1]), three 
different mechanisms to afford protection to Antarctic flora and fauna: 
 
i.   Prohibition of taking and harmful interference, unless a permit is issued 
ii.  Designation of Specially Protected Species 
iii. Prohibition to introduce non-native species, unless a permit is issued  
 
In regard to the latter, at CEP III an ad hoc inter-sessional contact group was created so as 
to analyse proper mechanisms to effectively provide additional protection to Specially 
Protected Species, as well as adequate criteria to designate an Antarctic species as 
“specially protected”.  The conclusions of this group are to be tabled during this CEP V, 
and may include, among other things, proposals for re-definition of certain associated 
terms.  
 
In parallel, Argentina considers that an intense discussion on the redefinition of taking, 
harmful interference and introduction of species would be needed (as already pointed out in 
point 2, above) before considering the suitability of the current mechanisms of protection.  
 
Once these mechanisms are agreed and eventually set out, they should be re-organised 
under a single title so as to provide Annex II with a clear statement of what kind of 
measures / procedures can be implemented, and the circumstances in which they should be 
applied.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Argentina considers that the establishment of a CEP inter-sessional contact group is needed 
to analyse the issues presented in this paper. This ICG should focus on the current wording 
of Annex II, so as to identify issues that may require modifications, particularly in reference 
to the scope and the mechanisms to afford protection, as well as to the way potential 
threatening actions to the Antarctic flora and fauna are therein defined.  
 
Argentina invites other Parties to share this concern, and to join the proposal of creating an 
Inter-sessional Contact Group to discuss, under Terms of Reference to be agreed during this 
Meeting, these issues, and any other proposal presented by other Parties as well.   
