XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-030
Agenda Item: ATCM 4a
AUSTRALIA
NETHERLANDES
Original : English



Review of Recommendations Passed by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings I to XVIII.

At ATCM XXIV the Netherlands introduced a Working Paper (XXIV ATCM/WP18) and an Information Paper (XXIV ATCM/IP25) concerning the status of Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions of the ATCM.  The Netherlands noted that some of these Recommendations had been superseded by subsequent Recommendations, or had become obsolete for other reasons.  

ATCM XXIV adopted Resolution 2 (2001) recommending that intersessional consultations be held to determine which of the Recommendations adopted by ATCM I to XVIII have been superseded by subsequent Recommendations, Measures, Decisions or Resolutions, or could be considered obsolete for other reasons.  The results of this analysis were then to be used to prepare a Decision for adoption at ATCM XXV.  

In accordance with Resolution 2 (2001) the Netherlands, Argentina, Australia and the United States of America participated in intersessional consultations on this issue.  

A detailed assessment was undertaken of all Recommendations adopted by ATCM I to XVIII.  This included a key word search of all Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions adopted by Consultative Meetings I to XXIV to identify where recommendations may have been superseded, as well as comparisons with other instruments, such as the Madrid Protocol and the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna.

During this assessment it became apparent that it would be useful to categorise recommendations, either partly or in whole, as being :

Spent – where the action required in the recommendation had to occur by a particular meeting or date and this has been passed;

Superseded – where the purpose or intent of the recommendation has been dealt with in a subsequent recommendation or instrument;

Obsolete – where the purpose or intent of the recommendation no longer exists; and

Ongoing – where the recommendation is still valid.

Where it appeared that a recommendation may have been superseded by another recommendation or instrument it was broken down into individual paragraphs or clauses which were compared with corresponding provisions in subsequent instruments superseding it so that it could be ascertained whether the whole, or only part of the recommendation had become superseded, spent or obsolete.  The full report of this analysis can be found at the following URL: www.aad.gov.au/atcm.  A summary of the report’s conclusions will be  provided as an Information Paper.

To aid the decision-making process, the Netherlands has established a database containing the full text of all ATCM Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions from ATCM I to XXIV, together with summaries and information on topics, approval status etc.  Output of this database will be submitted as Information Paper(s).  

The Intersessional Group proposes that it convenes one or more meetings during ATCM XXV, open to all Consultative Parties, to work out a specific list of recommendations that are clearly obsolete. It is not the intent of the intersessional group that this categorisation should result in any change in the legal force of past ATCM Recommendations, but that it should signify where action may no longer be required by Antarctic Treaty Parties.  Attached to this Working Paper is a draft Decision that could be used by the ATCM to recognise the current status of recommendations adopted by ATCM I to XVIII.
DRAFT DECISION ON THE STATUS OF ATCM RECOMMENDATIONS



The Representatives,

Conscious of the significant and ever increasing number of recommendations adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;

Desiring to achieve better understanding of which recommendations and measures, whether approved or not, require action by the Parties;

Recognising that some of these recommendations have been spent as a result of the passing of a specific event, or of time;

Recognising also that some of these recommendations have become superseded, or otherwise replaced by subsequent recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;

Recognising also that some of these recommendations have become obsolete as the purpose for which they were passed no longer exists;

Decide that the Recommendations detailed in Attachment A that have been classified as spent or superseded or that can otherwise be considered obsolete, require no further action by Antarctic Treaty Parties. 

