XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-045
Agenda Item: 
NORWAY
PERU
ARGENTINA
Original : English


ATCM XXV - Working Paper: Revision of “Guideline. Presessional Document Circulation and Document Handling”.
Submitted by Norway, Peru and Argentina. 

Background

The Final Report of ATCM XXIII (1999) contains the following passage: “Norway as the host country of the previous ATCM (Tromsö, 1998) drew attention to the problems related to the burden on the host country arranging Consultative Meetings without a permanent Secretariat, such as the absence of a collective memory in the form of archives and the financial burden” (para. 28). At the same Meeting, Norway and Peru offered to prepare papers outlining their experiences as host countries of ATCM XXII and XXIII on secretariat aspects of organising Consultative Meetings (para. 32)”.

To comply with the pledge at the XXIV ATCM in St. Petersburg, Peru presented Information Paper No. IP/6 with the title “Report on the organization of the XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Lima”. The organisational experiences being rather similar for both countries, Norway decided to take the matter forward by building on its 1998 initiative to establish an ATCM Homepage. Its and Peru´s suggestion that “the organizers of the XXV ATCM are entitled to transmit Working Papers and Information Papers prepared for the Meeting by posting them on the ATCM Homepage as an alternative to the prescribed diplomatic channels”, was thus approved by the Meeting (para. 31 of the Final Report of the XXIV ATCM). This paragraph further states that “The two countries committed themselves to presenting a Draft Decision formalizing this procedure at ATCM XXV”. This is the intention of this Working Paper.

The discussions at ATCM XXIII and XXIV reflected the increasing complexities associated with organizing the Annual Meetings of the Consultative Parties.

In particular, the steady increase in the number of Working Papers and Information Papers added considerably to the administrative and financial burden of the host countries. It is estimated that the cost of translation and interpretation during and after the Meetings over the last years has been in the range of 300 - 400.000 USD, which has normally made up around half of the total budget for the Meeting.

At the same time, technological developments have opened alternatives to the prescribed ways of document distribution.

At ATCM XXI (1997), Norway offered to explore ways of introducing electronical communication in the preparation of ATCM XXII. Norway subsequently, as Host Governmnet of ATCM XXII (1998), established an ATCM Homepage in April 1998. The Homepage was confirmed in Resolution 5 (1998), based on a proposal by Norway contained  in WP 25. It was subsequently taken over by Peru later1998. The Homepage was re-etablished by Russia in May 2001, and has now been taken over by Poland. 

Furthermore, with reference to Resolution 6 (2001), Argentina has established a Homepage devoted to exchange of information amongst the Parties (http://www.infoantarctica.org.ar/). This Homepage will be transferred by Argentina to the Secretariat when the latter is established. When it occurs, the Secretariat, from the beginning of its interim period, would also take over some responsibilities related to the handling of meeting documents, currently performed by the Host Countries, according to the functions listed in the Decision to be adopted at XXV ATCM. It would be necessary to reflect properly this development in the rules for document distribution. 

In this paper it is thus proposed that the ATCM now move to formalise these practices.

Present regulations for document circulation

According to the “Guideline” for “Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling”, which was adopted at ATCM XIX and confirmed at ATCM XX, a Working Paper written in one of the four official languages (English, French, Russian and Spanish) and delivered no later than 45 days before the Meeting, must be translated into the other three languages and distributed pre-sessionally through diplomatic channels. Papers submitted later than 45 days before the meeting may be distributed during the Meeting. Information Papers shall be translated upon the specific request of a Consultative Party.

Since 1998, the ATCM Homepage introduced by Norway has evolved into the main medium for distribution of information pertaining to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. The same applies to the Homepage of the Committee for Environmental Protection, which also was established at ATCM XXII. For the latter, “Guidelines for Circulation and Handling of CEP Documents” were approved simultaneously, as Appendix 2 to Decision 2 (1998). A major point here is the exclusive reliance upon advance electronic distribution of documents. This contrasts with the regulations still in force for ATCM document distribution, specifically the “Guideline” for “Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling” mentioned above. This “Guideline” presupposes advance distribution through diplomatic channels and makes no mention of electronic distribution.

The decision at ATCM XXIV to establish a secretariat has not diminished the need to formalise a more rational and modern form of distribution of documents.

Proposal

Norway, Perú and Argentina attach great importance to the timely, efficiently and orderly advance distribution of ATCM documents, in accordance with established regulations. The three countries would therefore propose that the Consultative Meeting adopt the following Decision:

Decision...(2002):

Revised Rules for Document Translation and Distribution

Desiring to replace the present “Guideline. Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling” (1995).

Decide

That the attached “Revised Rules for Document Translation and Distribution” shall replace the “Guideline. Pre-sessional Document Circulation and Document Handling” with immediate effect.

1. These rules apply to the distribution and translation of official papers for the Consultative Meetings. These papers consist of Working Papers and Information Papers.

2. A Working Paper prepared by Consultative Parties and Observers, and an Information Paper which a Consultative Party has requested be translated, should be received by the Host Government or by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, when established, no later than 45 days before the Consultative Meeting. Information Papers for which a translation has been requested should not exceed 30 pages.

3. The Host Government or the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, when established, should receive Information Papers for which no translation has been requested no later than 30 days before the Meeting.

4. When a revised version of a Paper made after its initial submission is resubmitted to the Host Government or to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, when established, for translation, the revised text should indicate clearly the amendments that have been incorporated.

5. The Papers should be transmitted to the Host Government or to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, when established, by electronic means whenever feasible.

6. Distribution of the Papers should be via the ATCM Home Page whenever feasible. Working Papers, which were received before the 45 days limit, should be publicised this way not later than 30 days before the Meeting.

7. Working Papers and Information Papers, for which a translation has been requested according to rule 2 above, may also be presented to the Host Government during the Meeting for translation.

8. No Working Paper or Information Paper may be presented for discussion at the ATCM unless being available in the four official languages.

9. The Host Government or the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, when established, should within three months of the end of the Consultative Meeting circulate through diplomatic channels and also pose on the  ATCM Home Page, the Final Report of that Meeting in the four official languages.





