 
Antarctic Protected Areas System: 
A Proposed Information Archive 
 
Working Paper 
Submitted by the United Kingdom 
 
Background 
 
In accordance with Resolution 1 (1998), the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have been revising 
management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (formerly Specially Protected Areas 
(SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)) to conform to the requirements of Annex V to 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  The UK has been delegated 
responsibility for the revision of management plans for 13 sites in the Antarctic Peninsula region.   
 
In the course of this review, the original values of the sites have been re-examined, and available data 
reviewed.  In addition field visits were made to 6 sites during January-March 2001 to verify 
descriptions and address gaps in data, and a great deal of new information was collated on the sites. 
 
During the review it became clear that the quality and accessibility of information plays a vital part in 
the effective management of special areas.  If information is of poor quality – or of sufficient quality 
but inaccessible – the ability of visitors to follow management policies for access to and use of the 
sites may be severely constrained. 
 
The review of management plans to meet the requirements of Annex V provided a timely opportunity 
for the UK to consider how it might make protected areas information more accessible, particularly 
with regard to Articles 9 and 10 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol; dealing with information 
and publicity and exchange of information respectively. 
 
In addition, protected area management plans generally encourage Parties, wherever possible, to 
deposit reports of visits to protected areas in a publicly accessible archive, and to maintain a record of 
usage, to assist both in reviewing management plans (required by Annex V at least every five years), 
and in organising scientific use of the areas. 
 
 
Development of an Information Archive 
 
With these obligations in mind, the UK has developed a simple computer-based archive to hold these 
types of information, with priorities for inclusion identified as: 
 
1. A listing of sites, showing their location on maps; 
2. Summary descriptions of the sites; 
3. The Management Plans and their maps; 
4. Bibliographies of literature relevant to each site;  
5. Site visit data, such as records of permits and site visit reports; 
6. Information on any significant changes to an area; 
7. Information about scientific data held on a site; and 
8. A photographic record for each site (digitally stored). 
 
The information archive has been developed to take advantage of the power of the internet.  This 
approach allows fast and distributed access to information using widely-available and standard 
 
formats, and enables electronic searches.  This was viewed as being the simplest and most effective 
means to facilitate access to the protected area information within the UK.  It also carried the added 
advantage of allowing links to be made to other internet sites on which Antarctic protected areas 
information is stored.  This approach also allows the information to be accessed world-wide which, 
given the international nature of activities in Antarctica, was viewed as potentially beneficial to other 
Parties, the scientific community, the tourist industry, and the wider public.  
 
The resulting information architecture is summarised in Figure 1.  At this stage, the archive mostly 
contains information on sites for which the UK has been responsible for revising management plans.  
The types of information included for these sites are shown at the lower levels of Figure 1.  Links are 
made to on-line information available for other protected areas directly from the protected areas list, 
and also from the electronically linked maps showing site locations. 
 
 
Proposal 
 
The information archive aims to improve access to information on the Antarctic protected areas 
system.  Such an archive could potentially serve the needs of the Committee and the ATCPs as the 
centrally held archive for all protected areas.  The UK would welcome comments from other Parties 
on the usefulness of such a facility, and on the structure and content of the site, which could be 
adapted for this purpose.  If seen as useful, the UK would be prepared to develop the site further by 
adding more detailed information and by making links to other available on-line data. 
 
If the Committee sees merit in further development of the archive as the international repository of 
Antarctic protected area information, consideration should be given to its longer-term storage and 
maintenance.  Options include adding or linking the site either to the CEP website, or to the ATCM / 
Secretariat website under development by Argentina. 
 
The protected area information archive will be available on-line in time for the XXV ATCM in 
September 2002, at which time the UK will distribute updated information on the site content and 
how it can be accessed.
 
25/07/2002
General information
about Antarctic
protected areas
Old Categories
SPA / SSSI /
SRA / MPA etc.
Introduction to the
Antarctic Protected
Area System
Purpose
Location Map
(new numbering
system)
Guide to Preparation
 of Management
Plans
Guidelines and contact information
Procedure and Application Form
Apply for Permit
SCAR
ASPA Visit
Report Form
eg.
ASPA 129 Rothera Point
eg.
ASPA 115 Lagotellerie Is
Summary
pdf doc
Word doc
Management
 Plan
Map 1: Location
Map 2: Site
Map 3: Geology /Plants /Birds
Plan Maps
(pdf, jpeg)
Bibliography
Images
Descriptions
Photographs
Species lists
Events register
Chemical data
etc
Supporting
Information
Permit #
Date
Permit Holder
Duration
Purpose
Status (visit carried out?)
Report
Visit
Information
Sites for which the UK
has responsibility
ASPA List
for all ASPAs
with links to  ASPA
information resources
Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas
(ASPAs)
Purpose
Location Map
ASMA List
Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas
(ASMAs)
Purpose
Location Map
HSM List
Historic Sites
and Monuments
(HSMs)
Purpose
Location Map
Seal Reserve  List
Seal Reserves
(CCAS)
Purpose
Location Map
CEMP Site List
CEMP Sites
(CCAMLR)
Antarctic Protected Area Information Archive Home Page
GENERIC LINKS
ON ALL PAGES
Home
Legal documents
Search
Contacts
Information about
Archive / site map
Figure 1: Antarctic Protected Area Information Archive, information architecture
 
