XXV ATCM
Working Paper WP-014
CHAIRMAN'S DRAFT

Original : English

To be translated soon


12 July 2002

Dear Colleague

You will recall that at the conclusion of our discussions in St Petersburg, on an Antarctic Liability regime, I indicated that I would issue a revised Chairman’s text taking into account those discussions.   An advance copy of this is now enclosed for your consideration.  The text is also being provided to the Polish authorities for translation and issuing as a formal conference document prior to the next ATCM.

Unfortunately it was not possible to provide for the full range of logistic/support arrangements which were required for an intersessional meeting to take place as delegations had hoped.    Nevertheless, I am confident that the very good progress made at St Petersburg, as reflected in the enclosed text, will enable us to move our work a great deal closer to completion at the Warsaw ATCM.

For planning purposes, you should also be aware that the discussion on Liability is likely to take place during the second week of the ATCM.   I will let you know as soon as a final decision is taken on this. 

I would draw to your attention the following aspects of the enclosed text:

    • A preamble has been included to place our work in context and to reflect the views of delegations
    • Article 1 on scope requires further work, particularly insofar as the relationship with CCAMLR and other Conventions is concerned.    I propose to refer this to a small group for work at the ATCM.
    • In Article 2 containing definitions I think we are getting close on “environmental emergency” (although we need to consider further whether the definition should deal with the result of the activity rather than the nature of the activity itself), “reasonable”, and “response action” (which includes a reference to clean-up in appropriate circumstances).   The definition of “operator”, which was very productively discussed in the small group coordinated by Australia, will nevertheless require some further work.
    • Article 3 on preventative measures and Article 4 on contingency plans reflect the very useful work done in the small group coordinated by the Netherlands.   These articles are now well developed, and will not require a great deal of further discussion or refinement.
    • Article 5 on response action has now been extensively discussed, and takes into account the useful work done in the small group chaired by Germany as well as in the broader meeting.   My sense is that we are now getting close to an outcome on this article, although some further discussion may be required.
    • In Article 6 on liability, there are obviously fundamental differences of view on paragraph 3 at this stage and if that approach was to be adopted a great deal of further work would need to be done on it.   I think that we are getting closer on the other paragraphs however.   The concept of joint and several liability has now been included in paragraph 5.
    • Article 7 on Actions for Compensation has been substantially redrafted, and the approach changed, to reflect the views expressed by delegations in St Petersburg.   The question of when jurisdiction should be conferred on a State will require further discussion.
    • Article 8 on Exemptions from Liability now includes, in paragraph 2, an exemption for States taking reasonable response action.   This approach draws on other Liability Conventions, as had been suggested at St Petersburg.   This article will require some further discussion.
    • Article 9 on Limits on Compensation has never been the subject of extensive discussion, but I suggest that it is now time for this since it is quite fundamental.   The issue is simple - what figure(s) should be inserted?   We need to start thinking about this.   The work on worst-case scenarios being done by COMNAP and SCAR, and also IAATO, will also assist in this respect.
    • Article 10 contains a concise statement on State Liability, and Article 11 on Insurance, reflecting the St Petersburg discussion, which may be sufficient.   There will be an opportunity for further discussion.
    • Article 12 on the Environmental Protection Fund will require further discussion.
    • As previously indicated, Article 13 on Amendment or Modification will be referred to a small group.
Background papers for Warsaw ATCM

I would remind delegations that, following from decisions in St Petersburg, various background papers are being prepared to assist the discussion in Warsaw:

(1)	The XXIV ATCM requested COMNAP in consultation with SCAR to provide the following information in respect of national programme operations, for the purpose of establishing limits on financial liability, compensation and insurability:
	(a) “Worst case scenarios” for land-based and sea-based environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area including the probability of occurrence and estimated cost for response action;
	(b) For the purposes of illustration, a range of scenarios less than worst case that might result in environmental impacts, including probability of occurrence and estimated cost of the response actions:
	(c) Scenarios similar to those in (a) and (b) for which response action would not be possible.

(2)	IAATO agreed to provide the foregoing information for tourist activities.

(3)	The Meeting further requested COMNAP to update SATCM XII/WP5, which provided very useful information on environmental incidents, which have occurred during the normal operations of national programmes.

(4)	The Meeting requested CEP to advise on the information thus provided.

(5)	Chile has offered to prepare a paper on costs and limits of insurance for the Warsaw meeting.

(6)	New Zealand has offered to collate previous papers on insurance for the next meeting.   As previously requested, delegations are asked to provide New Zealand with previous papers for this collation.

Preparation for Warsaw ATCM

I would ask that colleagues come to the Warsaw meeting well prepared to discuss - and hopefully resolve - the following:

    • Scope
    • the definition of “operator” and the associated jurisdictional issues (eg. Regarding actions for compensation)
    • the approach in paragraph 3 of Article 6
    • actions for compensation/disputes
    • limits on compensation
    • insurance
    • Environmental Protection Fund
    • amendment or modification
Should you want to get in touch with me before the Warsaw Meeting, or to give me any feedback, my email address is:

don.mackay@mfat.govt.nz

As indicated, I will give you a final word on the timing of the Liability discussion at Warsaw, as soon as possible.

I look forward to seeing you in Warsaw.

Kind regards




Don MacKay





Revised Draft
                                                                                                        12 July 2002

Chairman’s personal draft

DRAFT ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL     PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

	The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
	Recognising the importance of preventing, minimising and containing damage to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems;
	Further recognising the desirability of establishing comprehensive legal regimes to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
	Recalling Article 16 of the Protocol under which the Parties undertook to elaborate, in one or more Annexes to the Protocol, rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol;
	Further recalling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in Article 3(3) of the Protocol
	Noting the desire of the Parties to take action to promote environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty area by mandating certain steps concerning prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability, with a view to further steps being taken in these areas in the future by the Parties,
	Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
Scope

	This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which arise from activities covered by the Protocol and which occur after the entry into force of this Annex.   

Article 2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

(a)	“Agreed Measures” means measures adopted  pursuant to Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

(b)	“Environmental Emergency” means any accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment;

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which carries out an activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area pursuant to an environmental impact assessment of its activity.   When the term “operator” is used in conjunction with “Party”, it means an operator which is subject to the laws and regulations of that Party in implementing the Protocol, including environmental impact assessment;

(d)	“Response action” means reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency, which may include clean-up in appropriate circumstances, and including determining the extent of that emergency;

(e)	“Reasonable” in the context of (d) above includes objective criteria such as the risk to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, the rate of its natural recovery, any risk to human life and safety, technological and economic feasibility, practicality and proportionality.

Article 3
Preventative Measures

1.	Parties shall require operators to undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

2.	Preventative measures may include:

a.	specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities and means of transportation;
b.	specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities and means of transportation; and
c.	specialised training of personnel.

Article 4
Contingency Plans

1.	Parties shall require operators to 

a.	establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; and
b. 	cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.

2.	Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a.	procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;
b.	notification procedures;
c.	identification and mobilisation of resources;
d.	response plans;
e.	training;
f.	record keeping;
g.	demobilisation.

3.	Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

Article 5
Response Action

1.	Parties shall require their operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from their activities.

2.	In the event that prompt and effective response action is not taken, the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, including through their agents and operators acting under their control.

3.	Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand, unless threat to the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

4.	Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant guidance provided by expert groups including observer delegations to the Antarctic Treaty consultative Meeting, such as COMNAP and SCAR.

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).

2.	When prompt and effective response action was possible but has not been taken, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken,  into the Environmental Protection Fund established in Article 12.

3.	Where prompt and effective response action was not possible, and the resultant harmful impact on the Antarctic environment is significant and lasting, the operator shall be liable to make payment to the Environmental Protection Fund in accordance with Agreed Measures to be developed and adopted.   The amount of such payment shall take into account:

i	the nature and significance of the harmful impact, as assessed by expert groups such as SCAR;

ii	the extent to which the activity was in furtherance of the conduct of scientific research in accordance with the priority given it by Article 3(3) of the Protocol;

iii	the extent to which fault on the part of the operator contributed to the environmental emergency;

4.	Liability under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be strict.

5.	When an environmental emergency arises from the activities of two or more operators they shall be jointly and severally liable, provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only.

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	Subject to paragraph 2, actions against an operator which is liable under Article 6  may be brought in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or which conducted the environmental impact assessment of the activities leading to the environmental emergency.   All actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the occurrence of the environmental emergency.

2.	A Party in its discretion may provide that actions against that Party for liability under Article 6 may be brought in the courts of that Party, in accordance with procedures under its domestic law, provided that no Party shall be without its consent subject to jurisdiction in the Courts of another Party with respect to liability under this Annex.

3.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain  actions under paragraph 1 and, where applicable, paragraph 2.

4.	Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the liability of a Party under Article 6 may also be dealt with by arbitration between Parties in accordance with the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.

5.	All disputes involving compensation to the Environmental Protection Fund shall be dealt with by arbitration between Parties in accordance with the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol. 

Article 8
Exemptions from Liability

1.	An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 if the environmental emergency was caused by:

a.    	An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable measures were taken to prevent harmful impacts.

2.	A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5(2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.

Article 9
Limits on Compensation

The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be limited to $........under Article 6(1) and (2) and to $........ under Article 6(3).   

Article 10
State Liability

A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator (other than a governmental operator) to take response action to the extent  that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol.

Article 11
Insurance

Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance (or shall maintain, as appropriate, self-insurance) or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability up to the limits specified in Article 9.

Article 12
Environmental Protection Fund

1.	An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established.

2	The purposes of the Fund shall be:

a.	To provide for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5(2), if:

i	the identity of the operator cannot be established; or
ii	the costs exceed the limit fixed in accordance with article 9.

b.	Environmental clean-up in Antarctica or dependent and associated ecosystems;

c.	for any other purpose in furtherance of the Protocol.

2.	The Fund shall be administered by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty in accordance with terms of reference and decisions to be adopted by the Parties by consensus.

3.	Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement or projects to be paid from the Fund.   The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

4.	Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the Fund.

Article 13
Amendment or Modification

1.	This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.   Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes and extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.


