Report from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on
strengthening the existing guidance for visitors to Antarctica –
Proposal to adopt updated General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic
Report from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on
strengthening the existing guidance for visitors to Antarctica –
Proposal to adopt updated General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic
Working Paper submitted by Germany in its capacity as ICG
Convenor
Background
As a result of the Antarctic Tourism Workshop in Rotterdam from 3
to 5 April 2019, CEP XXII agreed to establish an ICG to address the
existing guidance for visitors to the continent, with a view to
strengthening that guidance and to ensure that activities from
visitors, including from tourism and non-governmental activities,
singularly and cumulatively, have no more than a minor or
transitory impact.
The ICG has the following Terms of Reference (ToR):
To consider all relevant guidance for visitors to the continent;
To revise and, where needed, strengthen the guidelines adopted
through Resolution 3 (2011);
To consider the coherence and relation between the General
Guidelines and Site Guidelines, as well as their systematic review
methodology;
To consider how to ensure that Site-specific Guidelines are as
specific as possible in terms of considerations for which activities
are suitable or not at each site;
To consider ways to improve planning, prioritization and
implementation of Site-specific Guidelines development; and
To report back to CEP XXIII.
The ICG convenor followed a 3-step strategy to address the ToR:
Step 1: Development of a discussion paper
This step includes listing all relevant guidance documents for
visitors to the continent and developing a discussion paper, which
serves as a working basis for the subsequent steps. Referring to
points 3. to 5. of the ToR, the paper outlines existing regulations for
visitors to Antarctica, the relationship between the General
Guidelines and Site Guidelines as well as a structural and content
analysis of Site Guidelines and the touristic activities. Systematic
review methodologies and the future development of Site
Guidelines are considered as well.
Step 2: Revision of the General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic
Based on the outcome of the discussion paper, the convener will
provide a proposal for revised General Guidelines for Visitors and
edit it in coordination with Members.
Step 3: Systematic review and formatting (layout) of the Site
Guidelines and General Guidelines
Based on the proposals of the discussion paper, the convener will
develop a template to be used for future revisions of Site
Guidelines.
Summary of the ICG process
Within the opening announcement of the ICG (30.08.2019),
Germany compiled a preliminary list of the relevant
Recommendations, Decisions, Resolutions and Measures relating to
guidance for visitors to the Antarctic. The draft list was based on
the list of “ATCM Recommendations (until 1995) and Decisions,
Resolutions and Measures (1995 – present) relating to Antarctic
tourism (based on the Antarctic Treaty Database)” from the
Discussion document for the International Workshop on Antarctic
Tourism and added the resolutions and decisions adopted at the
ATCM in Prague. Together with the list, it was proposed to develop
a discussion paper to serve as a basis for the work on the visitor
guidelines. A first draft of the structure of this discussion paper was
submitted together with the preliminary list of regulations.
The discussion paper was finalized in December 2020 after four
discussion rounds. Argentina, Australia, France, India, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the United Kingdom,
the United States and Uruguay as well as IAATO and ASOC
participated in the discussion rounds, commented on the paper and
gave valuable input. The discussion paper contains, among other
aspects, a historic overview of the development of guidelines for
visitors, a comprehensive listing of existing hard law regulations
and adopted soft law instruments concerning visitors to Antarctica
and a review of the structure of the General Guideline and the Site
Guidelines. Different aspects like definitions, the general scope of
the guidelines, the revision of structures, the inclusion of activities
and other new information as well as the possibility of a digitalized
format were thoroughly discussed.
It must be noted that the paper serves as a foundation for the actual
revision of the Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica, reflects the
work of the ICG as a report and is a working document that
portrays the group's discussions; it is not an agreed product that
reflects the opinions of all ICG participants. The document can be
found on the CEP forum page.
A first draft of the revised General Guidelines was circulated with
the finalized discussion paper on 03.12.2020. During two discussion
rounds, Argentina, Australia, France, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Spain and the United States as well as IAATO and ASOC
commented on the drafts, suggested alterations and gave valuable
hints on aspects to be considered.
Preliminary results and outlook
The comprehensive debate on fundamental aspects that related to
the strengthening and further development of all the guidance for
visitors (including activity guidelines) took more time than
originally planned. Due to the cancellation of ATCM XLIII in
Helsinki, the ICG was extended without discussion for one year and
was able to continue its work until 2021. Another intersessional
period will be necessary to complete the work in order to achieve
the goals set: namely, to produce up-to-date and improved General
Guidelines and Site Guidelines, to aid in ensuring that tourist and
non-governmental activities have no more than a minor or
transitory impact.
Based on the aspects discussed in the discussion paper, the General
Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic were revised and adapted.
Although there was extensive debate regarding the inclusion of
activity-specific information and rules of behavior (for example:
snorkeling, scuba diving, snowmobiling, etc.), the participants in
the ICG were unable to agree on the inclusion of such information
or rules in the General Guidelines. However, there was a broad
consensus to keep the General Guidelines as general and
comprehensible as possible. The revised Guidelines are hereby
submitted to the CEP for approval (see Attachment 2).
The next step is to revise the Site Guidelines for Visitors according
to the suggestions in the discussion paper with the aim of making
the guidelines clearer, more specific and more user-friendly. In
particular, it has to be decided how to deal with activity-specific
information. A revision also includes an update on the layout of the
guidelines. In order to harmonise the General Guidelines with the
Site Guidelines, the layout of the documents should be coordinated.
Since the ATS has been responsible for designing and composing so
far, it must be clarified whether the ATS would like to develop a
new layout itself or whether this should be done by the parties
involved in the ICG. We propose to develop the layout within the
framework of the ICG and to revise all existing guidelines until the
next ATCM in order to adopt them as a complete package in a new
design in 2022. The ATS would be provided with a corresponding
template for the further support and creation of new Site guidelines.
As there was great support for the proposal to make the guidelines
available in a more user-friendly and clearer digital format in the
future, the development of a separate app would be recommended,
in addition to the project of a manual of regulations and guidelines
relevant to tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic
Treaty area. Similar to the already existing IAATO app (IAATO
Polar Guide), the various guidelines could be accessed by visitors on
site. Cross-links within the guidelines, e.g. between the General
Guidelines and the Site Guidelines, would ensure that the relevant
regulations are available at any time at a click. A further added
value could be the inclusion of additional information, e.g. on flora
and fauna, historical sites or protected areas, to help visitors
educate themselves about the Antarctic environment. Feedback
functions for reporting incidents or the current state of the visitor
sites would also be conceivable. Similar to the layout, the question
of who would be responsible for the development of such an app
and who would ultimately host it needs to be clarified. A parallel
development with the layout of the guidelines would be ideal. This
way, the app could be presented at the next ATCM together with
the revised Visitor Guidelines as a complete package.
Other issues for consideration/additional points raised by
participants
Several points relating to guidelines relevant for visitors and
tourism in Antarctica in general were raised during the discussion
rounds of the ICG, which go beyond the scope of the ICG. The CEP
may wish to give further consideration to the following issues:
Separate guidelines for specific activities following the model of the
corresponding IAATO guidelines
The mixing of scientific and tourism activities.
The lack of guidance to evaluate the impacts related to sports or
recreational activities.
The need for harmonization of standards to ensure that all NCAs
apply the same standard.
The question of whether the existing proposed minimum distances
when approaching animals are sufficient and scientifically justified
and whether the precautionary principle is sufficiently taken into
account.
Recommendation
The ICG suggests that the CEP
Agrees to the revision of the content of the General Guidelines and
recommends the adoption of the attached Resolution.
Extends the ICG for a further year with the following ToRs:
To consider the coherence and relation between the General
Guidelines and Site-specific Guidelines, as well as their systematic
review methodology;
To consider how to ensure that Site-specific Guidelines are as
specific as possible in terms of considerations for which activities
are suitable or not at each site;
To consider ways to improve planning, prioritization and
implementation of Site-specific Guidelines development;
To present the revised General Guidelines and Site Guidelines in a
new layout
To initiate the development of an app for the digital representation
of the Visitor Guidelines, and
To report back to CEP
Resolution X (20XX)
Updated General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic
The Representatives,
Recalling Recommendation XVIII-1(1994) Guidance for those
organising and conducting tourism and non-Governmental activities
in the Antarctic and Resolution 3 (2011) General Guidelines for
Visitors to the Antarctic;
Recalling Resolutions 5 (2005), 2 (2006), 1 (2007), 2 (2008), 4
(2009), 1 (2010), 4 (2011), 4 (2012), 3 (2013), 4 (2014), 2 (2016),
1 (2018) and 2 (2019), which adopted and updated lists of sites
subject to Site Guidelines for Visitors (“Site Guidelines”);
Acknowledging that the General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic must be reviewed and revised as further information
becomes available;
Noting that Resolution 3 (2011) provides guidance on visitor
behaviour throughout the entire Antarctic;
Affirming the value of providing general environmental advice to
visitors to complement site-specific information;
Noting the desirability of providing contemporary advice to visitors
to Antarctica to guide them in minimising their impacts at all sites;
Recommend that:
1. their Governments endorse the attached updated General
Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic;
2. the Guidelines be placed on the website of the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat;
3. their Governments urge all those intending to visit sites in
Antarctica to ensure that they are fully conversant with and adhere
to the advice in these General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic.
Attachment: Updated General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic
