Review of the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) No 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands,
Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
Review of the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) No 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands,
Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
Argentina has carried out a review of the Management Plan for the
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 134, Cierva Point and
Offshore Islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, and has
determined that only minor amendments are required. Argentina
recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised
Management Plan.
Background
ASPA 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands off the Danco Coast on
the west coast of the north of the Antarctic Peninsula. The Area was
originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No
15 (ATCM Recommendation XIII-8, ATCM XIII, Brussels, 1985),
after a proposal by Argentina, due to its great plant diversity and
the fact that it has breeding colonies of at least ten species of birds.
Argentina has carried out a review of the Management Plan for the
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 134, Cierva Point and
Offshore Islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, in accordance
with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas attached
to Resolution 2 (2011).
During this new review process, which responds to the provisions of
Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, the values present in the Area were updated
in detail based on the latest scientific findings and the validity of
the measures necessary to protect it were revised in consultation
with the main researchers who carry out tasks in this Area and in
light of an analysis of the corresponding Visit Reports.
Summary of changes
A revised Management Plan for ASPA 134 is provided in Annex A.
There are no major changes in the Management Plan. The minor
amendments are summarized as follows:
Information has been updated within the Introduction, Description
of the values to be protected, and Description of the Area.
The Aims and objectives have been reworded without changes in
meaning to bring them into line with the writing standards used in
the latest management plans presented.
Some management guidelines have been incorporated in
accordance with standards adopted in the Antarctic Treaty in recent
years.
The following text has been added pursuant to section ii) of Article
7, Access to, and movement within or over the Area: "The use of
RPAs (unmanned aircraft or drones) will not be allowed within the
limits of the ASPA, unless previously analysed case by case during
the environmental impact assessment process. They may only be
used when stated in the entry permit and under the conditions
established therein. During the analysis and authorisation process,
all Antarctic Treaty directives in force will be taken into account."
The maps from the previous version have been updated and
redesigned using new cartographical techniques the legends have
been adapted and a map showing the location of the bird colonies
has been added.
The supporting bibliographical information has also been updated.
A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the "Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas".
Recommendation
Argentina recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands,
Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (Annex A).
ASPA 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands, Danco Coast,
Antarctic Peninsula
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal refer to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA 134
First designation:
ATCM Recommendation XIII-8, ATCM XIII, Brussels, 1985
First adoption of the management plan:
Measure 3 (1997) ATCM XXI, Christchurch
Management plan reviews:
Measure 1 (2006) ATCM XXIX -
CEP IX, Edinburgh
Current management plan:
Measure 5 (2013) ATCM XXXVI - CEP XVI, Brussels.
Any extension of the expiration dates of the management plan:
No.
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 134, Cierva Point and Offshore Islands, Costa Danco,
Antarctic Peninsula.
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) Major or minor?
Minor
(ii) Any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
No.
(iii) Any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the
captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map 1: The cartographic image of two of the three maps and
all subtitles and references have been updated. A map 4 was also
added.
Are there any changes to the description of the Area that are
relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) Any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with,
incorporation or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other – brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan where these are to be found.
The introduction has been updated.
The goals and objectives have been rewritten in accordance
with the current standards of the latest management plans.
The description of the values to be protected has been updated.
Management guidelines have been incorporated in accordance with
standards adopted in the Antarctic treaty.
The Description of the area has been updated.
The supporting bibliographical information has also been updated.
The following text has been added pursuant to section ii) of Article
7, Access to, and movement within or over the Area: “The use of
RPAs (unmanned aircraft or drones) will not be allowed within the
limits of the ASPA, unless previously analysed case by case during
the environmental impact assessment process. They may only be
used when stated in the entry permit and under the conditions
established therein. During the analysis and authorisation process,
all Antarctic Treaty directives in force will be taken into account.".
A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the "Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas".
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine
area?
N/A
6. If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of the
CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If so, has the prior approval of the CCAMLR been obtained? If
yes, please indicate CCAMLR final report and paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part of paragraph 2 under Article 3 of Annex
V)?
Article 3.2.
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain B - "Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern latitudes geologic"
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here).
Region "North-west Antarctic Peninsula"
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Summary: Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
Yes, IBA ANT081.
