Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 145: Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Working Paper submitted by Chile and Spain
Summary
Chile and Spain present the revised management plan for ASPA No.
145. In view of the extensive changes proposed to the revised plan,
Chile and Spain recommend requesting the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans provide a more detailed intersessional review of
the revised plan.
Introduction
In 1987, due to the proposal presented by Chile, two Port Foster
sites were designated as SSSI No. 27, under Recommendation XIV-5.
These were intended to protect the benthic assets associated with
two types of seabed, at depths of between 50 and 150 m (sub-site
A), and between 100 and 150 m (sub-site B). Subsequently, the site
was renamed ASPA No. 145 in accordance with Decision 1 (2002).
After two extensions of the management plan (Measure 2 (2000)
and Measure 5 (2009)), a revised version was approved that was
incorporated into the package associated with Antarctic Specially
Managed Area No. 4, Deception Island, through Measure 3 (2005).
Additionally, studies carried out by researchers from the Spanish
Antarctic Programme between 2008 and 2017 indicate that the
southern sector of Port Foster, the area surrounding Fildes Point,
which lies between 0 and 50 m deep, contains the richest areas of
benthic species on the island, and is a sector whose biodiversity has
unique characteristics. Given that this area is also the area within
the island that receives the most vessels with visitors, it is
considered necessary to protect it by including it as a new sub-site
of ASPA No. 145.
The following is a review of the management plan considering the
three proposed sub-sites.
Amendments
The proposal presented below has changed the format of the
Management Plan in accordance with the provisions of Resolution 2
(2011), Guide for the preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
The main amendments made to the original plan are presented in
the following sections:
Section 2. Two new objectives have been added to the original plan.
Section 3. The management activities for the Area have been
modified, eliminating two of those originally proposed but
incorporating four new activities.
Section 4. The period for designation of the Area has been modified.
Section 5. A third sub-site C has been included in the map.
Section 6 (i). The description of the Area was made clearer,
detailing a general description, the limits of the Area, its
hydrographic characteristics and the main species present in each of
the three sub-sites that are presented.
Section 6 (ii). Access to the Area has been specified.
Section 6 (iii). Structures located in the immediate vicinity of the
Area are indicated.
Section 6 (iv). The presentation of the ASPAs located in the vicinity
of the Area has been improved.
Section 7. The introduction to this section summarizes the list of
activities for which permission can be granted.
Section 7 (i). The description of the conditions for permits has been
improved, including two new ones.
Section 7 (ii). Information on access to the Area and movement
within it has been improved.
Section 7 (iii). Activities that can be carried out in the Area are
described in detail.
Section 7 (iv). Restrictions on the installation of structures and their
removal in the Area are detailed.
Section 7 (vi). The description of restrictions regarding materials
and organisms that can be introduced is improved and
supplemented.
Section 7 (vii). Information regarding the collection of flora and
fauna has been improved.
Section 7 (viii). The description regarding the collection or removal
of material has been improved.
Section 7 (ix). Information regarding waste disposal in the Area is
detailed.
Section 7 (x). Measures necessary to meet the aims of the
Management Plan have been improved and supplemented.
Section 7 (xi). Information regarding reporting requirements is
enhanced and supplemented.
Section 8. The bibliographic review is supplemented with
information related to Port Foster and updated results of the studies
carried out in the Area.
Recommendation
The draft management plan is submitted for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection. In particular, we ask the
CEP to consider the aforementioned changes. Nonetheless, in view
of the extensive modifications proposed to the revised plan, Chile
and Spain recommend requesting the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans provide a more detailed intersessional
examination of the revised plan and report on it in the XXIV CEP
Meeting.
ASPA No. 145 PORT FOSTER, DECEPTION ISLAND
Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. The Area was originally designated as SSSI No. 27 in
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987). The site was subsequently renamed
ASPA No. 145 in accordance with Decision 1 (2002). After two
extensions of the management plan (Measure 2 (2000) and Measure
5 (2009)), a revised version was approved through Measure 3
(2005) and the area was incorporated into ASMA 4 (Deception
Island).
If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan,
please indicate the types of amendment:
Major or minor?
There are both substantial and minor amendments, depending on
the point addressed.
Are there any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
Yes. The protected area is expanded with a sub-site in the southeast
sector of Port Foster.
Are there any changes to the maps?
Yes
Are there any changes to the description of the Area that are
relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The descriptions of the polygons that delimit the three sub-sites
have been improved.
Are there any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM
within this area or adjacent to it?
No.
Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating the
Management Plan paragraphs containing them.
The information in Sections 2 (objectives), 3 (management
activities), 6 (description of the Area) and 7 (terms and conditions
for entry permits) has been improved, fully supplementing the
bibliographic review (Section 8), with updated information on the
results of the studies carried out in the Area.
If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine area?
It is not a new area, but it contains a marine area.
If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Although it is a site where CCAMLR activities do not take place, it
does require their consideration.
If so, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes. In 2012, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee reaffirmed the
importance of this area for scientific research, stating that it will
probably not be exploited and recommending approval of the
management plan, which was ratified by the Commission the same
year.
If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The area is protected mainly because it pertains to a unique marine
ecosystem of special interest for scientific research.
Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes, the main associated domain is G.
If applicable, has the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic
Region (ACBR) represented by the ASPA/ASMA been
identified? (see the document titled Antarctic Conservation
Biographic Regions, appended to Resolution 6 [2012]) Yes/No (if
the answer is yes, indicate the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region here).
Yes, the ACBR 3, in the Northeast Antarctic Peninsula.
If applicable, Important Bird Areas in Antarctica (Resolution 5
[2015]) represented by ASPA/ASMA been identified? (see the
summary appended to the Information Document IP 27 from the
XXXVIII ATCM, Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015.
Summarised report” and the full report at: http://www.era.gs/
resources/iba/)? Yes/No (if the answer is yes, indicate the main
Important Bird Area here).
No.
