Earthquake Emergency Management System
Earthquake Emergency Management System
Working Paper submitted by Chile
Background
The north of the Antarctic Peninsula has been experiencing unusual
seismic activity in the Bransfield Strait, starting at the end of August
2020, with an earthquake of magnitude 4.9 (according to the
United States Geological Survey, USGS) felt on 29 August at 12:47
(UTC) and the following day 30 August at 10:31 (UTC), with the
occurrence of a 5.4 Mw earthquake (USGS). The tectonics around
the Antarctic peninsula are complex, since there are various
processes of convergence, divergence and lateral sliding of plate
segments in a relatively small area, such as the subduction zone of
the remnant of the Phoenix paleoplate in the northwest of the South
Shetland Islands and the separation of the South Shetland
microplate from the Antarctic plate.
Since the end of August 2020, more than 30 thousand earthquakes
have been detected on the white continent through seismic sensors
and satellite technologies. There has also been a significant increase
in the rate of deformation of the crust by more than one order of
magnitude, from only a few millimetres per year to about 15
centimetres per year. Instruments located on King George Island
managed to measure in just four months, from September to
December 2020, a shift of about 5.5 cm in a northwest direction.
The situation regained public visibility after the earthquake on
Saturday, 23 January, at 20:36:51 (local time) with a magnitude of
7.1 and its epicentre located near Bridgeman Island, about 250 km
northeast of the Chilean O'Higgins, Escudero and Eduardo Frei
bases. This event, together with that of 8 February 1971, which also
occurred within a radius of approximately 300 km from the Chilean
bases, are the only two major earthquakes, of magnitude >6.5 in
the last 70 years at least.
Chile has a Seismic Activity Monitoring System and a National
Tsunami Alarm System (SNAM), the responsibility of the
Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service of the Chilean Navy
(SHOA), which is part of the Pacific Tsunami Warning and
Mitigation System. This system is fed by information from DART
buoys (Deep ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis) and
from a network of 45 Sea Level Stations, two of which are located
in the northern sector of the Antarctic Peninsula. In the event of a
tsunami, the SNAM sends information on the earthquake
parameters and the estimated time of arrival to the civil
organisations in charge of notifying the population and the Armed
Forces based in the ports and inlets along the coast. Therefore, the
Chilean bases in Antarctica have immediate information in the
event of a tsunami risk.
Based on this monitoring and warning system, Chile has developed
tsunami evacuation plans in all inhabited coastal areas, which
involve the evacuation of people to areas higher than 30 metres
above sea level following the international recommendation given
by the International Tsunami Information Centre (ITIC). In this
regard, the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) has generated and
implemented emergency and evacuation plans that respond, among
others, to earthquake and tsunami threats.
The emergency and evacuation plans have been designed for each
facility and seek to familiarise its occupants, both scientists and
support personnel, with the base, its evacuation routes, the
emergency systems implemented, such as the warning system
(emergency lights, warnings); fire extinguishing systems (smoke
detectors, wet network, fire warnings); security areas and
emergency procedures for each threat.  
An important aspect of base Emergency and Evacuation Plans is the
definition of a shelter or evacuation location. These places must
provide: shelter, water, food and aid; therefore, they must have a
basic supply in case of emergency. The distribution of articles, their
quantities, and specifications vary by virtue of the characteristics of
each installation and the environment in which they are located. An
example of the above is the list of implements from the LARC
(Antarctic Laboratory for Cosmic Rays) shelter at the “Professor
Julio Escudero” base, located on King George Island.
 
 
Summary
Considering the unusual increase in the frequency of seismic
movements observed in the north of the Antarctic Peninsula,
including a 7.1 magnitude earthquake that activated the Chilean
tsunami warning system, and the probability that a high-magnitude
earthquake or tsunami could seriously affect people and
infrastructure in Antarctica, it is considered urgent to share the
scientific information available to study and analyse this
phenomenon.
We also propose the urgent establishment of an information
platform related to Disaster Risks in Antarctica, providing the
contact details of those in charge by country/base, established
evacuation places, locations of shelters and their level of
implementation. Cooperation and exchange of good practices
among the Parties in this matter are very relevant to face disaster
risks in Antarctica and in particular in the Antarctic Peninsula.
We propose: 
To invite the Parties to share information on their research on
seismological or potential disaster risks in Antarctica.
To ask the SCAR to report to the next ATCM on seismological
research or potential disaster risks in Antarctica.
To ask the COMNAP to prepare a report to evaluate the general
situation of emergency plans in Antarctic bases and the degree of
implementation of disaster risk programmes.
 To encourage interested Parties to review existing emergency
management plans in order to evaluate their implementation and
share their good practices with other Parties.
In this regard, Chile submits the following draft resolution to
consideration by the ATCM, so that it can be discussed among the
Parties, amended if necessary, and approved in order to give due
attention to the emergency management of seismic disasters in
Antarctica.
Proposed resolution
The Representatives:
Recognising the risks of seismic activity for people and
infrastructure in Antarctica, and the importance of safeguarding
operations in Antarctica;
Desiring that disaster risks in Antarctic operations be minimised;
Noting the need to perform monitoring and research on the increase
in seismic activity in the Antarctic Peninsula and to obtain data to
assess the risks associated with a high-magnitude seismic event;
Recognising the tradition of cooperation among the Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty;
And thanking the COMNAP for the work done on this matter;
Recommend that the Parties:
Identify and share information with other Parties about their
seismological research and potential disaster risks in Antarctica.
Invite the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
(COMNAP) to present a report to assess the general situation of
emergency plans at Antarctic bases and the degree of
implementation of disaster risk programmes.
Invite the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to
present a report on seismic activity in Antarctica and the risks to
people and infrastructures in Antarctica.
Review, as far as possible, their emergency management plans in
order to evaluate their implementation and share their good
practices with the other Parties.
