Important Bird Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:
Toward the development of selection criteria
Important Bird Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:
Towards the development of selection criteria
Submitted by Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Spain,
United Kingdom, United States
Summary
In 2015 the ATCM endorsed a report listing 204 Important Bird
Areas (IBAs) across Antarctica and offshore islands south of 60o
South. In doing so the ATCM adopted Resolution 5 (2015), which
requested the CEP update the ATCM on which IBAs were or should
be included in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
(ASPAs).
This paper summarises intersessional discussions on selection
criteria that might be applied to identified IBAs or other bird areas
when considering ASPA designation.
Further work is required to refine and test the criteria to ensure that
they provide a scientifically defensible approach to selecting IBAs or
other colonies or aggregations The term ‘bird areas’ is used
throughout this document, which is intended to include ‘colonies’ of
birds, which is appropriate for many Antarctic breeding species
which aggregate very strongly when breeding, as well as other
locations where birds such as snow petrels and Wilsons storm
petrels, only loosely aggregate when breeding. The term ‘colony’ is
used when it clearly applies to a certain species or when referring to
Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V to the Protocol which uses this term. that
may merit consideration for ASPA designation. To support this,
consultation with SCAR and other scientific experts is proposed. It
is also recommended that consideration is given as to how further
development of these criteria could support the CEP’s ongoing work
to systematically develop the Antarctic protected area system.
The information presented in this Working Paper is supplemented
by Information Paper 23.
Introduction
Important Bird Areas and Antarctica
The IBA programme was established by BirdLife International to
identify sites of international conservation significance for the
world’s birds. More than 12,000 IBAs in over 200 countries have
been documented and delineated. The term ‘IBA’ is not a formal
designation and does not imply that the site should necessarily
become a protected area. It is simply an indication of the
significance of a site for a single bird species or colonies or
aggregation of birds BirdLife International now refers to these sites
as Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas. See: https://
www.birdlife.org/worldwide/programme-additional-info/
important-bird-and-biodiversity-areas-ibas.
Between 2013 and 2015, with support from the Governments of
Australia, New Zealand, Norway and the United States, and the Pew
Charitable Trusts, work was undertaken to develop a list of IBAs for
Antarctica using a standardized set of data-driven criteria and
thresholds. The analysis resulted in 204 IBAs being identified across
Antarctica and offshore islands south of 60o South.
The ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica’ report was presented to the
18th meeting of the CEP (ATCM XXXVII/WP 40) with the
recommendation that the identified IBAs be endorsed. On the
advice of the CEP, the ATCM welcomed the report and adopted
Resolution 5 (2015) which recommended that Governments:
welcome and acknowledge the report on identified IBAs in
Antarctica, which covers breeding sites;
bring the report to the attention of the Secretariat of the Agreement
on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels for its consideration
including in the preparation of environmental impact assessments;
take account of the information in the report in the planning and
conduct of their activities in Antarctica;
request the CEP to provide an update to the ATCM on the extent to
which these IBAs are, or should be, represented within the series of
ASPAs, in particular those areas that might qualify as “major
colonies of breeding native birds”; and
undertake appropriate monitoring of bird populations to inform
future management actions that may be required.
Further work was undertaken to assess the extent to which
identified IBAs were included within the current series of ASPAs,
and a report was submitted to CEP XX (ATCM XL/ WP 37). This
report identified three possible methods (based on population
numbers, species diversity or a combination of both) for selecting
IBAs that may merit ASPA designation. The report also identified
additional factors (such as scientific importance, locality, rarity,
threat status and proximity to human activity) that may need to be
taken into account.
In response to this report the CEP encouraged interested Parties to
work intersessionally to develop criteria for assessing the suitability
of bird colonies for ASPA designation including to identify what
constitutes 'major colonies of breeding birds' and to report back
(Report of CEP XX, paragraphs 156-160).
Current representation of IBAs in ASPAs
Of the 72 ASPAs currently designated, 39 (54%) have listed
avifauna as a primary or secondary value to be protected. Birds may
or may not be present within the remaining ASPAs, although their
presence has not been included in the description of values to be
protected in their respective management plans Harris, C.M.,
Lorenz, K. and Sypoz, M. 2017. Representation of Important Bird
Areas in the Series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. Report to
the Governments of New Zealand, Norway and the United
Kingdom..
Of the 204 IBAs In 2018 BirdLife International recognised a further
(205th) Antarctic IBA at Ryder Bay Islands, which contains more
than 10% of the global population of south polar skuas. The islands
in Ryder Bay are part of a proposed ASPA put forward by the UK
and Netherlands to CEP XXIII. The USA has also put forward a
proposal for a "new" ASPA in the Rosenthal Islands, and if adopted,
this ASPA would include IBA No. 88. identified in 2015, 27 (13%)
are already designated as ASPAs, two encompass ASPAs and one
partly encompasses an ASPA Harris, C.M., Lorenz, K. and Sypoz, M.
2017. Representation of Important Bird Areas in the Series of
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. Report to the Governments of
New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom..
For 24 of the 27 ASPAs, the IBA trigger species was a subset of the
species listed as being an ASPA value (i.e. in many cases the diverse
assemblage of bird species was listed as the ASPA value), whereas
in the IBA it was only one or two of those species that functioned as
the IBA trigger. In the remaining three cases, at least one of the IBA
trigger species was not mentioned as an ASPA value.
Draft criteria used to select seabird breeding colonies for protection
A review of spatial protection criteria for breeding colonies of
seabirds used in other parts of the globe was undertaken to inform
the development of the draft criteria (see Information Paper 23).
Having considered a range of issues, draft criteria in the form of a
decision-making process that could be applied to the current list of
204 Antarctic IBAs, as well as other bird breeding sites across
Antarctica, are set out in Information Paper 23 with some examples,
and include:
Criterion A. Percent global population present
Criterion B. Percent of the Antarctic population present
Criterion C. Threat status of the species
Criterion D. Direct, indirect or cumulative pressures
Criterion E. Unique or rare features
Limitations
Data on the population status and trends of flying seabirds in
Antarctica generally remain extremely sparse. It is important to
record the limitations in the population data that were used to
identify the 204 Antarctic IBAs. There remains a lack of data for
many bird areas in Antarctica, not least because so much potential
breeding habitat has never been surveyed. Recent satellite
monitoring efforts have improved knowledge for some species See
for example: Schwaller, M.R., Lynch, H.J., Tarroux, A. and Prehn, B.
2018. A continent-wide search for Antarctic Petrel breeding sites
with satellite remote sensing. Remote Sensing of Environment, 210,
pp444-451., but satellite-based population estimates have low
precision making trend estimation difficult, and for some colonies
there has been little or no ‘on-the-ground’ verification. Targeted and
repeated surveys are likely to be required to verify remotely derived
population estimates and trends.
Further, the IBAs recognised in Antarctica by the ATCM (Resolution
5 (2015)), are only for breeding locations ashore. Elsewhere
conservation actions for seabirds are developed on a species-by-
species basis and encompass a range of actions that can be taken
across the lifecycle and full ecological range of the species Taylor,
Graeme A. 2000. Action plan for seabird conservation in New
Zealand. Wellington, N.Z. Dept. of Conservation, Biodiversity
Recovery Unit, 2000. ISBN 0-478-21921-5, Oppel, S., Bolton, M.,
Carneiro, A.P.B., Dias, M.P., Green, J.A. et al. 2018. Spatial scales of
marine conservation management for breeding seabirds. Marine
Policy, 98. pp37-46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.marpol.2018.08.024..
The designation of ASPAs to protect breeding colonies of birds in
Antarctica should not detract from the need to consider such
additional or optional protection measures, including designation as
a specially protected species, as well as the need also to protect
offshore foraging locations See for example: Handley J., Rouyer M-
M., Pearmain E.J., Warwick-Evans V., Teschke K., Hinke J.T., Lynch
H., Emmerson L., Southwell C., Griffith G., Cárdenas C.A., Franco
A.M.A., Trathan P. and Dias M.P. 2021. Marine Important Bird and
Biodiversity Areas for Penguins in Antarctica, Targets for
Conservation Action. Front. Mar. Sci. 7:602972. doi: 10.3389/
fmars.2020.602972.
Discussion
The intent of this current work is to respond to the ATCM’s request
to the CEP (Resolution 5 (2015)). The intent is not to increase the
number of ASPAs by a large number, nor to bias the series of ASPAs
in favour of protecting bird areas.
In some cases, existing ASPA designations could be modified to
better account for identified IBAs, through for example, modifying
the description of values being protected, amending management
controls or adjusting ASPA boundaries to better accommodate the
IBA. This might include consideration of including buffer zones or
seaward extensions of ASPAs to account, for example, for transit
routes or nearshore congregation areas adjacent to nesting sites.
There may be good reasons to consider some non-IBA bird colonies
for designation as ASPAs. There are a number of bird colonies that
do not meet the global IBA criteria, but which are likely to be
significant in the context of conserving Antarctic biodiversity,
including as important / unusual / major / representative areas
occurring beyond larger colonies. It will be important to ensure that
developed criteria are sufficiently broad so as to be applicable to
assessing the suitability of both IBA and non-IBA colonies for ASPA
designation.
Once developed, consideration could be given to incorporating the
developed criteria into the CEP’s Guidelines for Implementation of
the Framework for Protected Areas (Resolution 1 (2000).
Recommendations
The criteria presented remain in draft form and as a starting point
for further consideration.
The CEP is invited to:
review the draft criteria and their weighting presented in
Information Paper 23 and provide any additional comments or
advice;
request SCAR, in collaboration with ACAP and other seabird experts
as appropriate, and with interested Parties, to consider the draft
criteria and how they might be applied and report back to the CEP
with any advice and suggested revisions;
consider how the draft criteria might be incorporated into the CEP’s
work on further development of the Antarctic protected area
system;
provide a report to the ATCM XLIII on progress made in addressing
the ATCM’s request set out in Resolution 5 (2015);
encourage their research communities to continue to monitor and
survey Antarctic bird colonies so as to fill gaps in population data
and inform changes in population levels.
