Fourth report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach
Fourth report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and
Outreach
Working Paper submitted by Bulgaria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile,
Portugal, Spain and UK
Summary
At ATCM XLII (2019) in Prague, Parties decided to continue the
work of the intersessional contact group (ICG) on Education and
Outreach, following a number of Terms of reference related to
Education and Outreach. As well as the last year the ATCM in
Finland was cancelled, the work of ICG on Education and Outreach
continued over two years. As requested by the Meeting, this paper
aims to provide a summary on the discussions taken within the ICG
and recommends considerations by the ATCM of the outcomes of
the intersessional work. Overall, there are 25 posts (up to
27.04.2021) from 7 Parties, Observers and Experts comprising 425
views within the forum, particularly on national and international
education and outreach activities.
Background
The ICG on Education and Outreach was established during ATCM
XXXVIII (2015) in Sofia and it was followed by a very successful
workshop in which ninety-seven participants from thirty-seven
Parties, Observers and Experts took part. During ATCM XXXIX
(2016) in Santiago, Bulgaria introduced WP 24 First Report on the
Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach, jointly
prepared with Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Portugal and the United
Kingdom. The ATCM recognised the contribution of Parties and the
usefulness of the ICG’s work. Parties were advised to continue to
use and promote the forum on Education and Outreach to share
information on Education and Outreach activities and events with
each other. Contributions to Education and Outreach activities from
an Antarctic Treaty Perspective remains within the Multi-Year
Strategic Work Plan of the ATCM.
As stated in the final report of ATCM XLII (2019) in Prague,
paragraph 208, the Meeting agreed to continue the ICG on
Education and Outreach for another intersessional period, and
agreed to the following terms of reference:
Foster collaboration at both the national and international level, on
Education and Outreach;
Identify key international activities/events related to education and
outreach for possible engagement by the Antarctic Treaty Parties;
Share results of education and outreach initiatives that demonstrate
the work of Antarctic Treaty Parties in managing the Antarctic
Treaty area;
Emphasise ongoing environmental protection initiatives that had
been informed by scientific observations and results, in order to
reinforce the importance of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on
Environmental Protection;
Promote related education and outreach activities by Experts and
Observers, and encourage cooperation with these groups;
Discuss the possibility for the creation of an Antarctic Education
and Outreach section on the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) website.
Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, Portugal, Spain and the United
Kingdom will continue to form the Core Group which will moderate
this forum.
Method of Operation
The ICG operates using the online ATCM Discussion Forum, under
the topic ‘ICG on Education and Outreach’. The discussion is open
to all Parties, Observers and Experts. Currently there are 38 points
of contact listed as participating in the ICG. Of these 7 parties and
observers and experts (up to 27.04.2021) have participated in the
forum. The ICG began work with an opening announcement by the
convener 15th October 2019. The work plan was arranged in three
stages:
Stage 1: Opening announcement with opening notes, proposed
timetable and working scheme;
Stage 2: Requesting parties to provide initial comments, proposals
and sharing information on ToR issues;
Stage 3: Preparation and submission of Working Paper report of the
ICG for ATCM.
Taking in account that the last year`s ATCM was postponed, the
work of the ICG continued over a period of two years.
Discussions
There are 25 posts (up to 27.04.2021) from 7 parties, observers and
experts (Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, India, Portugal, UK and
COMNAP). There are 16 topics and 425 views within the forum:
Opening Announcement; Celebrating Fernão de Magalhães/Fernand
Magellan/Hernando de Magallanes; Antarctica Day 2019; UN
Conference on Oceans: links to the Antarctic Treaty; Special issue
on Polar Education and Outreach; Contributions of Belgian
scientists to Education and Outreach related to Antarctica;
COMNAP Workshop 2019; Czech Republic - Education and
Outreach activities - 2019; POLAR WEEKS 2020 and ongoing
Outcomes; Bulgaria - Education and Outreach Activities march
2020-march 2021; UK public engagement in a new polar research
ship, enhancing diversity in polar science and education and
outreach during a global pandemic; APECS report on E & O 2020.
The pandemic coronavirus disease COVID19 required most of the
reported activities to be carried out online or in accordance with
the pandemic restrictions in different countries.
A number of activities celebrating the 500th anniversary of the first
World circumnavigation made by the expedition of Fernão de
Magalhães/Fernand Magellan/Hernando de Magallanes in 1519
were discussed and noted.
Some Parties (Czech Republic, Belgium and Bulgaria) shared
information about their education and outreach activities in the
intersessional period. Belgium shared a very positive experience of
an itinerant exhibition, Antarctica, by Luc Jacquet.
POLAR WEEKS and Antarctica Day celebrations were shared with
numerous online activities organised by the different countries.
Digital technologies such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams and Webinars
provide effective online platforms to connect polar scientists,
schools and general public. As an example, Association of Polar
Early Career Scientists (APECS) Portugal and PEI (Polar Educators
International) carried out a POLAR WEEK in September 2020 and
engaged 11152 students, 12 Antarctic scientists and 78 teachers/
educators with related partners; and British Antarctic Survey’s
Antarctica Week 10 zoom webinars attracted over 70000 viewers
and a further 1800 viewings of the recordings. The estimated total
audience for #AntarcticaWeek posts shared across BAS, and
external social media was 1.03 million.
A UK STEM campaign built around the high profile and public
celebration of the new Royal Research Ship – the RRS Sir David
Attenborough over three days 26-28 September engaged millions of
school children from Britain and around the world.
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
reported the outcome from the half day Education and Outreach
Workshop called “Communicating the Importance of our Antarctic
Research”, which was held during the Annual General Meeting
XXXI (2019) in Plovdiv, Bulgaria. During the workshop, national
Antarctic programs shared their experiences in launching a general
public campaign through the media and live updates about the
current and future work of the Antarctic programs. In the report it
was emphasised the importance of the usage of digital media,
online platforms and modern technology for reaching out to the
better communities between Antarctic stations and general public.
The article, “Education and outreach by the Antarctic Treaty
Parties, Observers and Experts under the framework of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings”, in the special Issue on Education
and Outreach
by the journal Polar Records, reflecting on Education, Outreach and
Engagement ten years after the International Polar Year 2007-8,
was shared widely online.
Recommendations
The ICG recommends that the ATCM
Recognizes the usefulness of the Forum on Education and Outreach
Advises the Parties to keep promoting the usage of the Forum to
provide information of their activities related to Education and
Outreach
Encourage key international activities/events related to education
and outreach that Parties can engage
Advises the Parties to continue to promote not only Antarctica and
Antarctic research through their Education and Outreach Activities
but the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol itself.
