The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD):
Areas of Ecological Significance in the Antarctic marine
environment
The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD):
Areas of Ecological Significance in the Antarctic marine
environment
Working Paper submitted by France, Australia, Belgium, Germany,
the United Kingdom, the United States, and South Africa
Summary
This paper draws attention to the publication in the scientific
journal Nature of the results of the Retrospective Analysis of
Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD), a project of the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Expert Groups on Birds
and Marine Mammals and Antarctic Biodiversity Informatics. Using
assemblage-level tracking of marine predators, the analysis aimed
to enhance understanding of fundamental ecosystem processes in
the Southern Ocean by identifying ‘Areas of Ecological Significance’
(AESs) with high concentrations of multiple predator species.
Integration of more than 4,000 tracks from 17 bird and mammal
species revealed AESs around sub-Antarctic islands in the Atlantic
and Indian Oceans and over the Antarctic continental shelf (see the
related Information Paper “The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic
Tracking Data identifies Areas of Ecological Significance in the
Southern Ocean” presented by SCAR).
The RAATD project is a good example of SCAR’s important role to
assist in the coordination of large-scale data collation, processing
and multi-national collaboration – notions at the core of the
Antarctic Treaty. The co-authors of this paper consider that the
AESs should be utilised by the CEP and ATCM as appropriate to
support the objectives and environmental principles of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
France, Australia, Belgium, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
United States, and South Africa recommend that the Committee
endorses, and advises the ATCM to adopt, a Resolution to recognise
the importance of the Areas of Ecological Significance (AESs) in the
Antarctic marine environment as a further tool to inform
management actions and assist Parties when planning and
conducting activities in Antarctica, including to assist
environmental impact assessments and to contribute to
environmental monitoring as well as to provide further information
in the elaboration or update of ASPAs and ASMAs management
plans. Further, the AESs contribute to priority actions identified in
the Climate Change Response Work Program to understand and
monitor changes to the Antarctic environment and species.
Background
The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD)
project began in 2009. This was a project initiated and led by the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Expert Groups
on Birds and Marine Mammals and Antarctic Biodiversity
Informatics. This analysis aimed to highlight ecologically significant
areas for multiple top predator species in the Southern Ocean. To
this end, spatial location data from on-board animal tracking
devices collected between 1991 and 2006 on 17 different species
with different ecological strategies and needs (seals, cetaceans,
flying and diving birds) were collated to build one of the largest
monitoring databases in the world with nearly 3,000,000 data
points. These data were made freely available, as per Article III of
the Treaty, and were introduced, together with the processing and
analysing scripts in a data paper published in the scientific journal
Nature Scientific Data (Ropert-Coudert et al. 2020) as a companion
paper to the main article in Nature.
While the scale of the project, which involved more than 80
scientists from 42 polar programmes, is one of the characteristics of
RAATD, it is above all the extreme attention paid to data cleaning,
verification and editing before sharing that makes RAATD an
extremely reliable source of information, especially in an era where
Big Data projects cannot/do not always pay the same level of
attention to the less glamourous data "cleaning" part, despite the
importance this has for further analysis. The important and
comprehensive data cleaning process took 9 years to complete. The
monitoring data were then used to model the combined use of
circumpolar
habitat by the 17 species of marine predators (Hindell et al. 2020).
By identifying, mapping and modelling areas of the Southern Ocean
where several predator species congregate, a better understanding
of the biodiversity of this area is gained. If predators that specialise
in krill, fish and squid all visit the same place this is likely to signal
high diversity, and probably abundance, of prey species at lower
levels of the food chain.
Recommendations
France, Australia, Belgium, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
United States, and South Africa recommend that the CEP endorses,
and advises the ATCM to adopt the draft Resolution in Annex 1 to
recognise the importance and utility of the Areas of Ecological
Significance (AESs) in the Antarctic marine environment.
References
Hindell M, Reisinger R, Ropert-Coudert Y, Huckstadt L, Trathan P,
Bornemann H, Charrassin JB, Shown S, Costa DP, Danis B, Lea MA,
Thompson D, Torres L, Van de Putte A, Alderman R, Andrews-Goff
V, Arthur B, Ballard G, Bengtson J, Bester M, Blix AS, Boehme L,
Bost CA, Boveng P, Cleeland J, Constantine R, Corney S, Crawford
R, Dalla Rosa L, PJN de Bruyn, Delord K, Descamps S, Double MC,
Emmerson L, Fedak M, Friedlaender A, Gales N, Goebel M, Goetz K,
Guinet C, Goldsworthy S, Harcourt R, Hinke J, Jerosch K, Kato A,
Kerry K, Kirkwood R, Kooyman G, Kovacs K, Lawton K, Lowther A,
Lydersen C, Lyver P, Makhado A, Márquez M, McDonald B,
McMahon C, Muelbert M, Nachtsheim D, Nicholls K, Nordøy E,
Olmastroni S, Phillips R, Pistorius P, Plötz J, Pütz K, Ratcliffe N,
Ryan P, Santos M, Southwell C, Staniland I, Takahashi A, Tarroux
A, Trivelpiece W, Wakefield E, Weimerskirch H, Wienecke B, Xavier
J, Wotherspoon S, Jonsen I, Raymond B (2020) Tracking of marine
predators to protect Southern Ocean ecosystems. Nature 580: 87–
92. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2126-y
Ropert-Coudert Y, Van de Putte A, Reisinger R, Bornemann H,
Charrassin JB, Costa DP, Danis B, Huckstadt L, Jonsen I, Lea MA,
Thompson D, Torres L, Trathan P, Wotherspoon S, Ainley D,
Alderman R, Andrews-Goff V, Arthur B, Ballard G, Bengtson J,
Bester M, Blix AS, Boehme L, Bost CA, Boveng P, Cleeland J,
Constantine R, Crawford R, Dalla Rosa L, PJN de Bruyn, Delord K,
Descamps S, Double MC, Emmerson L, Fedak M, Friedlaender A,
Gales N, Goebel M, Goetz K, Guinet C, Goldsworthy S, Harcourt R,
Hinke J, Jerosch K, Kato A, Kerry K, Kirkwood R, Kooyman G,
Kovacs K, Lawton K, Lowther A, Lydersen C, Lyver P, Makhado A,
Márquez M, McDonald B, McMahon C, Muelbert M, Nachtsheim D,
Nicholls K, Nordøy E, Olmastroni S, Phillips R, Pistorius P, Plötz J,
Pütz K, Ratcliffe N, Ryan P, Santos M, Southwell C, Staniland I,
Takahashi A, Tarroux A, Trivelpiece W, Wakefield E, Weimerskirch
H, Wienecke B, Xavier J, Raymond B, Hindell M (2020) The
retrospective analysis of Antarctic tracking data project. Nature
Scientific Data 7, 94. DOI: 10.1038/s41597-020-0406-x.
Annex 1. Draft Resolution on Areas of Ecological Significance
identified in the Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data
(RAATD) project
Resolution XXX (2021)
Areas of Ecological Significance in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Recognising that, in some parts of Antarctica, a changing Antarctic
climate is having an observable effect on native wildlife;
Recalling Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), which requires that activities
in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to
limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment;
Recalling also the requirements of Annex II to the Protocol on the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora;
Welcoming the publication of the results of the Retrospective
Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD) project of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Expert Groups
on Birds and Marine Mammals and Antarctic Biodiversity
Informatics, which has identified Areas of Ecological Significance in
the Antarctic marine environment;
Aware of the potential for harmful disturbance to marine predators
in Antarctica from a range of human activities in the region;
Aware also that ongoing research is required to further improve the
state of knowledge of the status and trends of Antarctic marine
predator populations and their distribution at sea;
Recommend that their Governments:
1. welcome and acknowledge the RAATD project publication on
identified Areas of Ecological Significance in the Antarctic marine
environment, which are used by multiple predator species;
2. bring the report to the attention of the Secretariats of the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses
and Petrels for their consideration;
3. take account of the identified Areas of Ecological Significance in
the planning and conduct of their activities in Antarctica, including
in the preparation of environmental impact assessments and in the
development of new ASPAs with a marine component, or to review
already agreed management plans of ASPAs/ASMAs;
4. consider how these Areas of Ecological Significance could serve
as a basis to complement Antarctic marine spatial protection and
management; and
5. continue to undertake appropriate on-land and at-sea monitoring
of predator populations to inform future management actions that
may be required.
