Proposal to Enhance Cooperation in the Research and Monitoring
on the Population Dynamics of Penguins in the Ross Sea Region
Proposal to Enhance Cooperation in the Research and Monitoring
on the Population Dynamics of Penguins in the Ross Sea Region
Working Paper submitted by China
Summary
Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adelie Penguin
(Pygoscelis adeliae) are key indicators of the Antarctic ecosystem in
the Ross Sea Region. The historical data reveals that the rise and
fall of the populations of penguins in this region are largely
influenced by the natural climatic and environmental variation, and
migration of populations in different colonies. The population size
of Emperor Penguins in the Ross Sea region have been increasing
with fluctuation in the recent 2 decades, while Adelie population
shows a steady increasing trend. It is proposed that ATCM and the
CEP further encourage Parties/members to Enhance Cooperation in
the Research, Monitoring and assessment on the Population
Dynamics of Penguins in the Ross Sea Region to inform the
decision-making on relevant topics, and incorporate the related
science needs into relevant their work Plan.
1. Significance
Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adelie Penguin
(Pygoscelis adeliae), as important endemic species to Antarctica, are
key indicators of the Antarctic ecosystem (Taylor and Wilson 1990).
Adelie Penguin and Emperor Penguins are the only penguin species
in the Ross Sea Region, which supports 25-30% of the population of
Emperor Penguins and 30% of Adelie Penguins.
The genetic structures of Emperor Penguins and Adelie Penguins in
the Ross Sea region are different from those in other regions. SNP
molecular markers show that the genetic structure of Emperor
Penguin in the Ross Sea region is significantly different from other
meta-populations. The Ross Sea region is the only such a region
with record of penguins in the Last Glacial Period. Adelie Penguins
inhabited Beaufort Island and areas along Scott Coast can be dated
back to 45,000-26,000 year ago (Emslie et al., 2007). The earliest
records of penguins since the Pleistocene was found at Terra Nova
Bay as early as 8,500-8,200 ago (Gao inlitt., Lambert et al. 2002，
Parks et al. 2015), matching the time of the retreat of ice shelf in
the region.
The historical data reveals that the rise and fall of the populations
of penguins are largely influenced by the natural climatic and
environmental variation, interactions among atmosphere-ocean-
ecosystem, and migration of populations. The primary control
factors might vary in different spatial and temporal scales. It is
found that the falls of penguin populations in some areas usually
coincides with the rises in other areas, and climate change may also
drive penguins to move to new suitable breeding sites.
2. Population Dynamics
The analysis of scientific data and information demonstrates that
the population size of Emperor Penguins in the Ross Sea region
have been increasing with fluctuation in the recent decades, while
Adelie population shows a steady increasing trend.
There are seven main breeding colonies of Emperor Penguin in the
Ross Sea region. The populations of Emperor Penguins in the
colonies demonstrated an increasing trend with relatively great
fluctuation. The greatest record in the numbers of chicks and adults
were respectively 65220 and 79253 breeding pairs in 2012, while
the records in 2011 were the second, with 56512 and 77845
breeding pairs respectively.
The long-term and systematic monitoring started in 1981. The
extent and duration of sea ice in the Ross Sea region has been
increased in the past 40 years, resulting in the increase of
population size of Adelie Penguin. Despite the individual population
size varied among colonies, the populations of Adelie Penguins in
the largest
colonies in the Ross Sea region e.g. Cape Adare, Cape Crozier, Cape
Bird, Beautfort Island, and Possession Island, have been increasing.
The population size of Adelie Penguins in the Ross Sea region was
estimated to be 1,080,000 breeding pairs through aerial image
during 1981-1987; and average population size was estimated to be
855,625 pairs through aerial image during 1981-2012. The
breeding population in the 24 breeding colonies in the Ross Sea
region was estimated to be 1,175,271 pairs combining with field
survey and satellite image.
3. Conclusion
Emperor Penguin and Adelie Penguin are key indicators of Antarctic
ecosystem, especially in the Ross Sea region. On the basis of the
analyses on available data, it can be concluded that: (1) The
population size of Emperor Penguin has been increasing in the
whole Antarctica. An increase since 2000 is obvious with
fluctuation because of natural change and logistics of survey. (2)
The size of Adelie Penguin is in a stable increase at the main
colonies in the Ross Sea region.
The survey data shows large variations of population sizes of some
breeding penguins, and also reveals the risk of instability. The
fluctuation of population sizes at some colonies could reflect the
real situation, while the difference of methods and accuracy, or the
migration of populations among the colonies could not be excluded.
Therefore, the regional and/or the species-scale status and trend
may not be fully reflected in the result of the surveys
China has surveyed and protected the population of Adelie Penguin
on Inexpressible Island in recent years in cooperation with
neighboring stations, with the support of existing temporary
facilities at the new station in the Ross Sea region. With the
construction of new station in the Ross Sea region, more scientific
research programs could be conducted to contribute to the research
and monitoring on the penguin populations and the ecosystems in
the Ross Sea region, with a view to support cooperation of Parties
in developing appropriate and effective management measures.
4. Recommendations
ATCM and the CEP further encourage Parties/members to promote
international cooperation and data sharing:
1) to conduct a comprehensive, coordinated, long-term, and
accurate research, monitoring and assessment of the population
dynamics of Emperor Penguins and Adelie Penguins in all breeding
colonies across the Ross Sea area, on the basis of systematic
planning and comprehensive collaboration, reducing local
population variation caused by migration, investigation methods,
etc. and include environmental factors such as sea ice, temperature,
and productivity of ocean to reveal the patterns of population
change and the dynamics of drivers. Establish the status and long-
term trend of Emperor Penguins and Adelie Penguins through
international collaboration and data sharing, with the aim to inform
the decision-making on relevant ATCM and CEP topics.
2) to incorporate the relevant science needs into relevant ATCM and
CEP work Plan.
Attachment：Population Dynamics of Emperor Penguins and Adelie
Penguins in the Ross Sea Region
