Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on Post-Visit
Reports
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on Post-Visit
Reports
Working Paper submitted by Argentina as the ICG Convener
Summary
During ATCM 42, and following the discussions held after the
presentation of WP 66 “Reviewing requirements for exchanging
information on non-governmental expeditions” (Argentina), the
Meeting agreed to establish an ICG on the Review of Post-Visit
Reports.
The ICG was assigned the following Terms of Reference (ToR):
To examine the content of the format of the Post-Visit Report
contained in Resolution 6 (2005) relative to the information
exchange requirements.
To propose modifications to the Post-Visit Report that would
facilitate full compatibility between the information exchange
requirements and these reports.
To submit the results of the analysis and the proposed changes to
the ATCM 43, with the aim of updating Resolution 6 (2005).
Background
Through WP 66 (ATCM 42), Argentina raised different issues
related to the exchange of information on non-governmental
activities under the premise that the efficiency of the tools that are
designed for tourism monitoring is based on more precise evidence
to allow for better informed decisions. In this sense, it was also
noted that while the information exchange requirements have been
subject to past reviews and now include a rather wide range of data
to be exchanged, it was still possible to improve them so that
Parties have a more complete overview of tourism activities in the
Antarctic Treaty area, thereby assisting decision-making. Among the
issues raised, the need to revise the format and content of Post-Visit
Reports was also noted.
As was indicated by Argentina in WP 66, the Post-Visit Report,
completed one per trip by tour operators for referral to their
National Competent Authority, is the main source of information
that National Programmes depend on for completing their data on
non-governmental operations that they must submit in accordance
with the Annex of Decision 5 (2016) Currently Decision 7 (2019)..
The format and content of the Post-Visit Report was adopted
through Resolution 6 (2005), but has not been modified since then,
even though the information exchanges requirements have been
Decision 6 (2013) refers to Resolution 6 (2005), without modifying
it. It indicates the need “2. to revise the Electronic Information
Exchange System (“EIES”) to include:a) a list of non-governmental
ship-based and land-based expedition activities from which Parties
can select one or more for reporting in annual information, to be
aligned with the activity fields in the Post Visit Site Report Form
endorsed in Resolution 6 (2005), with the flexibility to enter
additional activities; andb) the number of visitors that participate in
each of the specific activities”;Decision 5 (2016) neither mentions
Resolution 6 (2005) nor modifies it.. It was consequently pointed
out by Argentina that it would be useful to review the consistency
between both tools, as they should mirror each other.
Argentina proposed that the ATCM establish an ICG to review the
compatibility between information exchange requirements and
Post-Visit Reports.
As stated in the ATCM 42 Final Report (paragraph 404), several
Parties reiterated the importance of maintaining comprehensive and
up-to-date information on non-governmental activities in order to
support evidence-based decision making.
Organisation of discussions
The forum operated during the intersessional period that extended
between ATCM 42 and 43 (2019 / 2021). Argentina, Australia,
Spain, France, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, ASOC and
IAATO, participated in three discussion rounds and commented on
the paper and provided valuable input.
A discussion paper was proposed to serve as a basis for work during
the three rounds and to reflect progress on each point raised.
In order to meet the first two ToRs, in the opening announcement
of the ICG, Argentina proposed to divide the work into two steps.
As a first step, Argentina made a preliminary comparative analysis
between the current content of Decision 7 (2019), IAATO IP 89
(2005) “Proposed Amendments to the Standard Post Visit Report
Form by the IAATO” and the PVR format adopted through
Resolution 6 (2005), agreed to after discussions held during the
presentation of IP 89, in order to review the consistency between
both tools, as they should mirror each other.
Argentina presented the results of this preliminary analysis in a
document for the consideration of the participants. In this
document, amendments were proposed to the PVR so as to facilitate
full compatibility of the PVRs with the information exchange
requirements.
In the second step Argentina proposed to discuss additional aspects
related to the current PVR format and raised a series of questions.
Different aspects like the addition of new sections to the PVR and
EIES, options for reporting a trip under the combined flight/ship
mode, definitions of incidents and tourist activities, the revision and
updating of the PVR, as well as the access and availability of the
document, were discussed thoroughly.
Finally, a first draft of the revised version of the PVR and its
instructions, resulting from the first two rounds of discussions, was
presented. Participants commented on the drafts, suggested
modifications and provided valuable input on aspects to be taken
into account.
The final discussion paper and the discussions of each round are
available on the ATCM forum.
General overview of the outcomes of the discussion
Decision 7 (2019) compared to PVR Resolution 6 (2005)
From the analysis conducted, differences were found between both
tools. It was noted that there were fields in the PVR format that
weren´t included in the information exchange requirements
contained in Decision 7 (2019) and the relevance of their inclusion
was assessed. Among those fields present in the PVR and not in the
information requirements, the addition of a field for unusual
incidents was considered but the type of information to be included
therein still requires further discussions.
The utility of current PVR format to report all current non-
governmental travel modalities
Participants agreed that in order to reflect new travel modalities,
such as package tours, some modifications to the PVR format would
be appropriate.
From the analysis carried out, it was agreed to add a new section
both in the PVR form (Part 1 A: Expedition Details, "combined
activity" / Part 2: list of activities the option "transfer of
passengers") and in the information exchange format to better
reflect journeys under the responsibility of more than one operator.
Consequently, there is a need to modify the information requested
in Decision 7 (2019) in order to incorporate information on
"combined activity” into section 2.2.2 Non-governmental
expeditions in its sections A) Vessel-based Operations, B) Land-
based Operations and C) Aircraft Activities.
To improve the registrations in order to develop better management
tools
Site visited
Participants agreed on the idea of enhancing the sites registration to
increase its standardization and precision, and recognised the
importance of keeping the list of sites up to date and having a
correlation between the EIES and the PVR.
During the PVR review, in the "site visited" section of the PVR, the
list provided by the ATS was incorporated in order to continue the
alignment with EIES.
While participants agreed that an update will be required each time
a NCA adds a new site, whether this should be done automatically
by the ATS or a "review/update period" for the PVR be established
and changes be introduced on a regular basis, needed further
discussion.
Activities at Site
Discussions on this point were conducted under the premise that all
activities carried out are evaluated previously by the corresponding
national authority, and the PVR and EIES form a post-activity
reporting system which plays no role in approval or authorisation
processes.
With the same criteria as in the column for "sites visited",
participants saw merit in enhancing the description of activities
carried out at each site. To improve recording, the participants
agreed to incorporate into the drop-down menu: the list of activities
mentioned in IAATO IP 145 (2019) and the options "other" and
"passenger transfer". In this sense, and to minimize errors when
selecting activities, the definitions from IP 145 (2019) were added
to the PVR instructions.
In order to have a correlation between the activities reported by the
Parties in the EIES and the PVR, there was support to request the
ATS to incorporate the agreed activities in the list of EIES.
In relation to the best way to keep this list updated, further
discussions are still pending. While some participants indicated that
it could be a task for the ATS as new activities are reported in the
EIES, others prefer that a periodic review be carried out.
Availability of the PVR Form
Participants agreed that it would be helpful to have a PVR form
available to be downloaded from the ATS website, and it was
pointed out that the structure of the form should not be editable
(i.e., no possibility to modify the list of landing sites or activities).
Like within the "site visited" and "activities" sections, debates on the
best way to keep the PVR form updated also require further
discussions.
Conclusions
As a result of the work of the Parties during the ICG, the revised
PVR form and instructions are hereby submitted to the ATCM for
adoption (see Attachment 1 and 2), with the modifications agreed
by participants. Likewise, it is proposed to amend the Requirements
for Exchanging Information on Non-Governmental Expeditions
(Decision 7 (2019)) to incorporate "combined activity" information
into section 2.2.2 Non-governmental shipments under A) Ship-based
operations, B) Shore-based operations and C) Aircraft activities.
The opportunity of having a space for discussion on the ATS
website constitutes a concrete response to the relevance assigned by
participants to debate on issues related to Tourism and the
Exchange of Information in
Antarctica. In this sense, these deliberations have been very fruitful
and promising, and it would therefore be desirable to keep the
momentum and continue these initial and very productive
discussions through this forum.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the ATCM:
Accepts the proposed modifications of the information exchange
requirements identified by the ICG and modifies Decision 7 (2019),
accordingly.
Accepts the proposed modifications of the Post Visit Report form
attached to this Working Paper and modify Resolution 6 (2005)
accordingly.
Requests that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat updates the
corresponding fields in the EIES and integrate the PVR form for
download from the ATS website in the Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities section and in the four official languages.
Encourage the Parties to continue discussing on these issues.
