Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has
conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 104: Sabrina
Island, Balleny Islands.
The review was conducted as a desktop exercise with reference to
Annex V of the Protocol and the Revised Guide to the Preparation
of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
The management plan was circulated for comment to scientists and
environmental managers of National Antarctic Programmes, and
tourism operators working within the Ross Sea region who conduct
research and tourism activities in the Area.
The revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached
revised Management Plan for ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny
Islands.
ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 4, Sabrina Island, by
Recommendation IV-4 (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 3 (2009)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 4 (2015)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2015)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 104: Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
The description of the area has minor information and editorial
updates that do not relate to identifying the location or boundary of
the Area.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Section 1: Very minor editorial updates.
Section 2: Very minor editorial updates.
Section 3: Addition of “to the extent practicable” to the 3rd bullet
point, to identify the difficulty of access to the site.
Section 6(i): Minor changes to the description to incorporate new
information about fauna at the site.
Section 7(ii): Minor updates on overflight information for
consistency with the maps. Addition of Resolution 4 (2018) for the
operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems.
Section 8: Addition of one publication to the Bibliography
Appendix 1, Table 1: Addition of bird species sighted in the Area
since the last management plan review.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect the outstanding
ecological values, specifically the biological diversity which is
unique for the Ross Sea region.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
N/A
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
N/A
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
N/A
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
N/A
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
N/A
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A
