Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guides for important historic sites in
the Ross Sea region
Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guides for important historic sites in
the Ross Sea region
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States
Summary
The “Heroic Era” sites of Cape Royds, Cape Evans, Hut Point and
Cape Adare are important historic sites in the Ross Sea region. They
also receive regular and increasing numbers of visitors. New
Zealand and the United States have identified the need to manage
the potential impacts of increasing numbers of visitors coming to
these four sites. They have taken proactive steps to review the
Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide No. 21 Cape Royds and draft
new Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guides for Cape Evans, Hut Point
and Cape Adare.
Context
Four sites in the Ross Sea region from the ‘Heroic Era’ of Antarctic
exploration are designated as Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs)
and as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs): ASPA No. 155
Cape Evans (HSM No. 16, HSM No. 17), ASPA No. 157 Backdoor
Bay (HSM No. 15), ASPA No. 158 Hut Point (HSM No. 18), and
ASPA No. 159 Cape Adare (HSM No. 22).
These sites are of exceptional historical importance and interest to
visitors, and are visited regularly. It is relatively uncommon for
ASPAs to be visited for educational or outreach purposes and these
four ASPAs are therefore unusual in this respect. All of these sites
are vulnerable to human disturbance, and strict measures are set
out in the ASPA management plans to ensure protection is
comprehensive and effective, including conditions for regulating
access.
People responsible for visits to these sites, including tour operators,
guides and leaders of national programme visitor groups, are
required and expected to be fully conversant with the detailed
management plans and to ensure that all visitors comply with their
provisions. All entry to these sites is strictly by permit.
However, the ASPA management plans are relatively detailed and
lengthy documents. There is a need to provide the broader audience
of visitors with key information and policies in a simpler form that
communicates the most important guidance and is more easily
accessible for use on-site.
This need was recognised at Cape Royds when, in accordance with
Resolution 5 (2005), New Zealand and the United States prepared a
Visitor Site Guide for Cape Royds (ATCM XXXII - CEP XII (2009),
WP013), which was adopted as Site No. 21 through Resolution 4
(2009).
The Cape Royds Visitor Site Guide covers the area of ASPA No.157,
which includes Shackleton’s historic Nimrod hut, as well as the
adjacent area surrounding ASPA No. 121 which is designated to
protect the local Adélie penguin colony and into which access is
prohibited except for scientific and management purposes.
Recognising that Antarctic tourism has continued to grow in recent
years and that the historic huts in the Ross Sea are of significant
interest, New Zealand and the United States have taken proactive
steps to manage potential impacts of visitors coming to the Ross Sea
by first revising and bringing up to date Visitor Site Guide No. 21
Cape Royds, and secondly by preparing new Visitor Site Guides for
the other three important historic hut sites within the Ross Sea that
are designated as ASPAs: Cape Evans, Hut Point and Cape Adare.
We note that the ASPA management plans for all of the historic
sites listed above, as well as that for ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds,
have been revised in accordance with the regular reviews required
under Annex V Article 6(3), and have been submitted for
consideration at this meeting. We further note that the guidance
provided in the draft Visitor Site Guides attached to this Working
Paper has been based faithfully on the provisions set out in the
revised management plans for these sites to ensure they are fully
consistent with the requirements that are established by the ASPAs.
Maps to support the Visitor Site Guides are based on those used in
the corresponding ASPA management plans, adapted in colour for a
more general audience.
New Zealand and the United States are happy to modify the Visitor
Site Guides attached to this Working Paper in accordance with the
adoption of any changes to the ASPA management plans for the
corresponding sites, or with adoption of other recommendations on
Visitor Site Guides that may be made by the Committee for
Environmental Protection.
Recommendation
The attached revised Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide No. 21
Cape Royds, Ross Island, and the new Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site
Guides for Cape Evans, Hut Point and Cape Adare, are
recommended for consideration by the Committee for
Environmental Protection and adoption by the ATCM.
