Report of the Informal Discussions on Relevant Issues, Trends and
Challenges to the Antarctic Treaty System
English version provided by the author
Report of the Informal Discussions on Relevant Issues, Trends and
Challenges to the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Summary
This Working Paper aims to summarise the comments and
suggestions that Consultative Parties made during the Informal
Discussions on Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to the
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). Due to COVID-19 pandemic the
discussions were rolled over to 2021. Eighteen Consultative Parties
have participated in this Informal Group. As a result of these
discussions, the Russian Federation suggests to continue these
discussions essential to the functioning of the ATS.
Background
At ATCM XLII, after discussing the Working document 57 “The
Antarctic Treaty in the Changing World” presented by the Russian
Federation, the Meeting decided to introduce a new item 16 of the
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan «Continue cooperation
between Parties to proactively identify and address current and
future trends related to the ATS» and establish “Informal
Discussions on Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to the
Antarctic Treaty System” at the ATCM Forum to be moderated by
the Russian Federation.
The focus of the task of the newly formed Group, as seized in the
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan, was on, inter alia:
an overview of the application of Article IX (2) of the Antarctic
Treaty;
a general analysis of the relationship between the ATS and other
relevant international legal frameworks; and
consideration of Antarctic-related activities by persons that were
not under the jurisdiction of States Party to the Antarctic Treaty
(AT).
The work of the aforementioned Group presented a timely
opportunity to discuss the overall state of things within the ATS and
to confirm that the ATS was functioning successfully coping with
the emerging challenges in an efficient and flexible manner. At the
same time further issues for the elaboration by the ATCM and other
ATS bodies were highlighted as important and suggested that they
required extra attention.
Informal Group
Discussions according to the new item 16 of the ATCM Multi-Year
Strategic Work Plan have proceeded steadily as intersessional
informal consultations within an on-line ATCM Forum. In addition,
there were outreach efforts on behalf of the Russian delegation for
the all-inclusiveness of the discussions and a more balanced output.
During several rounds eighteen Consultative Parties have
contributed to this Group’s work. Simultaneously more input was
provided by a greater number of Consultative Parties via
multilateral and bilateral contacts. This was of particular
importance as the topic is quite complex and sensitive. The
comments also indicated that the delegations required substantial
time to appropriately consider, including on interagency level, the
relevant issues. Thus, the process apparently has to be a long-term
one.
The functioning of this Group was also considered as a tool to
strengthen the mandate of the ATCM as a main political body
within the ATS on issues, affecting this System, its integrity and
efficiency as a whole. Simultaneously, many delegations stressed
that the deliberations on proactive identification of current and
future trends and issues related to the ATS trends should not
duplicate on-going discussions on specific issues brought to the
attention of the ATCM and CEP (e.g. tourist and other
nongovernmental activities). These tracks should complement each
other: the deliberations on specific, «technical» matters shall give
food for thought in terms of identifying current and future
challenges to the ATS and vice versa a common understanding as to
the existence of a challenge to the ATS may be of utmost
importance in terms of prioritizing the activities on specific issues.
Ultimately, such cross-fertilization will significantly facilitate the
deliberations of the ATCM agenda items devoted to the ATS.
From the outset it was agreed that the process should be organized
in a results-oriented manner with a focus on delivering some
practical solutions to the ATCM in areas most likely to achieve
broad consensus. The content of recently adopted Prague
Declaration should be a prominent point of reference, especially,
the provisions stressing the importance of ensuring that «all
activities in Antarctica are conducted in accordance with the
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty system».
Discussions also vividly demonstrated that some issues, which had
been raised during the Prague ATCM and in the aforementioned WP
57, need further and more-in-depth study, analyses and, on some
occasions, additional information and data to be collected. It
concerns, for all, the crosscutting issue of relationship between the
ATS and existing or potential legal frameworks of universal
character/geographical scope. Some delegations were cautious in
agreeing on taking up this issue further due to the fact that the
Consultative Parties have different suites of international
obligations depending on the other treaties to which they are party.
There is an apparent merit in a comprehensive study of these
matters, especially from the international law and law of treaties’
point of view, because the ATS may, most obviously, very soon be
confronted with significant challenges.
The suggested work is crucial for the Consultative Parties to
elaborate and to be able to represent to the outside world, in duly
coordinated manner, their joint and carefully crafted position to
protect, promote and further strengthen the ATS.
More discussion on the trends and issues to the ATS were welcomed
during the upcoming ATCM.
Conclusions
Upon the whole there was general support extended to the idea of
identifying the most important trends and issues related to the ATS
thus launching a valuable addition to the ATCM-mechanism for
review of the systematic issues related to the ATS. The issue seemed
to be urgent especially taking into account the appearance of quite
new and complex sorts of activities in Antarctica, including by
various nongovernmental actors, like tourism, and prominently
growing inland air-traffic.
Consensus should be stated in respect of the status of the Antarctic
Treaty as «inviolable cornerstone» of the ATS and paying high
regard to its adaptive «capabilities». The intention of the current
exercise is to further strengthen the ATS and to adapt it, as
appropriate, to emerging challenges - by means of overall, effective
and creative use of its potential and flexibilities, provided for, inter
alia, by Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
There should be noted a broad support expressed to the idea of
looking carefully into the issues of improving coordination between
different ATS institutions (e.g. ATCM-CEP and ATCM-CCAMLR). In
the opinion of the Russian Federation, the trend of blurring their
competences may have very strong and negative long-lasting impact
on the effectiveness and at the very end, on the integrity of the ATS
and ATCM, as its main political body.
It was mentioned by a significant number of delegations that it
would be very timely and appropriate to look more closely at what
can be done with the optimization of the process of decision-making
by the ATCM, e.g. in terms of speeding up the approval of Measures
by all Consultative Parties. On that point it might be appropriate,
inter alia, to refer to the idea, reflected in para.16 of the ATCM-
Multiyear Strategic Work Plan, to critically overview the existing
practice of implementation of the Article IX (2) of the Antarctic
Treaty as to the granting the status of its Consultative Party. Second
point in this respect indicated was in respect of ensuring complete
and in-good-faith implementation of the Measures and Decisions
approved by the ATCM by all Consultative Parties.
The other issue, which enjoyed general support, was the perception
of the ATS and application of its legal rules and standards by «third
Parties», namely: States which are not Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty, as well, as by persons, vessels and aircrafts of their
nationality intending to operate in Antarctica. In this context, the
Russian delegation drew attention to the issues of relationship
between the ATS and UNCLOS and between the ATS and BBNJ,
which are becoming more and more of pressing nature, considering
that among the 168 UNCLOS States-Parties, only 45 are
participating in the Antarctic Treaty.
Another aspect of the same issue, which may be of importance for
the States Parties to Antarctic Treaty, but due to cautious positions
expressed by many delegations has to be postponed to a later stage
was a potential legal uncertainty as to exact legal regime to be
applied to objects and/or activities «covered» both by the ATS legal
rules and norms of other international treaties and arrangements.
One more global trend, pointed out at the Forum, to be carefully
considered by the ATS was climate change and global warming. It
was suggested to consider this in two ways: a) the impact of this
global trend to Antarctica, its ecosystem and human activities in
Antarctica and, at the very end its legal status; and b) the influence
of Antarctica, its ecosystem and relevant human activities to the
processes of climate change and global warming. In this regard
there should be noted the idea to undertake a comprehensive
overview and assessment of Antarctic observation efforts - in
conjunction with intensifying and making more robust and globally
important science contributions by the Parties to international
cooperation in scientific investigation in Antarctica. To collectively
fill the existing gaps in scientific knowledge about the Antarctic and
its ecosystem, including its living marine resources, is definitely one
of most important, strategic issues to be addressed in the course of
efforts of strengthening the ATS.
At the final stages of the discussions it had also been suggested by
the Russian delegation that the issue of influence of the COVID
pandemic and the potential of introduction of COVID-19 virus to
the Antarctic should be viewed as one of the challenges not
previously analysed. There was a support of one delegation, but as
the process was in an advanced phase this did not receive further
elaboration by other Consultative parties and can be discussed at
the present ATCM.
Recommendations
The Russian Federation recommends that the ATCM:
Discusses the results of the outcomes of the Informal Discussions on
Relevant Issues, Trends and Challenges to the ATS;
Considers prolonging these informal discussions at the ATCM
Forum;
Updates MYSWP, as appropriate.
