Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 159 Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 159 Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast.
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has
conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 159: Cape
Adare, Borchgrevink Coast. The review was carried out
concurrently with other ASPAs in the Ross Sea that are designated
for their historic values.
The review was conducted with reference to Annex V of the
Protocol and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to
Resolution 2 (2011).
Stakeholder including Parties active in the Ross Sea region,
Antarctic heritage professionals at the Antarctic Heritage Trust, and
IAATO were consulted on the revisions.
The revisions are minor and outlined in the cover sheet and text
below.
Recommendations
The attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 159 Cape
Adare, Borchgrevink Coast is recommended for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection and adoption by the
ATCM.
On adoption of the revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 159
Cape Adare by the ATCM, it is recommended that the new
coordinates determined for HSM No. 22 Borchgrevink’s and Scott’s
Northern Party huts (71° 18' 26.2" S 170° 11' 28.3" E) and for HSM
No. 23 Hanson’s Grave (71° 18' 04"S 170° 13' 51"E) replace those
currently cited in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments
maintained by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
ASPA No. 159 Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 1 (1998)
First adoption of management plan:
Adopted at first designation.
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 11 (2010), Measure 14 (2015).
Current management plan:
Measure 14 (2015).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Recommendation VII-9 (1972), Decision 1 (2002), Resolution 2
(2011).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Corrections to boundary coordinates, although the shape and
configuration of the boundary remains similar.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. New maps have been prepared.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. New coordinates have been determined for HSM No. 22 and
HSM No. 23.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Annex V, Article 3.2 (h) Sites or monuments of recognised historic
value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment U – North Victoria Land geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Region 8 – North Victoria Land
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
Yes - IBA No. 165 is considered the whole of the Ridley Beach and
the lower western slopes of the Cape Adare promontory. The ASPA
is designated for the historic values not the IBA and is only a
portion of the IBA area.
ASPA No. 157 Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds, Ross Island (Historic Site
and Monument (HSM) No. 15) is designated to protect the historic
hut and associated artefacts from the British Antarctic Nimrod
Expedition of 1907-09 led by Sir Ernest Shackleton. The site is of
exceptional historical importance and interest, and strict measures
are set out in the ASPA management plan to ensure protection is
comprehensive and effective, including conditions for regulating
access.
The Management Plan was last updated in 2015, and in accordance
with Annex V Article 6.3 New Zealand has undertaken a review of
the Management Plan review for consideration in 2021. New
Zealand has carried out the review concurrently with other ASPAs
in the Ross Sea that are designated for their historic values. This
helped to ensure policy consistency across all of the ASPA plans for
historic sites in the Ross Sea.
Updates were made taking into account recent information on the
status of the values and features within the Area, changes made in
other ASPA management plans recently adopted, and the latest
agreements by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.
A process of stakeholder consultation on the revisions involving
Parties active in the Ross Sea region, Antarctic heritage
professionals at the Antarctic Heritage Trust, and IAATO was
undertaken over a period of more than six months.
Extensive editorial improvements to the structure, organisation and
clarity of the text have been made, in particular through:
the addition of an Introduction;
clarification of Aims and Objectives (Section 2);
elaboration of Management Activities in more detail (Section 3);
improvements in maps (Section 5), more detail on which are
provided below.
restructuring the Description of the Area (Section 6);
elimination of duplicative text in the sections relating to Access to
the Area (Section 6(ii) and Section 7(ii)), and the addition of
important policy detail on access to Section 7(ii);
clarifications about structures within and near the Areas (Section
6(iii));
focus of information on other protected areas in proximity that are
relevant to the historic values of the site (Section 6(iv));
edits to General Permit Conditions (Section 7(i)) so these are
consistent with wording used in other recent ASPA plans;
provision of more specific detail on the conditions of access to the
Area, including on pedestrian, vehicle, small boat and aircraft
access, and for use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
within the Area (Section 7(ii));
improvement in the clarity of limits to the numbers of people that
are permitted within the ASPA at any given time (Section 7(ii));
reorganisation of the Code of Conduct (Section 7(iii)) and clarifying
that it is mandatory so that items of greater importance appear
earlier in the list, the potential for fire in the historic huts being of
greatest concern. Use of selfie sticks inside huts has recently
emerged of
concern because of their potential to knock delicate artefacts within
a confined space, and this item has been added to the Code;
strengthening provisions on the import of materials and organisms
into the ASPAs, consistent with provisions made in other ASPAs and
in the CEP Non-native Species Manual (2019) (Section 7(vi));
clarification when materials for heritage purposes may be
introduced into the Area (Section 7 (vii));
clarification of the conditions under which materials may be
removed, in particular those that pose a threat to the historic values
of the site, and that where items may be removed for conservation
purposes their return is the preferred outcome unless they are at
risk of being damaged or destroyed (Section 7(viii));
clarification of measures necessary to meet the aims of the
Management Plan (Section 7(x)), in particular that people
responsible for managing site visits must be trained to be capable of
fulfilling their roles and that they must actively monitor activities
and take actions to correct any behaviour that is not in compliance
with the Management Plan;
addition of a brief list of supporting documentation and a list of
boundary coordinates (Section 8).
New maps were developed for ASPA No. 159 Cape Adare. Map 1 is
based on the SCAR Antarctic Digital Database (v7.1, 2019), while
Map 2 is based on newly acquired spatial data. The previous Cape
Adare management plan site map contained positional errors of up
to ~200 m, and consequently all coordinates in the management
plan were in error by this magnitude. As a result these coordinates
were incompatible with modern GPS.
The new Map 2 for Cape Adare was developed in collaboration with
the Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) and the United States
Antarctic Program. KOPRI acquired Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) imagery over Cape Adare in January 2020 as part
of their on-going research programme on the Ross Sea ecosystem,
and prepared a new high resolution digital orthophotograph for the
site. Absolute spatial accuracy was approximate (~20 – 30 m)
because ground control points could not be acquired during this
mission. Therefore, to improve geopositional accuracy, in
collaboration with the United States a spatial adjustment was
applied to the orthophoto to match its position to a new WorldView
3 satellite image of the site (0.3 m resolution), which was
orthorectified by the Polar Geospatial Center, University of
Minnesota (image copyright Digital Globe 2019).
Map 2 has an estimated spatial accuracy of approximately +/- 5 m,
which is comparable to handheld GPS. The new map has been used
to determine revised coordinates for the boundaries of the protected
area at Cape Adare, although the overall size and shape of the
boundary remains similar. This allows visitors to use the new map
and management plan with handheld GPS in the field to locate the
ASPA boundaries with reasonable accuracy. The boundaries have
sufficient buffers to allow for residual inaccuracies in the
geopositioning and to ensure protection around the historic features
is maintained.
Through the work undertaken to improve the maps for ASPA No.
159 Cape Adare, the revised coordinates for HSM No. 22 are 71° 18'
27.5"S 170° 11' 29"E (centred on Borchgrevink’s living hut), and
these should be used to update the list of HSMs maintained by the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
The currently listed coordinate for nearby and closely associated
Hanson’s Grave (HSM No. 23) (71° 17'S 170° 13'E) was also found
to be in substantial error, and places the HSM several kilometres
north of Cape Adare in the ocean. While this site lies beyond the
extent of the new orthophoto prepared by KOPRI, a new GPS
position acquired by Prof. C. Carey (University of Waikato) for HSM
No. 23 is 71° 18' 04"S 170° 13' 51"E. This position should be used to
update the list of HSMs maintained by the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat.
Revisions to the management plan attached to this Working Paper
have been extensive, and have involved detailed review and
discussions by stakeholders, and in particular among national
programmes operating in the region, with the Antarctic Heritage
Trust and IAATO. While important improvements have been made
to the maps and coordinates, New Zealand has classified the
revisions as ‘minor’ because matters of critical policy substance,
such as the values protected by the
site, the policies on numbers of visitors allowed, activities that are
allowed, the conditions of access, and the boundary configuration
have not changed.
