Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation IV-7
(1966, SPA No. 7)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation IV-7
Any revisions to management plan:
Recommendation XIII-13 (1985), Measure 1 (2002), Measure 5
(2010), Measure 6 (2015).
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2015).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea.
Other relevant measures:
Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines for Seabee Hook, Cape
Hallett
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
The northern boundary of the Area has been adjusted on Seabee
Hook to reflect the most recent data on the distribution of breeding
penguins. A new Facilities Zone has been designated in the
southeast of the Area.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics with color added to all maps. A map of the
new Facilities Zone has been added.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. A Facilities Zone has been added to the description of the Area
and to relevant maps.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No. However, minor changes to the boundary affect the adjacent
Visitor Site Guidelines area at Seabee Hook.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
((b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds;
(d) the type locality of two species;
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic value;
(h) sites of recognised historic value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment U – North Victoria Land Geologic’.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. ACBR8 – North Victoria Land.
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
Cape Hallett is identified as IBA No. 170.
ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 106 Cape Hallett was last
revised in 2015, and review thus fell due in 2020. Accordingly, the
United States has made a number of revisions to the Management
Plan, both as a result of recent changes within the Area and in light
of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last
plan was adopted.
Cape Hallett was originally designated as Specially Protected Area
(SPA) No. 6 through Recommendation IV-7 (1966) after a proposal
by the United States of America. The boundaries of the Area were
enlarged in Recommendation XIII (1985) to include extensive
stands of vegetation to the south and north of the original Area. The
Area was re-named and re-numbered as ASPA No.106 by Decision 1
(2002). The Management Plan was revised and the Area was
extended to include Seabee Hook, the breeding area of a substantial
colony of Adélie penguins, by Measure 1 (2002). Measure 5 (2010)
deleted the Managed Zone and revised the boundary to exclude two
areas on Seabee Hook, which are managed by Antarctic Treaty
Visitor Site Guidelines.
The primary reason for designation of the Area is that it provides an
outstanding example of biological diversity, in particular a rich and
diverse terrestrial ecosystem. The terrestrial ecosystem and rich
avifauna present are also of high scientific value. The site has been
identified as a type locality for two species of mite (Coccorhagidia
gressitti and Eupodes wisei). In addition the site is of important
historical and educational value and the location is aesthetically
outstanding. The current Management Plan reaffirms these values of
the Area.
Minor changes have been made to the northern boundary of the
Area to reflect recent data on the distribution of penguins on Seabee
Hook from an orthophotograph acquired by the Republic of Korea
(Jeong-Hoon Kim pers. comm. 2019). The northern boundary
follows the perimeter of penguin breeding areas along the shoreline
of Seabee Hook, which allows for access to this beach by tourist
parties following Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guidelines.
Following establishment of a temporary camp by the Republic of
Korea at the designated camping site (described in Section 6(iii) of
the Management Plan), the present review determined there would
be benefit in clarifying the spatial limits of the designated camping
area through definition of a new Facilities Zone (Section 6(v)). This
zone is designed to contain camping infrastructure (e.g.
accommodation, storage and scientific facilities) and associated
activities within a defined area, thus minimizing the extent of
potential impacts associated with camps. The Facilities Zone is
located on beach gravels close to Willett Cove (Map 5), with
relatively sparse vegetation and few nesting birds, although South
polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) are known to nest nearby.
The site was formerly part of a ‘road’ used when the former Hallett
Station was operational, and thus is considered likely to have been
previously impacted by human activities. The zone is ~90 m x 40 m
in size at its maximum dimensions.
An amendment has been made to the Management Plan to allow
small vehicles (such as snowmobiles and All Terrain Vehicles) to be
parked on land within the Facilities Zone for the purposes of
practical storage and maintenance. Vehicles otherwise remain
prohibited from the Area.
A new Management Objective has been added to Section 2 of the
Management Plan seeking to ‘minimize the possibility of the
introduction of pathogens that may cause disease in faunal
populations within the Area’. To meet this objective, a new policy
has been added to Section 7(vi) of the Management Plan specifying
that ‘Raw poultry and raw eggs, or products containing raw poultry
or eggs, are prohibited from the Area. Processed and / or cooked
poultry and egg products should be avoided where practicable’.
Policy on the Disposal of Waste (Section 7(ix)) has been clarified
such that Liquid human wastes and Domestic Liquid Wastes may be
disposed of into the sea outside of the Area, for example in Willett
Cove. Such disposal was considered to pose negligible risks to the
environment and local fauna given the assimilative capacity of the
ocean and currents in this area, and also because of the inclusion of
the new policy in Section 7(vi), as noted above, prohibiting raw
poultry and eggs from the Area.
No substantive changes to the values of the Area or its overall
boundaries have been made. Therefore the revisions have been
classified as ‘minor’ in nature and in effect.
Other minor changes to provisions in the Management Plan include:
Revisions to the scientific description of the Area, including updates
on the number of breeding Adélie penguins within the Area, which
was 47,373 breeding pairs in 2017. Important Bird Area (IBA) No.
170 Seabee Hook has been noted in the Description of the Area;
The Latin name for South polar skua (Stercorarius maccormicki)
recently changed to Catharacta maccormicki (see BirdLife
International Data Zone: http://datazone.birdlife.org/species/search
Accessed Jan 2021). The management plan has been amended as
appropriate.
Revisions to take account of new agreements and guidance reached
by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted,
and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
Section 5 Maps. Map graphics have been improved with color used
to aid clarity in the context of a relatively complex site.
Sections 6(ii) and 7(ii) relating to aircraft access and overflight
have been rationalised, with policies formerly in Section 6(ii) being
set out in Section 7(ii), thus keeping all policies relating to air
access in one section and avoiding repetition. A Helicopter Access
Zone has been defined to clarify the recommended access route to
the Secondary helicopter landing site. Aircraft access provisions
have also been updated to include reference to the Environmental
Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica (Resolution 4 (2018)).
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been
updated.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
