Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) to
Review the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
prepared by New Zealand for ‘Scott Base Redevelopment’
Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) to
Review the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
prepared by New Zealand for ‘Scott Base Redevelopment’
Working Paper submitted by Spain
Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established
in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP
consideration of draft CEEs to consider the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) prepared by New Zealand for
‘Scott Base Redevelopment’.
ICG participants advised the CEP that the draft CEE conforms to the
requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection. The participants commented favourably
on the proposed activity described in the draft CEE, regarding to the
utilization of the previous location where Scott base sits, and the
intensive utilization of renewable energy sources, as well as the up-
to-date wastewater treatment technologies. The New Zealand
proposed operation searches for an efficient process of
decommissioning the old station and carrying the already built new
buildings, saving time and reducing the carbon footprint of
supporting vessels. On the basis of comments provided by
participants, the ICG advises the CEP that the draft CEE is clear,
well-structured and well presented. Moreover, the ICG agrees with
the conclusion that the proposed activity would ‘lead to more than
a minor or transitory impact on the environment’ supported by the
information contained within the draft CEE. If New Zealand decides
to proceed with the proposed activity, there are several aspects for
which additional information or clarification would be beneficial in
the required final CEE.
Background
On 12 February 2021 New Zealand notified the CEP Chair of the
availability of the draft CEE for ‘Scott Base Redevelopment’. The
draft CEE was prepared by Antarctica New Zealand. The full
document, in English, was available for download from https://
www.antarcticanz.govt.nz/sbrceedraftfornotification.pdf and via the
CEP Workspace on the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic
Treaty: https://www.ats.aq/devAS/EP/CEPWorkspace.
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration
of Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report, Appendix 3) the CEP Chair
issued:
CEP Circular 6 / CEP XXIII (12 February 2021), which:
advised CEP contact points of the availability of the draft CEE;
advised of the need to establish an open-ended intersessional
contact group (ICG) to review the draft CEE;
proposed that Spain’s CEP representative, Dr. Antonio Quesada,
convene the ICG;
proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convener and /
or terms of reference.
CEP Circular 7 / CEP XXIII (3 March 2021), which noted that no
comments had been received on the proposed convener or terms of
reference.
Terms of reference
The ICG addressed the four standard terms of reference outlined in
the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs:
The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of
Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol
Whether the CEE: i) has identified all the environmental impacts of
the proposed activity; and ii) suggests appropriate methods of
mitigating (reducing or avoiding) those impacts
Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported
by the information contained within the document
The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE
Method of operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and
Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. A link to the English
language version of the full draft CEE was posted to the Discussion
Forum, together with French, Spanish and Russian versions of the
Non-Technical Summary and the Guidelines for Environmental
Impact Assessment in Antarctica (the EIA Guidelines) adopted
under ATCM Resolution 1 (2016).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convener
of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional
consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any
Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of
the CEP or at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
The ICG commenced with an opening message from the convener
on 4 March 2021 and an initial comment period from that date
until 2 April 2021. The convener circulated a draft ICG report for
comment on 12 April 2021 and prepared a final report, addressing
comments received, by the 30 April 2021 deadline for submission of
Working Papers to CEP XXIII.
Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by nine CEP Members
(Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, India, Italy, Norway, the
United Kingdom and the United States) and one Observer (ASOC).
The following sections summarise the main points raised by ICG
participants, in accordance with the ICG terms of reference. The full
submissions provided by participants are available in the CEP
Discussion Forum. If New Zealand decides to proceed with the
proposed activity, it should also have reference to the matters
raised in those full submissions.
The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of
Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
All ICG participants expressed the view that the draft CEE conforms
to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental
Protocol, and one participant recommended a new CEE with the
alternative in the case the non-permanent mooring location at Pram
Point could not be prepared.
Participants commented favourably on the proposed activity,
considering that rebuilding the station at the same location would
represent an environmental benefit vs. searching a new location or
refurbishing the old inefficient station. Most participants provided
positive comments on the relevant renewable energy utilization,
together with more energetically efficient buildings and a newest
generation wastewater treatment plant. Both, building the new
station and decommissioning the previous one are considered for
most participants an efficient process, with relatively low
environmental impacts considering the magnitude of the process.
Participants identified several aspects for which additional
information or clarification should be provided in a final CEE, if the
proponent decides to proceed with the proposed activity. The
following sections describe points raised by several participants.
Description of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Participants noted that the draft CEE presented a useful overview of
the construction and operation of the redevelopment of the station
(Section 2), some of them considered the description as excellent.
Some participants suggested a better quality in the figures to allow
a better interpretation. Some participants suggested that further
details might be provided to ensure the CEE adequately describes
the project and the actions, including further information on the
following matters.
Measures to reduce energy consumption and measures to reduce
emissions of air pollutants, e. g. the diesel generators in more detail
Materials for the construction, painting and its resistance to erosion
as well as the possibility of producing microplastics
Fuel spill prevention and response, several questions were raised
regarding this topic on the potential spills from the tanks and the
potential affection to the drinking water inlet, and the risks derived
from the transportation from McMurdo Station by road
More information is requested regarding the distribution of fuel
from the tanks to the buildings and about an alarm system in case
of spill, as well as a contingency plan.
An emergency plan for the potential high risk of hazards during the
construction phase
Regarding the potential impact of larger population at the station
with a wastewater treatment plant that does not precludes other
contaminants (e.g., pharmaceuticals, POPs, microplastics, etc)
finishing in McMurdo Sound.
The explosive storage and blasting activity. Some participants
recommend more information regarding the chemical pollution and
the associated emissions and effects caused by the blasting.
During the piles construction, where the buildings will sit on, sand
will be used, but information regarding the origin of that sand and
the biosecurity of that material is requested.
Comprehensive documentation of all asbestos exposures already
identified and investigated.
The identification of the contaminated soils by hydrocarbons, heavy
metals and old dumping sites may be useful to avoid mixing.
Remediation plans for heavy metal polluted soils
The impact of climate change on the buildings design and
construction materials
The impacts on the new design of the road to McMurdo Station
Details on the new wind turbines, regarding installation,
transportation and hauling
Possible alternatives to the activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Participants noted that the draft CEE addressed several alternatives
to the proposed activity (Section 3), and the chosen one seemed to
be the most appropriate, although some details for the election
process might be better explained.
Description of the initial environmental reference state (Annex I,
Article 3.2(b))
Participants noted that the initial environmental reference was well
described (Section 5) and several indicated the extensive research
done in the area, providing an extensive reference state. However,
some participants suggested that other elements would enrich the
final CEE, including the following matters.
Comprehensive information about Snow, Ice and Water, preferably
in a separate new chapter.
Since one of the relevant impacts would be the dust produced in the
earthworks some participants suggest that a reference state of Air
should be considered as a separate section.
One participant wonders if Cape Evans is a good reference site for
comparison, since no vegetation has been described there.
Some participants recommend better description of the marine/
coastal species wider in time and space. Some others comment on
the necessity of a better understanding on the Weddell seal
population hauling in the area
Description of the methods used to forecast the impacts of the
proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(c))
Participants commented that the prediction of impacts (Section 6) is
relevant, solid and complete, following national legislation and also
the most strict regulation searching for the “Green Star Antarctica
New Zealand Custom Tool”
Estimation of the likely direct impacts, indirect, cumulative and
unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity, and effects on the
conduct of scientific research and other existing uses and values
(Annex I, Article 3.2(d)(e)(f)(h)(i))
See ToR#2(i).
Identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties (Annex I,
Article 3.2(j))
Participants noted that the draft CEE provides a complete list of
gaps in knowledge and uncertainties (Section 8). They suggested
that this section may include also the uncertainties derived from the
simultaneous reconstruction of the USA’s McMurdo Station only 3
km far. Also, an uncertainty would be the degree of participation of
the construction company in the CEE. Some participants also
consider that the lack of knowledge in the environmental baseline
of area where the new road will be constructed is a relevant gap in
the knowledge.
Non-technical summary (Annex I, Article 3.2(k))
Participants noted that the Non-Technical Summary (NTS) provides
a clear and helpful summary of the information presented in the
main body of the CEE. It was noted, however, that the NTS could be
expanded to also include some figures presenting the project.
Identification of mitigation measures, including monitoring
programs (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
See ToR#2(ii).
Whether the CEE:
i) has identified all the environmental impacts of the proposed
activity;
Participants noted that the proponents identified extensively the
impacts derived from the project. Participants also suggested that
further information and assessment would be required for other
environmental impacts, including:
Information about the chemical pollution derived from the
explosive utilization.
Cumulative impacts derived from the simultaneous reconstruction
of McMurdo Station.
Impacts to the Weddell seals hauling in the area
Impacts on the birds derived from the wind turbines and blade
strikes
terrestrial and nearshore marine environment associated with the
generation of dust and sediment generated during the construction
and operation of the proposed station (e.g. earthworks, vehicle use).
ii) suggests appropriate methods of mitigating (reducing or
avoiding) those impacts
Participants observed that the draft CEE identified measures to
mitigate a range of impacts associated with the construction and
operation of the station (Section 6). However, they suggested that
in some cases a more comprehensive description of planned
mitigation measures would be beneficial. Participants gave
particular emphasis to the need to elaborate mitigation measures
for the following matters.
On the mitigation of effects on science, not only on long term
projects, but also on current science. Some parties were wondering
about the electric noise of the wind turbines and transforming
station on the instruments sited on Arrival Hights ASPA#122.
Similar worries were expressed regarding the geomagnetic station
sited at the same location.
Some participants consider that mitigation measures related in the
Draft CEE are the Standard Operation Procedures for New Zealand
but perhaps could not be 100% appliable for Antarctica.
Some participants wondered about the mitigation measures about
the wastewater production during the works with extended
population and an obsolete WWTP.
Mitigation of asbestos polluted soils were worrisome for several
participants, with opposing comments regarding evacuation of
contaminated soils, encapsulation or other approaches.
Steps to prevent, and take action in response to bird strikes on the
wind turbines.
Mitigation of underwater noise during the non-permanent wharf
construction as well as during the transport and maneuvering of
vessels including the ice-breaker has been identified as needed.
Participants welcomed the stated intention to develop a monitoring
program (Section 7), and suggested that other aspects should be
monitored, including:
Whales behaviour in reference to the works
Bird strikes by wind turbines
Explosive blasting impacts physical and chemical
New road effects
Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported
by the information contained within the document.
Participants considered that a CEE was the appropriate level of EIA
for the proposed activities.
Participants felt that the overall conclusion that the proposed
activities would ‘lead to more than a minor or transitory impact on
the environment’ (Section 9) was adequately supported by the
information contained within the draft CEE.
The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Participants commented that the draft CEE is generally clear, well-
structured, and well presented. Some participants recommended a
better resolution in the figures and more explanatory legends on
them.
Some participants also suggested to include the renewable energy
project as a part of the general redevelopment and not as a
separated section.
Conclusions
Having reviewed the draft CEE prepared by New Zealand for the
‘Scott Base Redevelopment’ in accordance with the Procedures for
intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, the ICG advises the
CEP that:
The draft CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
If New Zealand decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there
are several aspects for which additional information or clarification
should be provided in the required final CEE. These matters are
outlined in detail in the submissions made by participants, and are
summarised in this ICG report. In particular, the Committee’s
attention is drawn to the suggestions that further details should be
provided regarding:
the description of the proposed activity, particularly in reference to
the construction materials, and origin of sand as well as the
explosives chemical characteristics.
the initial environmental reference state, including areas not
included as Crater Hill and the new road trajectory.
potential environmental impacts, including for aspects of the
proposed activity not addressed or sufficiently well described,
particularly those impacts produced by dust during the earthworks
and road transit, operation of wind turbines, potential pollution of
not eliminated chemicals from the wastewater treatment plant, and
the potential introduction of non-native species with the building
materials.
cumulative impacts that might arise in light of simultaneous
reconstruction of the USA’s McMurdo Station in the proximities of
Scott Base.
mitigation measures, including for impacts not addressed or
sufficiently well described, particularly those measures related to
fuel management risks (transport from McMurdo Station,
distribution pipes, potential effects of spills on the drinking water
inlet).
The conclusion that the impacts of redeveloping Scott Base would
‘lead to more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment’
is adequately supported by the information provided in the draft
CEE.
The draft CEE is clear, well structured, and well presented, although
a better resolution of maps and figures is recommended.
