Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Change in a Global Context
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Change in a Global Context
Working paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Climate change and its impacts are of much concern globally and to
the Antarctic Treaty System given realised and expected impacts on
global sea level rise and biodiversity.
The recent Special Reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) provide the clearest recent summaries of
global climate change that has taken place, impacts that are being
realised, and changes that are projected.
Attention is drawn here to key findings from these IPCC Special
Reports, focussing on substantial uncertainties about global and
Antarctic impacts; and to the research being undertaken through
SCAR to address these uncertainties. The paper presented here is
not intended as a comprehensive synthesis.
Key uncertainties include the current and future behaviour of the
Antarctic cryosphere (especially implications for global sea level
and coastal populations and infrastructure); climatic variability over
short timescales which is especially important given its significance
for impacts and operational forecasts; and the future of marine and
terrestrial Antarctic biodiversity, approaches to improve its
conservation, and ways to mitigate climate change impacts on both.
Quantifying and reducing these uncertainties through focussed
research is critical.
More critical is the need to convey to Treaty nations the importance
of the Paris Climate Agreement, and expected strengthening of
greenhouse gas emissions reductions targets, for maintaining
Antarctic and Southern Ocean environments and their biodiversity
as they have come to be known over the 60 years of the Antarctic
Treaty.
Introduction
The progress of global climate change and the interactions between
climate change in the Antarctic and the Earth System are of primary
concern to the ATCM and to the CEP. That concern was most
clearly articulated through the report of the Meeting of Experts on
Climate Change (ATME 2010), which also considered closely the
SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Report (ACCE
Report) SCAR. 2009. Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment. J Turner et al. (Eds.). Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research, Cambridge, UK..
Much significant action has been taken by the ATCPs since then,
including establishment of the CEP’s Subsidiary Group on the
Climate Change Response Work Programmme to prioritise
implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Programme
(CCRWP) (Decision 1 of 2017), and regular interactions with SCAR
to receive up-to-date scientific information on climate change in the
Antarctic region, its implications for the Earth System, and its
impacts on Antarctica and its associated and dependent ecosystems
(e.g. ATCM XLII IP 136 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment – 2019 Update).
Now, more than 10 years after the publication of the ACCE Report,
significant research progress has been made in understanding
climate change, uncertainties about its progress and global impacts,
and its likely influence on life both on the continent and in the
Southern Ocean. Much of this progress for the Antarctic region has
resulted from National Antarctic Programs focussing their research
efforts on climate change and its impacts (following Resolution 6 of
2015), and through recognition globally of the humanitarian,
economic and biodiversity impacts and costs that climate change is
already bringing and will continue to bring.
The recent Special Reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) – Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15, IPCC
2018) IPCC. 2018. Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-
industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the
threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty. V Masson-Delmotte et al. (Eds.). https://
www.ipcc.ch/sr15/ and Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC, IPCC 2019) IPCC. 2019.
IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate. H-O Pörtner et al. (Eds.). https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/ ,
provide the clearest recent summaries of global climate change that
has taken place, impacts from such change that are being realised,
and changes that are forecast. The SROCC is especially relevant to
the Antarctic Region.
Based on these reports, on new science which is emerging
continuously, and on insights from its three new Scientific Research
Programmes (SRPs), all focussing in whole or in part on this area of
scientific endeavour, SCAR will within the next year be providing a
decadal update to its ACCE Report to the Antarctic Treaty System.
In the interim, SCAR here draws attention to critical findings from
the IPCC Special Reports (information extracted from IPCC 2018;
IPCC 2019) which have direct relevance to the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean, provides summary information on its new SRPs
which are, in part, a direct response to the priorities of the ATCM’s
CCWRP, and provides recommendations on the way forward.
Observed and projected effects of climate change in Antarctica on
the Earth system
Ice sheet changes. Antarctic ice loss is dominated by acceleration,
retreat and rapid thinning of major West Antarctic Ice Sheet outlet
glaciers, driven by melting of ice shelves by warm ocean waters
(IPCC 2019, Chapter 3 Summary). There is limited evidence and
high agreement that recent Antarctic Ice Sheet mass losses could be
irreversible over decades to millennia (IPCC 2019, 3.3.1; Cross-
Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3; 4.2.3.1.2).
Sea level. Global mean sea level (GMSL) rise has accelerated in
recent decades due to mass loss from the Antarctic Peninsula and
West Antarctic Ice Sheet, and the Greenland Ice Sheet (IPCC 2019,
3.3.1, table 4.1). The Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets are the
largest reservoirs of land ice on Earth and will be primary drivers of
future changes in sea level.
Melting of the Antarctic Ice Sheet may contribute up to 0.28 m to
GMSL rise by 2100 (RCP8.5; IPCC 2019, table 4.4), with a total
expectation of GMSL up to 1.1 m. But deep uncertainty remains
about the expected changes to the Antarctic Ice Sheet. Expert
elicitation studies indicate that a GMSL rise of 2 m at the end of this
century cannot be ruled out (IPCC 2019, 4.2.3.1.2). New work
continues to illustrate that with higher temperature rises,
substantial losses to the Antarctic Ice Sheet will be experienced J
Garbe et al. 2020. Nature 585: 538; E Gilbert & C Kittel. 2021.
Geophysical Research Letters, doi: 10.1029/2020GL091733, and
reveals much about variation at small scales relevant to cryosphere
behaviour A Wåhlin et al. 2021. Science Advances 7: eabd7254..
Sea ice change. Total Antarctic sea ice cover has exhibited no
significant trend over the period of satellite observations. A
significant positive trend in mean annual ice cover between 1979
and 2015 has not continued due to three consecutive years of
below-average ice cover (2016-2018) driven by atmospheric and
oceanic forcing (IPCC 2019, 3.2.1.1.1). New research is unveiling
the mechanisms underlying long-term variability and suggests
declines may continue over the longer term X Crosta et al. 2021.
Nature Geoscience 14: 156..
Southern Ocean carbon and heat sink. The Southern Ocean plays a
disproportionately large and increasing role in the global ocean
uptake of heat and carbon dioxide from the atmosphere (IPCC
2019, 3.2.1.2.1, 3.2.2.3). Under future climate change scenarios,
the Southern Ocean is predicted to store increasing amounts of
carbon dioxide, before its capacity slows or halts around the year
2070 ± 10 under RCP8.5 (IPCC 2019, 3.2.2.3).
Fisheries sustainability. The anticipated effects of climate change on
Antarctic living marine resources may impact the global supply of
fish and krill. The distribution of Antarctic krill (Euphausia
superba) is expected to continue to migrate southwards in response
to projected warming and ocean acidification, especially in the
southwest Atlantic region (IPCC 2019, 3.2.3.2.1). There is, however,
low confidence for the projected effects of climate change on
toothfish (Dissostichus spp.) (IPCC 2019, 3.2.3.2.3). Fisheries
management may need to respond to climate-driven changes in the
distribution and abundance of fish and krill stocks to ensure their
sustainability into the future (IPCC 2019, 3.5.2.1).
Observed and forecast effects of global climate change in Antarctica
Irreversible ice sheet loss. In addition to contributing to global sea
level rise, Antarctic Ice Sheet mass losses and Marine Ice Sheet
Instability could irreversibly change Antarctic environments and
ecosystems over timescales from decades to millennia. Under
scenarios for 1°C of global warming, there is a moderate risk of
large-scale singular events that cause abrupt and potentially
irreversible changes in systems, such as the disintegration of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet (high risk under 2.5°C of global warming) (IPCC
2018, 3.5.2.5).
Primary productivity increases. Warming temperatures, declining
sea ice extent and enhanced input of iron from ice-shelves, icebergs
and glacial meltwater are expected to increase net primary
productivity in Antarctic waters by changing nutrient availability
(IPCC 2019, 3.3.3.3). Ice shelf retreat can also create areas of open
water surrounded by sea ice (polynyas) where rates of primary
production increase due to increased light and nutrient levels. For
example, primary productivity doubled in the area exposed by the
recent calving of the Mertz Glacier Tongue in East Antarctica (IPCC
2019, box 3.3).
Ocean salinity and acidification. Antarctic Ice Sheet and glacial melt
has increased the input of freshwater into the Southern Ocean (high
confidence in the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas) (IPCC 2019,
3.3.3). It is very likely that the Southern Ocean will experience
year-round conditions of surface water undersaturation for mineral
forms of calcium carbonate by 2100 under RCP8.5; under RCP2.6,
the extent of undersaturated waters are reduced markedly.
Differences in sensitivity and the scope for adaptation to projected
levels of ocean acidification exist across a broad range of marine
species groups (IPCC 2019, Chapter 3 Summary, 3.2.1, 3.2.2.3,
3.2.3).
Biodiversity change or loss. Climate-induced changes in the
Southern Ocean, such as ocean acidification, warming and sea ice
loss, are likely to have detrimental impacts on many Antarctic
species and ecosystems (IPCC 2019, box 3.4). These changes are
predicted to cause shifts in the distribution and relative abundance
of animals, including marine mammals, birds, fish and krill (IPCC
2019, 3.2.3.2), which will affect Marine Protected Area efficacy MA
Hindell et al. 2020. Nature 580: 87.. Species that are sensitive to
temperature changes, ocean acidification, and sea-ice dependent
species, may be particularly affected. On land, changes to
ecosystems are being documented across the region, though these
changes differ between species and regions MJ Amesbury et al.
2017. Current Biology 27: 1616; WS Andriuzzi et al. 2018. Ecology
99: 312; SA Robinson et al. 2018. Nature Climate Change 8: 879. .
Non-native species. Weakening climatic barriers and retreating ice
cover are likely to increase habitat suitability and availability in
Antarctica for non-indigenous species, particularly on the Antarctic
Peninsula and offshore maritime islands (IPCC 2019, box 3.4). In
concert with greater shipping activity and increasing numbers of
Antarctic visitors, climate change is forecast to increase the
establishment likelihood and invasion success of a broad range of
potentially invasive species.
Historic sites and monuments (HSMs). Several studies have shown
that historic huts and their wooden and metal contents are
susceptible to degradation through either biological or physical
means, especially at higher humidities and temperatures BW Held
et al. 2005. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 55:
45; RL Farrell et al. 2011 Polar Biology 34: 1669; BW Held & RA
Blanchette. 2017. Fungal Biology 121: 145.. In the case of wooden
structures, saprophytic fungi are well documented in Antarctica,
though responses of indigenous species and populations to changing
environmental conditions are complex BE Arenz & RA Blanchette.
2009. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 55: 46; KK Newsham et al.
2016. Nature Climate Change 6: 182; M Misak et al. 2021. Global
Change Biology 27: 1111. . Nonetheless, research from the Arctic
Pedersen et al. 2020. Scientific Reports 10: 14577., and high
degradation rates
in some Antarctic HSMs at high temperatures and humidities9,
imply that climate change may have an impact on HSMs, though
formal research about this process remains sparse.
Infrastructure and sea level change. Forecasting sea level rise
around the Antarctic coastal margin, to assess likely infrastructure
impacts, is complicated by the fact that different outcomes may be
expected over time depending on the relative rates of mass loss
from the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets (especially WAIS) P
Stocchi et al. 2013 Nature Geoscience 6: 380; RE Kopp et al. 2014.
Earth’s Future 2: 383; T Frederikse et al. 2020 Nature
Communications 11: 390; BD Hamlington et al. 2020. Reviews of
Geophysics 58: e2019RG000672.. Sea level forecasts include initial
periods of rise or fall, depending also on which particular area of
Antarctic coast is being considered. Nonetheless, all scenarios imply
potential impacts on coastal infrastructure. This is an active area of
investigation RH Levy et al. 2020. Sea-Level Projections for New
Zealand’s Scott Base Rebuild. GNS Science Report 2020/13, Lower
Hutt, New Zealand..
Uncertainty in Antarctica’s contribution to global change
Uncertainty in GMSL forecasts for the end of the century are largely
caused by uncertainty around the timing and spatial extent of ice
sheet instabilities in Antarctica (IPCC 2019, 4.2.3.2). This arises
from limited evidence about historical ice sheet changes,
inadequate model representation of ice sheet processes, and limited
understanding of the complex interactions between the atmosphere,
ocean and cryosphere (IPCC 2019, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter
3, 3.3.1, 4.1).
There is also low confidence in Antarctic sea ice projections due to
challenges associated with modelling seasonal and interannual
variability in Antarctic sea ice, and other interacting processes
related to clouds, ocean stratification and salinity (IPCC 2018;
2019, 3.2.2.1).
Uncertainty in predicting species and ecosystem responses arises
from a lack of information about possible indirect responses to
climate change, and the relatively short time series data available
for ecologically important species (IPCC 2019 3.2.3.2).
SCAR Scientific Research Programmes
Recognising the need for quantifications of and rapid reductions in
uncertainty about: (i) the current and future behaviour of the
Antarctic cryosphere (especially implications for GMSL), (ii)
climatic variability over short timescales given its significance for
impacts and operational forecasts, and (iii) the future of marine and
terrestrial Antarctic biodiversity, approaches to improve its
conservation, and ways to mitigate climate change impacts on both,
SCAR has agreed three new Scientific Research Programmes
https://www.scar.org/science/srp/ (SRPs) which focus on these
areas.
Instabilities and Thresholds in Antarctica (INSTANT) is an
interdisciplinary programme which quantifies the Antarctic Ice
Sheet's contribution to past and future global sea-level.
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) investigates the prediction of near-term
conditions in the Antarctic climate system on timescales of 1 to 30
years.
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (Ant-ICON) answers fundamental questions relating to
the conservation and management of Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean given their changing environments.
These SRPs are expected to continue over an eight-year period
(with a mid-term review) and will provide science evidence that is
of both global interest and of direct relevance to the priorities of the
ATCM and CEP.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the Parties:
Further consider the scientific research outcomes provided by SCAR
which can inform regional and continent-wide policy responses and
actions being proposed through the CCRWP and the SG-CCRWP;
Reaffirm their support for scientific investigations of climate change
and responses to it in the region;
Emphasise to their nations the significance of Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean with respect to global climate regulation, and the
need for continued protection of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean
environment, to ensure a sustainable future for humanity and for
the biodiversity on which we depend;
Convey to their nations the importance of the Paris Climate
Agreement, and expected strengthening of greenhouse gas
emissions reductions targets, for maintaining Antarctic and
Southern Ocean environments and their biodiversity as they have
come to be known over the 60 years of the Antarctic Treaty;
Consider the Reports of the IPCC, especially the Summary for
Policymakers of each report.
