Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 120 – Pointe Géologie
ASPA 120 - Pointe Géologie
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA 24) by Measure XIX-3
(Seoul 1995)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 3 (1995)
Revisions to the management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Measure 2 (2011)
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2016)
Extension of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Adélie Land
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment made to it:
(i) Major or minor?
Minor
(ii) Any changes to boundaries or coordinates?
None
(iii) Any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the
captions only or also in the graphics?
Map 1 has not been changed.
Map 2 and its legend have been updated.
(iv) Any changes to the description of the Area relevant to
identifying its location or boundaries?
No
(v) Any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM located
within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any
merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or
site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which they are located.
See the main working document for a description of the changes
made.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
If yes, please provide the reference to the relevant paragraph of the
CCAMLR Final Report here.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
the new designation (i.e., which section under Article 3.2 of Annex
V)?
This is not a new designation.
The ASPA constitutes a representative area of considerable
biological, geological and aesthetic value, contains a great diversity
of plants and animals, is an important area for scientific research,
and research programmes and long-term monitoring on the bird
colonies and geology have been performed in the area since 1952.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the document Environmental Domains
Analysis for the Antarctic Continent appended to Resolution 3
[2008])?
If yes, specify the main Environmental Domain here.
ASPA 120 falls under Environmental Domain L (continental coastal-
zone ice sheet)
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions document appended
to Resolution 6 [2012])?
If yes, specify the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic
Region here.
The Pointe-Géologie archipelago is linked to the Antarctic
Biogeographic Conservation Region No. 13 “Adélie Land” (Terauds
et al. 2016).
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 [2015]) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Refer
to the Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary, appended
to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://
www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
If yes, specify the Important Bird Area(s) here.
The Pointe-Géologie sector has been identified as an important area
for bird conservation (IBA 150) under criteria A1 (presence of a
globally threatened species) and A4iii (the site is known or thought
to hold, on a regular basis, at least 10 000 pairs of seabirds of one
or more species) (Harris et al. 2015).
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 120 - Pointe Géologie
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, France carried
out a five-year review of the management plan for the Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 120, Pointe-Géologie
Archipelago, in Adélie Land. The revisions were carried out in
accordance
with Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to
Resolution 2 (2011). The changes made mainly concern the
updating of scientific data. France recommends that the CEP
approve the revised management plan for this area, which is
appended to this document.
Introduction
Four islands, a nunatak and the emperor penguin breeding site were
classified in 1995 (Measure 3 - ATCM XIX, Seoul) as an Antarctic
Specially Protected Area on the basis that they constituted a
biologically, geologically and aesthetically representative example
of terrestrial Antarctic ecosystems. Therefore, this area also has
exceptional intrinsic scientific value. The management plan was
revised in 2005 (Measure 2 - RCTA XXVIII, Stockholm), in 2011
(Measure 2 - RCTA XXXIV, Buenos Aires), and in 2016 (Measure 2
(2016) - RCTA XXXIX - CEP XIX, Santiago). This revision clarifies
certain aspects, specifies access conditions and updates the data on
animal populations present in the area.
The following section briefly describes the changes other than
simple editorial changes (spelling corrections, rephrasing) resulting
from the proposed review of the management plan.
Summary of proposed amendments
Introduction
Addition of a reference to the status of the ASPA as an Important
Bird Area.
1. Description of values to be protected
Updating of information regarding scientific monitoring undertaken
in the ASPA.
2. Aims and objectives
Clarifications and reorganization of the objectives of the ASPA for
better readability. No substantial changes have been made.
3. Management activities
The following additions have been made:
Reflections on establishing a biodiversity monitoring database for
the ASPA.
Clarification that access to the ASPA is subject to authorization
throughout the year.
Mention of objectives in terms of awareness of biosafety issues.
Details on the need for activities undertaken on the margins of the
ASPA (Dumont d'Urville scientific station) to take into account the
species present in the Area as far as possible.
5. Maps
Map 2 has been updated (scientific data updated, formatting
clarified).
6. Description of the Area and identification of the sectors
The following additions have been made:
Clarification of the system of access to the emperor penguin colony.
Description of the climatic and meteorological context.
Mention of species that do not breed in the Area but that may visit
it.
Substantial development of the paragraph "Threats and pressures".
Tables 1 to 3 have been updated based on the most recent scientific
data.
The system of “Special zones within the ASPA” has been revised
and clarified for Antarctic giant petrels and emperor penguins.
7. Terms and conditions for entry permits
The following clarifications have been made:
Regime for the use of drones.
Regime for the installation, modification or removal of structures.
Rules relating to biosecurity (restrictions on materials or organisms
that may be brought into the Area) have been developed in order to
prevent such introductions.
The methods for notifying visit reports have been specified in order
to facilitate monitoring and management of biodiversity in the
Area.
8. Reference documents
The bibliography has been updated
Conclusion and proposal
No substantive changes of the text on the Management Plan for
ASPA 120 - Pointe Géologie have been proposed. The changes made
will nevertheless make the management plan easier to read, thus
facilitating its implementation in the field. The measures related to
the sharing of scientific information and data will ultimately
facilitate management of the site.
France recommends that CEP XXIII approves the attached revised
management plan for ASPA 120 Pointe Géologie and submits it to
ATCM XLIII for adoption.
