Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of Member Countries
Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of Member Countries
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
ATCM XLI requested SCAR to provide an update to its 2010 report
contained in ATCM XXXIII WP 2 Biological prospecting in the
Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research.
To assist with that review SCAR has: surveyed its Member countries
to assess the extent to which bioprospecting has been undertaken
through national Antarctic programmes since 2010; reviewed
national Antarctic science strategies to assess the extent to which
bioprospecting is prioritised and reviewed the academic literature
on the issue published since 2010.
This Working Paper summarises the findings. Further details on the
survey results and the literature search are provided in Information
Paper 12 Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of Member
Countries.
Background
The issue of biological prospecting has been considered by the
ATCM since the early 2000s. In 2008, ATCM XXXI requested SCAR
to review the published literature that may involve biological
prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty region and undertake a survey
of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken in the
SCAR community (paragraphs 308 to 310 of the Final Report of
ATCM XXXI refer).
SCAR reported on the findings of its review to ATCM XXXIII in
2010 (ATCM XXXIII WP 2 Biological prospecting in the Antarctic
region: a conservative overview of current research).
In 2018 ATCM XLI requested SCAR to update its earlier report
(paragraphs 57 and 58 of the Final Report of ATCM XLI refer).
Significant considerations
In its 2010 report (ATCM XXXIII WP 2 Biological prospecting in the
Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research),
SCAR drew the Parties’ attention to several significant qualifiers
that apply to this review. In updating the 2010 report, these
qualifiers still apply and merit repeating briefly here (with further
detail provided in ATCM XXXIII WP 2 Biological prospecting in the
Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research).
Given the lack of consensus on the definition of bioprospecting,
SCAR provided two common definitions to guide the responses to
its survey. The same definitions were used in the 2019 survey as
were used in 2010. However, SCAR recognizes that other
definitions might be adopted and that how ‘bioprospecting’ is
defined will influence what is reported as bioprospecting research.
SCAR reiterates its observation that agreement on fundamental
working definitions will be essential for this discussion to be carried
forward in a meaningful and deliberative manner.
The initial step in any bioprospecting activity is often not
necessarily described as such. That is, research that is undertaken
for purely descriptive taxonomic, systematic, or ecological purposes,
and which is typically available publicly may be subsequently used
for bioprospecting, even if it was not the original intent of the
researchers.
Among the organisms that have been the focus of bioprospecting
research in the Antarctic, some are distributed outside the Antarctic
Treaty area. Accordingly, bioprospecting research involving an
Antarctic organism may well have been conducted using material
collected elsewhere.
SCAR member survey
SCAR circulated a survey to its 44 member countries in mid-
October 2019 with responses requested by mid-December 2019. 17
responses were received by the deadline with a further five received
up until mid-January 2020.
From among the 44 SCAR member countries, responses were
received from 22 countries (a 50% response rate). Of the
respondents, 14 are Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and
eight are non-Consultative Parties (at the time of the survey).
The response rate means that a complete overview of activities
being undertaken by SCAR member countries cannot be provided.
For the purposes of this survey, and consistent with SCAR’s 2010
review, bioprospecting or natural products research has been
referred to as:
The collection of biological material and the analysis of its material
properties, or its molecular, biochemical or genetic content, for the
purpose of developing a commercial product.
or
The search for valuable chemical compounds and genetic material
from plants, animals and microorganisms. 
By way of summary, the survey results recorded that:
15 (12 CPs Consultative Parties and 3 NCPs Non-Consultative
Parties) of 22 (68%) respondent countries confirmed that their
national Antarctic programme had carried out or supported
research that could be considered ‘bioprospecting’ against the
definitions provided.
A total of 78 projects or programmes were listed in the responses
provided by the 15 countries that confirmed that their national
programme had carried out or is carrying out ‘bioprospecting’.
These projects covered a range of environments, scientific analyses
and organisms.
16 (10 CPs and 6 NCPs) of 22 (73%) respondent countries
confirmed that their national Antarctic programme had carried out
or supported research that could later be used for bioprospecting or
natural products research. Three respondents qualified their
positive response by noting that whilst some of their government
funded projects could result in commercialisation at a later stage,
this was not the goal or motivation for the research at the time
funding was awarded.
4 (4 CPs) of 22 respondent countries confirmed that their national
Antarctic programme had cooperated or was actively cooperating
with research or commercial entities that are directly associated
with bioprospecting or natural products research or
commercialisation.
4 (4 CPs) of 22 respondent countries confirmed that at least one
patent application had been applied for as a result of research
undertaken or supported by their national Antarctic programme.
Assessment of National Antarctic science strategies.
Recognising the incomplete response rate to the survey among the
SCAR membership, an examination was conducted of the national
Antarctic science strategies or national research plans among all 44
SCAR member countries.
Of the 44 SCAR member countries:
13 National Antarctic Programmes publish a national Antarctic
research strategy or similar (nine Consultative Parties and four Non-
Consultative Parties);
11 National Antarctic Programmes publish their research interests
and/or priorities via their website (six Consultative Parties and five
Non-Consultative Parties);
Seven National Antarctic Programmes either summarise existing
research effort or have very limited information available on their
Antarctic science effort (seven Consultative Parties);
no or extremely limited relevant information on their research
interests was discoverable for the remaining thirteen National
Antarctic Programmes (seven Consultative Parties and six Non-
Consultative Parties).
Among the information that was discoverable via the searched
websites, 11 National Antarctic Programmes actively and publicly
identify their interests in pursuing research on the biotechnological
potential of Antarctic living organisms (9 CPs and 2 NCPs).
Among the published information this intent appears at the level of
a ‘programme’ or ‘theme’ or in some cases as a ‘line’ or ‘project’
within a broader programme.
With one exception, the research descriptions do not specify the
organisms or ecosystems to be researched and make only broad
references to the biotechnology or bioprospecting potential of
‘Antarctic organisms’, ‘Antarctic biodiversity’ or ‘Antarctic
ecosystems’.
One National Antarctic Programme (a Consultative Party) makes
the more specific reference in their research interests to ‘microbial
communities and bioprospecting of microorganisms’.
Literature search
The findings of the literature search are provided in the Annex to
Information Paper 12 Antarctic Bioprospecting: SCAR Survey of
Member Countries. Here it is worth highlighting a recent
publication that provides an extensive review of biodiversity
research in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (Oldham and
Kindness 2020 Oldham, P and Kindness, J. 2020. Biodiversity
Research and Innovation in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
bioRxiv 2020.05.03.074849; doi: https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.03.074849 Note: this article is a preprint
and has not been certified by peer review.). Using extensive text
mining techniques, the paper provides a thorough account of the
extent of Antarctic biodiversity appearing in the scientific and
patent literature in multiple languages.
The paper reports on the recent growth in bioprospecting or
biological prospecting appearing in the academic literature as well
as the rising, albeit irregular trend in patent activity referencing
Antarctica. The paper notes that, based on the text mining
techniques used, the patent landscape for Antarctica can be divided
into six main groups: a) sequence data b) Candida antarctica, c)
Antarctic krill, d) other species recorded in the Antarctic, e)
citations of the Antarctic scientific literature, and f) references to
Antarctic place names as collection sites.
However, Oldham and Kindness make clear that considerable care
needs to be applied in interpretation of the Antarctic origin of
genetic resources within patent documents and whether they are
actually material to or part of the claimed invention.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the Parties:
Note the findings of its member survey and literature search;
continue to explore open and transparent ways of reporting and
collecting data and information pertinent to its discussions on the
issue of biological prospecting;
Notes SCAR’s willingness to keep the ATCM informed on relevant
publications as they arise.
