SARS-CoV-2 in Antarctic Species by way of Reverse Zoonosis
SARS-CoV-2 in Antarctic Species by way of Reverse Zoonosis
Background
1.1 The SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 in humans, shows
the potential for “reverse zoonosis”.
1.2 Reverse zoonosis is the process by which a human virus is
spread to other species when particular conditions and other factors
align for infection and disease to occur.
1.3 This paper explores, from an operational perspective, the issues
related to reverse zoonosis of SARS-CoV-19 from humans to
Antarctic fauna species.
1.4 Detection of SARS-CoV-2 is the first crucial step for effective
infection control (Barbosa et al., 2020) and national Antarctic
programs have put in place rigorous pre-screening, testing and
isolation criteria for all their expeditioners to ensure pre-
deployment early detection (COMNAP 2021).
1.5 Antarctica remained the only continent to be free of a
COVID-19 case through 10 December 2020, a full nine months into
the global pandemic and almost a year from the initial report of the
novel coronavirus.
1.6 Since that time, no further suspected or confirmed cases of
COVID-19 in Antarctica have been reported, eliminating a direct
source for human to Antarctic species spread.
1.7 Given the evolving global pandemic situation and the current
limited availability of vaccine, there is recognition that this largely
COVID-19 free situation may change for Antarctica and, also that
indirect sources of infection for migratory Antarctic species are
widespread and substantial (Annex 1 Figure 1).
Risk Assessment: Binding Propensity
2.1 A challenging aspect of viral transmission is gaining entry to a
new host’s cells (Geoghegan, 2020). This involves a virus latching
on to a molecule that binds the outside of a cell, analogous to a key
clicking into a lock. The better the fit, the more likely the pathogen
is to access the cell’s interior.
2.2 In humans, SARS-CoV-2, fits with the protein ACE2 to enter
airway cells.
2.3 How would SARS-CoV-2 “fit” with Antarctic species? Damas et
al. (2020) looked at 410 vertebrate species to predict SARS-CoV-2
“fit” or binding propensity in those species, ranking each according
to their potential to be infected by SARS-CoV-2 via their ACE2
proteins. The research used in silico analysis (computer modelling)
and urged caution not to over-interpret the research predictions.
2.4 Of the 410 species considered by Damas et al. (2020), five
Antarctic species were included: 1. Antarctic minke whale
(Balaenoptera bonaerensis); 2. Killer whale (Orcinus orca); 3. Sperm
whale (Physeter catodon); 4. Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes
forsteri); and 5. Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae). Using a five-
stage scale (very high, high, medium, low, very low), the two
penguin species showed a “very low” binding propensity. For the
three cetaceans, the first two showed a “high” binding propensity of
the ACE2 receptor to SARS-CoV-2, the third a “medium”. None of
the Antarctic species in the study received the highest designation
of “very high” binding propensity.
2.5 Referring to Damas et al. (2020), Barbosa et al. (2020) provided
“early insight” on the “susceptibility of Antarctic wildlife to
infection by the SARS-CoV-2”, as follows:
Antarctic birds (including penguins) – likely to have low
susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection;
Antarctic pinnipeds – very low to low susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2
infection; and
Cetaceans – appear to have the highest risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection
amongst Antarctic wildlife.
2.6 Binding propensity in itself is not enough to predict whether
reverse zoonosis will occur and other factors must also be
considered.
Risk Assessment: Transmission Pathways
3.1 SARS-CoV-2 is a respiratory virus transmitted between people
through direct, indirect, or close contact with infected people’s
saliva and respiratory secretions and droplets, expelled when an
infected person coughs, sneezes, talks or sings. The US Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) notes that airborne particles are not
considered the primary route of transmission, therefore social
distancing and good hygiene play a key role in preventing human-
to-human transmission.
3.1.1 Direct or close contact with infected people
3.1.2 A small number of studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 can
infect other animals (domestic cats, dogs, zoo gorillas and farmed
mink) that are in direct contact with infected people (CDC 2021).
3.1.3 National Antarctic programs generally endorse a wildlife “no
approach” distance of 5 metres. If following this protocol, it is
highly unlikely people will come into direct contact with wildlife.
Under usual circumstances, only Antarctic scientists and related
science support personnel, with national authorization through the
EIA process, will come in to direct or close contact with wildlife.
This is always under strict protocols for carrying out proposed
investigations. Following SCAR and COMNAP recommendations for
scientific equipment to be cleaned prior to packing greatly reduces
the likelihood of contaminated equipment surfaces in the field.
3.1.4 A reduction in personnel numbers for the 2020/21 Antarctic
research season reduced the risk of contact with wildlife. The
COMNAP COVID-19 prevention protocols contain recommendations
for pre-deployment testing, with only those returning negative
results for SARS-CoV-2 immediately before deployment to
Antarctica being deployed.
3.1.5 This means that “contact” with wildlife in the true sense of
that word (physical touching) by operational and logistical
personnel within national Antarctic programs is rare and therefore
does not provide a direct transmission pathway.
3.1.6 Indirect through virus shedding
3.1.7 Environmental stability of coronavirus may provide indirect
transmission pathways by way of human faeces, and sewage-
derived transmission routes may be of importance to prevent
unprecedented human-to-human spread of disease. The plausibility
of this indirect pathway relies upon the assumption that SARS-
CoV-2 can be shed in the faeces of infected humans (Franklin &
Bevins, 2020) and that the virus remains infectious in faeces.
3.1.8 Studies report detection of virus RNA copies in faeces
specimens and in urban wastewater. However, only a limited
number of studies detected infectious SARS-CoV-2 in human faeces
(CDC 2020). Viral load kinetics and duration of viral shedding are
important determinants for disease transmission. Most studies
detected the SARS-CoV-2 viral load peak within the first week of
illness (CDC 2020) and no study to date has detected live virus
beyond day 9 of illness, despite persistently high viral loads.
Elsamadony et al. (2020) showed that despite evidence of
prolonged SARS-CoV-2 RNA shedding in respiratory and stool
samples, viable virus appeared to be short-lived. Therefore, RNA
detection alone cannot be used to infer infectiousness. Uncertainty
remains as to the possibility of this human-to-human transmission
pathway regardless of sewage treatment employed, viability in
seawater, and little work has been published on this transmission
pathway from humans to other species. The role of faecal shedding
in viral transmission remains unclear (Cevik et al., 2020) and
further investigation is warranted before this indirect transmission
route can be proven (Elsamadony et al., 2020).
3.1.9 Conceptual model studies indicate that this indirect
transmission pathway would likely require faecal virus shedding
that is “substantial” in terms of number of infected persons at a
focal location (Franklin & Bevins, 2020).
3.1.10 The Antarctic situation, with an extremely low human
population and COMNAP guidelines which recommend evacuation
of any programme expeditioner testing positive in Antarctica for
COVID-19, mean that the “substantial” threshold will likely never
be met.
3.1.10 Indirect through migratory Antarctic species
3.1.11 Globally, over 150 million people are infected. Reverse
zoonosis to migratory Antarctic species is a possibility via humans
external to Antarctica.
3.1.12 Damas et al. (2020) identified the Antarctic minke whale
and the Killer whale as two Antarctic species that had a “high”
score for binding propensity. The Antarctic minke whale is the most
abundant baleen whale in the world and has a habitat range of the
whole of the southern hemisphere (IWC 2012). The Killer whale is
found in all oceans, tends to inhabit coastal areas (Annex 1 Figure
2) and are considered "common" in the eastern Pacific coasts.
3.1.13 Under most circumstances, no Antarctic staff would come
into contact with these or any other cetaceans. Scientists, whose
research specifically focuses on understanding cetaceans, usually
carry out their data collection by remote sensing or distanced
biological sampling methodology. Ships may come close to such
species, this is not a common occurrence and, ship sewage handling
and discharge is regulated including under MARPOL.
3.1.14 There is no risk of reverse zoonosis to these whales from the
people currently present in Antarctica. There may be risk of
infection when these animals travel outside the Antarctic region,
into coastal areas near highly-infected human populations.
Summary
4.1 At the time of writing, the risk of reverse zoonosis of SARS-
CoV-2 from direct contact with humans in Antarctica and Antarctic
wildlife is very low to nil as there are no confirmed or suspected
cases of COVID-19 in Antarctica. As we continue to employ
prevention protocols, we prevent reverse zoonosis via three of the
four principle transmission pathways identified in the Barbosa et al.
(2020) paper (summarised as: 1. Contact; 2. Faecal and sewage
transmission pathways; and 3. Human to animal to animal
transmission).
4.2 Given that the highest score for binding propensity in the
Damas et al. (2020) study was for Antarctic minke whales and Killer
whales, both of which are migratory species, the greatest risk to
Antarctic species will likely come from external, indirect,
transmission pathways.
COMNAP recommended measures
Based on the information presented above, COMNAP proposes the
following recommended measures for ATCM consideration:
Antarctic Treaty Parties to continue to support the proactive
protocols related to management and outbreak prevention of
COVID-19, such as those found in the COMNAP COVID-19
Prevention and Outbreak Management Guidelines.
Antarctic Treaty Parties to work with their competent authorities
and national non-Antarctic agencies to educate those agencies on
the migratory nature of Antarctic marine species and of the risks
related to reverse zoonosis to Antarctic species, especially to
cetaceans.
Through the EIA process, ensure Antarctic researchers and related
research support personnel with national authorization to come into
direct or close contact with wildlife for research purposes are doing
so under the strict protocols for carrying out their proposed
investigations including following their national Antarctic
programme procedures, and any applicable SCAR and COMNAP
guidelines.
Ensure all Antarctic personnel receive regular training that includes
education on their programme’s protocols in regards to wildlife “no
approach” distances.
Educate all expeditioners on the importance of continuing to
employ robust cleaning and basic hygiene practices while in all
Antarctic situations (on station, in the field, on a vessel or aircraft)
and especially if in close or direct contact with Antarctic wildlife.
Researchers or research support staff who suspect they have
COVID-19, should follow their programme protocols which may
include self-isolation and testing, and should not come into contact
with Antarctic wildlife even if permitted to do so.
Support research into reverse zoonosis studies involving Antarctic
species, and share information and data from these studies.
Annex 1: Figures
Figure 1. Map showing total reported cases of COVID-19 by country
on 8 December 2020. With global total reported as 67.9 million
cases with more than 500,000 new cases reported each day on
average. Source: The New York Times Coronavirus World Map,
Updated December 8, 2020, 2:07 P.M. E.T., https://
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/world/coronavirus-maps.html.
Figure 2. Graphic showing presence or observation data for Minke
whales (on left) and Killer whales (on right) giving the overall feel
for the distribution and migratory patterns of these cetaceans.
Source: https://mapper.obis.org/?taxonid=137087 and https://
mapper.obis.org/?taxonid=137102.
Annex 2: References
Barbosa, A., Varsani, A., Marandini, V., et al., Risk assessment of
SARS-CoV-2 in Antarctic wildlife, Science of the Total Environment,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143352.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), COVID-19 and
Animals, updated February 10, 2021, https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/animals.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), COVID-19
Science Update, edition 20-09-08, September 8, 2020.
Cevik, M., Tate, M., Lloyd, O., Maraolo, A.E., Schafers, J., and Ho,
A., SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV viral load dynamics,
duration of viral shedding, and infectiousness: a systematic review
and meta-analysis, Lancet Microbe, 2021 Jan;2(1):e13-e22. doi:
10.1016/S2666-5247(20)30172-5. Epub 2020 Nov 19.
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP),
COVID-19 Prevention and Outbreak Management Guidelines,
version 6, 13 January 2021.
Damas, J., Hughes, G.M., Keough, K.C., et al.., Broad host range of
SARS-CoV-2 predicted by comparative and structural analysis of
ACE2 in vertebrates, PNAS September 8, 2020, 117 (36)
22311-22322; first published August 21, 2020; https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2010146117.
Elsamadony, M., Fujii, M., Miura, T., and Watanabe, T., Possible
transmission of viruses from contaminated human feces and
sewage: Implications for SARS-CoV-2, Science of the Total
Environment, 2021 Feb 10; 755: 142575; Published online 2020
Sep 29. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142575.
Franklin, A.B. and Bevins, S.N., Spillover of SARS-CoV-2 into novel
wild hosts in North America: A conceptual model for perpetuation
of the pathogen, Science of the Total Environment 733 (2020)
139358.
Geoghegan, J., as quoted in Wu, K.J., in National Geographic,
Science, Coronavirus Coverage, “There are more viruses than stars
in the universe. Why do only some infect us?”, 15 April 2020.
International Whaling Commission (IWC), Report of the Scientific
Committee. J Cetacean Res Manag 14 (Suppl):1–468, 2012.
Quammen, D., “And Then the Gorillas Started Coughing: Humans
are spreading the coronavirus to other animals. What does that
mean for all of us?”, The New York Times, February 19, 2021,
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/19/opinion/covid-symptoms-
gorillas.html?smid=em-share.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Environmental
Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in
Antarctica (2018).
SCAR & COMNAP Inter-continental Checklists For supply chain
managers of the National Antarctic Programmes for the reduction in
risk of transfer of non-native species (May 2019).
Wageningen University & Research News, “COVID-19 detected on
multiple Dutch mink farms, October 25, 2020, https://www.wur.nl/
en/Research-Results/Research-Institutes/Bioveterinary-Research/
show-bvr/COVID-19-detected-on-two-mink-farms.htm.
