Projections of future population decline emphasise the need to
designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected
Species
Projections of future population decline emphasise the need to
designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected
Species
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
At the request of the UK, SCAR has initiated a review of the status
of the emperor penguin, with the intention of considering it as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species. SCAR tasked the Expert
Group on Birds and Marine Mammals (EG-BAMM) to undertake the
review. SCAR finds that the emperor penguin is vulnerable to
ongoing and projected climate change, warranting protection as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species. The outcomes of this
assessment have relevance to the ATCM and CEP because of its
implications for species-related conservation decision-making and
conservation planning.
Background
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has repeatedly
recognised the importance of receiving up-to-date scientific
knowledge to evaluate the threats to Antarctic species. The future
population status of the emperor penguin has been noted by the
CEP in the past (e.g. ATCM XLII IP42 Emperor penguins -
vulnerable to projected rates of warming and sea ice loss; an
international collaboration to inform species-related conservation
decision-making and conservation planning). For example, both the
CEP Five Year Work Plan and the Climate Change Response Work
Programme identify the need to understand population status,
trends, vulnerability and distribution of key Antarctic species. In
this Working Paper, we present work reported in an associated
Information Paper (IP22 Projections of future population decline
indicate the need to designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic
Specially Protected Species) that considers the conservation status
of the emperor penguin, including identifying the next steps to
ensure appropriate conservation decision-making and planning.
Loss of breeding habitats and the profound transformation of the
foraging habitat associated with significant change in and loss of
sea ice as part of climate change are the primary threats to emperor
penguins. Emperor penguins initiate breeding during the Antarctic
winter and are uniquely adapted to the cold. Breeding colonies
occur in coastal locations around the continent, almost exclusively
on land-fast ice (i.e. sea ice attached to the coast). A few colonies
are located on ice-free land or nearby ice shelves in years when sea
ice is of insufficient quality as a platform for breeding. As of 2009,
the global population was estimated to be ~238,000 breeding pairs
across 46 colonies; since then, an additional 15 colonies have been
discovered via satellite imagery, bringing the total [likely]
population to upwards of 256,000 breeding pairs.
Despite a number of important caveats, remote sensing contributes
to an improved toolset for monitoring emperor penguin
populations. Estimates of the global population are now more
tractable, offering opportunities for monitoring regional and global
change, as well as variation in phenology, population trajectories
and correlation with environmental variables. In this context, the
future loss or degradation of important habitats for emperor
penguins will be highly informative (including changing
environmental thresholds, such as fast ice availability and quality)
given that emperor penguins have unique traits associated with
almost total reliance upon sea ice as a specialised breeding habitat.
Much of the life history of emperor penguins remains data poor,
especially at sea, and particularly for juveniles and non-breeding
birds. Further work that will help reduce uncertainty about any
potential, undetermined threats is detailed in a draft Species Action
Plan (see Annex A, and IP22 Projections of future population
decline indicate the need to designate the emperor penguin as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Species).
Globally, the total abundance of emperor penguins is projected to
decline by 99% (median of projections) relative to its initial size
under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 climate
scenario in which greenhouse gas emissions remain unmitigated
throughout the 21st century. In contrast, under the Paris Agreement
1.5°C climate scenario, the global population is projected to only
decline by 37% of its 2009 population size, but this scenario
remains unlikely given the current emissions pledges and targets.
All these analyses indicate that the species might best be classified
within the IUCN Red List as Vulnerable. The species is currently
listed as Near Threatened, and has not been up-listed due to the
uncertainty about future greenhouse gas levels and emission
scenarios, future sea-ice projections and because the assessment also
depends upon a degree of model verification against population
trend. However, support for up-listing is provided by Jenouvrier et
al. (2014), who showed that the recent dynamics of the emperor
penguin population at Pointe Géologie projects reasonably
accurately past population dynamics that agree well with the
observed number of penguins at Pointe Géologie. Moreover, current
sea-ice projections suggest that the most rapid declines will occur
after mid-century, when the loss of emperor penguin populations is
likely to be rapid. The incidence of colonies that ‘blink’
(disappearing some years, reappearing in others), and of major
environmental perturbations leading to massive breeding failure,
also increase uncertainty about the future of emperor penguin
population state but have been incorporated into the most recent,
modelled population projections. Finally, climate change may also
affect penguin prey species, many of which also depend on sea ice.
Loss of suitable breeding habitat is the most important challenge
that emperor penguins face. Listing emperor penguins as a Specially
Protected Species is a critical step forward in global endeavours to
fight human-induced climate change via increasing greenhouse gas
emissions. It would be precautionary, therefore, to reduce or
eliminate other stressors that could otherwise add to the burden
that emperor penguins face. Consequently, it is important to
develop management options that are informed by the best
available scientific evidence.
Conclusions
Based on the current scientific literature, and accepted IPCC climate
model projections, SCAR reports that:
emperor penguins are vulnerable in the foreseeable future due to
the loss of their breeding habitat;
species-related management options, informed by the best available
science, should be reviewed and developed to reduce or eliminate
other stressors from emperor penguins, thereby improving the
protection of this species; and
emperor penguins should continue to be the focus of collaborative
international research on monitoring and multidisciplinary research
climate impact assessment.
SCAR recommends that the Parties:
Support the formation of an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to
review the draft Action Plan prepared by SCAR (Annex A, and IP22
Projections of future population decline indicate the need to
designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected
Species).
Support a case to be made to the IUCN to uplist Emperor penguins
to Vulnerable.
Tasked the ICG to report to ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV in Berlin with a
revised draft Action Plan, together with a recommendation about
the emperor penguin’s conservation status, in accordance with the
Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised
Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II
to the Protocol.
Annex A: Development of a draft Species Action Plan for the
Emperor Penguin
Unambiguously, the largest threat to emperor penguins is the loss of
Antarctic sea ice as result of global climate change. Mitigation of
this threat will require coordinated and unified global action that is
beyond the remit of this draft Action Plan. Nonetheless, there are
several actions that can be taken to offset and reduce the effects of
climate change. This draft Plan aims to manage all direct and
indirect potentially harmful human interactions with free-living
emperor penguins to reduce threats at every stage of their life cycle,
and thereby ensure their continued existence in the wild until such
time that risks posed by climate change are mitigated.
Specific Objectives
Establish within SCAR’s EG-BAMM an Emperor Penguin Working
Group focused on the delivery of this draft Action Plan through
liaison with all interested and affected parties, facilitating the
provision of regular synthetic updates on the status of emperor
penguins.
Engage across the international science community to develop best
practice guidelines for specific scientific procedures relevant to
emperor penguins (e.g., Code of Conduct on using Antarctic
Animals for Scientific Research, adopted by CEP in 2019). It is
critical that all research is conducted ethically and we aim to seek
collaborative opportunities to science facilities close to emperor
penguin colonies, to increase awareness about the risks and threats
to the species and to promote such ethical guidelines. Engage with
Treaty Parties and their national Competent Authorities and with
the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs to provide
advice and recommendations and where appropriate facilitate
distribution of new guidelines, including translations thereof to the
predominant language used at a given facility.
The Working Group will also convey the outcomes of relevant
scientific assessments, with advice and recommendations to
facilitate development of management actions to the ATCPs on a
regular basis, or as any substantial changes might suggest, via
Working Papers submitted either via the CEP or directly by SCAR in
keeping with Article 10.2 of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
As part of the five-yearly update of this draft Action Plan, provide
information, advice and recommendations on the effectiveness of
the management actions for emperor penguins and provide
suggestions or recommendations for changes to management
actions if these are required. Doing so should involve best practice
decision-science and engage all stakeholders for maximum efficacy,
and should be preceded in the year prior to the update by an online
forum or meeting to assess the effectiveness of actions.
Continue and expand demographic studies to improve
documentation of the functional relationships between demographic
parameters across different life history stages and environmental
fluctuations.
Build on analyses by Ainley et al. (2010), Jenouvrier et al. (2014;
2017; 2019, 2021) and Abadi et al. (2017) to develop new analyses
of how emperor penguins are projected to respond to climate
change using CMIP5 data, and when sufficiently mature, CMIP6
data. Consider the full circumpolar extent of emperor penguins with
a special focus on inter-annual variation in breeding propensity (i.e.
frequency of occurrence of breeding at colony sites) across different
parts of the species range. Highlight the need for regional climate
models that provide robust ecological projection capability at scales
relevant to the ecology of emperor penguins. Develop modelling
capacity to provide projections beyond the next 100 years.
Undertake population assessment studies to monitor emperor
penguins at the colony scale, the regional scale and the circumpolar
scale. Liaise with and coordinate with interested parties to initiate
ground counts and aerial counts to ground-truth and improve
satellite remote-sensing population estimates. Evaluate population
assessments based on satellite remote-sensing, with particular
emphasis on short-term colony movement (see e.g. Richter et al.,
2018), repeated observation within the same breeding season, and
improved image analysis techniques.
Collate all available tracking data to undertake a gap analysis.
Then, if deemed necessary, undertake new telemetry studies to
better document the preferred habitats of emperor penguins at
different times of the year and across different life history stages.
Better understanding of the energetic, physiological constraints and
behavioural capacity of emperor penguins to adapt to new breeding
conditions and altered food web interactions, including altered prey
availability and changed predation risks.
Identify and collate information on other potential threats to
emperor penguins, especially those associated with human
activities, such as fishing, plastic pollution, other pollutants, habitat
degradation of the oceans, pathogens, etc. Quantify all such threats,
both spatially and temporally, to determine where and how
management actions can mitigate the impacts of these threats and
improve the survival of emperor penguin breeding populations.
Continue liaison with the Antarctic community, including Treaty
Parties, their national competent authorities and International
Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) as required, to
provide expert advice on responsible visitor management at
emperor penguin colonies. Promote exchange of information across
the Antarctic community to raise awareness about responsible
visitation, conservation and reducing and offsetting global
emissions. Identify collaborative opportunities to communicate this
information and Antarctic Treaty System efforts to the wider public.
Assess feasibility for research and monitoring using ‘ships of
opportunity ’and other operators.
Liaise with relevant Associations of Zoos and Aquaria about living
collections and breeding programmes, including the identification
of wild-caught specimens of emperor penguins. Link with such
bodies to increase public awareness and need for conservation.
Assess and revise this draft Action Plan every five years.
