Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley,
Victoria Land
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria
Land
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has
conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 131: Canada
Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land.
The review was conducted through a field campaign to capture
vegetation data and a desktop exercise, with reference to Annex V
of the Protocol and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
The management plan was circulated for comment to scientists and
environmental managers of National Antarctic Programmes working
within the Ross Sea region, who conduct research activities in the
Area.
The revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached
revised Management Plan for ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake
Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land.
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria
Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
 Site of Special Scientific Interest 12 by Recommendation XIII-8
(1985)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 3 (1997), Measure 1 (2006), Measure 6 (2011)
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2016)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria
Land
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes
The two previous maps are replaced with three new maps,
numbered 1 to 3 (previously A and B). There are no changes to the
map specifications. The main changes for each map are:
Map 1: Data sources are updated, including the lake shoreline,
showing water level rise.
Map 2: New map showing the Helicopter access zone, using the
same base map as Map 3.
Map 3: Updated vegetation density data, showing finer resolution
than the previous map. Updated data for the locations and numbers
of mummified seals. The campsite is removed and the location
labelled “former hut/camp site”. Updated lake shoreline data is
used. Removal of the “overflight” line.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
The description of the area has minor information and editorial
updates that do not relate to identifying the location or boundary of
the Area.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Minor editorial and formatting updates throughout.
The main change to the management plan is the removal of the
camp site and the subsequent prohibition of camping within the
Area, in favour of the Facilities Zones found at Lake Fryxell and
Lake Hoare. The helicopter landing site is retained but landings
must be specifically authorised by Permit and for essential scientific
or management reasons only. This change is proposed to strengthen
the protection of the ecological and scientific values of the Area.
Section 1: Editorial updates to better define the values of the Area.
Section 2: Deletion of one management aim and rewording on two
management aims. The changes retain the original meaning but
simplify the text.
Section 6(i): Addition of information on a green alga species and
minor updates to the description of the area. Removal of
information about the camp site and updated information for the
helicopter landing site.
Section 7: Updates on access provisions to vegetated areas and
stream margins, for increased protection of the Area values and for
consistency with Map B.
Section 7(i): Updates to the access and camping information in line
with the removal of the camp site and change to helicopter
overflight and landing conditions inside the Area. Deletion of ‘and/
or the Taylor Valley Visitor Zone” from the landing site options.
Section 7(ii): Update to the scientific activities that may be
conducted in the Area with the addition of “cannot be elsewhere”.
Addition of Resolution 4 (2018) for the operation of Remotely
Piloted Aircraft Systems.
Section 7(iv): Addition of “Camping within the Area is prohibited”.
Removal of “Camping at the designated campsite (Map B) may be
permitted to meet specific essential scientific or management
needs”.
Sections 7(v) and 7(ix): Deletion of information related to camping
within the Area.
Section 8: Addition of one reference: Levy, J.L., Cary, S.C., Joy, K.
and Lee, C.K. 2020 Detection and community-level identification of
microbial mats in the McMurdo Dry Valleys using drone-based
hyperspectral reflectance imaging. Antarctic Science 32(5):
361-381.
Replacement of the maps.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation of the Area is that it contains
important ecological and scientific research values, notably rich
assemblages of biological communities.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
S - McMurdo - South Victoria Land geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
9 - South Victoria Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
N/A
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A
