Report from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on a voluntary
on-board observer operational framework for tourist vessels
operating within the Antarctic Treaty area
English version provided by the author
Report from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on a voluntary
on-board observer operational framework for tourist vessels
operating within the Antarctic Treaty area
Summary
ATCM XLII established an open-ended ICG, convened by France, on
the issue of a voluntary on-board observer operational framework
for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area.
According to the initial proposed schedule, the discussions extended
over a two-year period. This paper summarizes the outcome of
discussions, and presents the results of the ICG.
The ICG reached a general agreement about the attached
“Discussion document” and “Monitoring checklist”. According to
the Terms of Reference agreed for this ICG, these documents
present a voluntary operational framework for Parties wishing to
implement it at the national level.
As a recommendation, ATCM should consider encouraging Parties
to implement the proposed framework by means of a Resolution
(see below).
Background
Following the Workshop held in Rotterdam from April 3 to 5, 2019,
entitled “Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a
Fresh Approach”, ATCM XLII agreed « to establish an open-ended
ICG on the ATCM online discussion forum on the issue of a
voluntary on-board Observer operational framework for tourist
vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area ». Final Report of
the ATCM XLII, 2019, par. 383
The task assigned to this ICG was “to propose a draft operational
framework that could be implemented, on a voluntary basis, to
Parties willing to deploy observers on tourist vessels under their
jurisdiction”.
The following terms of references (ToR) were agreed upon:
To study existing frameworks in order to provide feedback;
To share information and ideas on issues related to a voluntary on-
board observer operational framework, such as:
The role of observers and the tasks potentially assigned to them;
The profile and qualifications required for observers;
The type of vessel concerned and the frequency of observations;
The potential financial issues involved.
Depending on progress, to propose a draft voluntary on-board
observer operational framework
Organisation of the ICG
The ICG operated during the intersessional period that extended
between ATCM XLII and XLIII (2019 / 2021). Thirty-six
contributions were shared between participants, namely Australia,
Argentina, Chile, Finland, Germany, IAATO, the United Kingdom,
the United States, ASOC, and France as the convener.
A general outline of a Discussion Document prepared by the
convener integrated the results of the discussions as the work
progressed. This Discussion Document was completed during the
following rounds of discussions:
Stage 1, Round 1 – Drafting of the Introduction and Chapter 1 of
the Discussion document: “Benchmarking: study of existing
frameworks”
Stage 2, Round 1 – Drafting of first part of Chapter 2 of the
Discussion Document: General objectives and legal issues of the
voluntary framework
Stage 2, Round 2 – Drafting of second part of Chapter 2 of the
Discussion Document : Operational issues
The completed Discussion Document arising from these discussions
provided the basis for the “voluntary on-board observer operational
framework” referred to by ToR 3 of the ICG. In addition,
participants also prepared a “monitoring checklist”, which aims to
be used as an operational tool to assist in the implementation of
monitoring.
Summary of the discussions
Introduction and Chapter 1 of the Discussion document:
“Benchmarking: study of existing frameworks”
Participants were invited to comment on a benchmarking study,
presented as part of Chapter 1. It is based on the following schemes:
New Zealand Observer Scheme for Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic
Tourism
IAATO Mandatory Observer Scheme
CCAMLR Scheme of International Scientific Observation
This Chapter provides concrete examples of how to handle
important issues of such mechanisms: their general objectives, roles
and responsibilities of stakeholders, tasks assigned to the observers,
appointment issues, profile and qualifications required for
observers, etc.
First part of Chapter 2 of the Discussion Document: General
objectives and legal issues of the voluntary framework
Participants of the discussion stressed the need to address up-front
the following specific issues:
The overall objectives of the proposed framework;
Legal issues, especially the relationship between the proposed
framework and the existing inspection regimes under the Antarctic
Treaty and the Madrid protocol.
A specific round of discussions was dedicated to these points. This
resulted in the definition of clear overall and specific objectives for
the operational framework and a reconsideration of the wording
used throughout the Discussion Document to maintain a clear
distinction between the present monitoring system and the
Antarctic Treaty inspections under art. VII (e.g. replacing
“observers” and “observation” by “monitors” and “monitoring”).
The legal status and the type of the proposed framework were
clarified as well.
Second part of Chapter 2 of the Discussion Document: Operational
issues
Participants put forward the need to clearly establish the role and
responsibilities of the monitors, as well as the follow-up of their
monitoring.
Accordingly, they discussed the overall mission of the monitors and
the specific tasks they will have to carry out. A “monitoring
checklist” consisting in a list of points of attention for monitors
stemmed from this part of the discussion. Participants also agreed
on ways and means to report to the ATCM the monitoring and
subsequent actions taken.
Finally, participants shared their views on the remaining
operational issues, namely:
Profile and qualifications required for the monitors;
Tasks and responsibilities assigned to the state Party, including the
issues related to the appointment of monitors;
Tasks and responsibilities assigned to the operators;
Types of vessels concerned and frequency of monitoring;
Cooperation between NCAs, and relationship with existing
observation frameworks;
Funding.
As part of this final round, participants discussed the list of
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System that should be monitored,
and the way to consider domestic authorizations or permits. They
remind that the voluntary nature of the framework entails the
following considerations:
It would be appropriate for the Parties to determine which
information should remain at the national level, and which should
be shared.
Each Party will define its own policy with respect to the operational
issues addressed in the Discussion Document. In this sense, criteria
proposed by the framework should be considered as guidelines.
In the same vein, types of vessels concerned, frequency of
monitoring, and funding issues are presented as examples and
guidance only.
General overview of the completed voluntary monitoring
framework
During this two year discussion, the ICG provided a thorough
analysis of the points set out in the ToR. Furthermore, the group has
thoroughly considered how a voluntary on-board observer
operational framework could be set up in Antarctica, in the context
of the Treaty system.
Similar frameworks such as those considered as part of the
Discussion Document have proved their efficiency. The
implementation of the proposed framework will enhance the
National Competent Authorities’ understanding of activities carried
out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and their knowledge of visited sites
and operator practices. It will allow monitoring for consistency with
domestic and international norms adopted within the Antarctic
Treaty System framework. It will provide Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties with an efficient tool in order to address the
challenges arising from the increase and diversification of tourist
activities within the Antarctic Treaty area.
This common framework is intended to be implemented on a
national scale. Voluntary Parties will operate national schemes to
monitor tourism activities falling under their own jurisdiction (i.e.
the activities they have authorized).
Bearing in mind its voluntary nature, the operational framework
prepared by this ICG is intended to be used as guidance by
voluntary Parties and to support and harmonize practices. To that
effect, the framework should be conceived as a formal “toolkit” for
Parties to transcribe and adapt in national practice and legislation if
needed.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the ATCM endorses the proposed
framework, and encourages voluntary Parties to implement it at the
national level, by adopting the following Resolution.
Resolution X (20XX)
The Representatives,
Recalling article 3 Environmental Principles of the Environment
Protocol;
Noting that Resolution 3 (2011) provides guidance on visitor
behaviour inside the Antarctic Treaty area;
Considering the issues relating to the growth of tourism numbers,
the increasing diversity of tourism activities and compliance with
current regulations;
Recalling previous ATCM discussions Especially WP 23, ATCM
XXVI, Madrid, 2003; Chairman’s Report, ATME 2004, par. 33; Final
Report of the ATCM XXXII, 2009, par. 172; WP 48, ATCM XXXIII,
Punta del Este (2010); Final Report of ATCM XXXIII, par. 240; WP
48, ATCM XXXIV, Buenos Aires, (2011); WP 43, ATCM XXXV,
Hobart, (2012). pointing out the value of on-board observer
schemes to address Antarctic tourism related issues;
Convinced that a common and standardized on-board observer
framework will provide voluntary NCAs with a valuable tool
enabling them to thoroughly monitor activities implemented under
their jurisdiction.
Recommend that:
Voluntary Parties endorse and implement the proposed on-board
observer framework for tourist vessels under their jurisdiction;
Such voluntary Parties promote a cooperative approach as part of
the implementation of the framework
