Review of information related to Education & Outreach available
through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat webpage
Review of information related to Education & Outreach available
through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat webpage
Working Paper submitted by Spain, Bulgaria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile,
Portugal and UK
Summary
At ATCM XLII (2019), the Meeting agreed to continue the
intersessional contact group on Education and Outreach for another
intersessional period, one of the terms of reference for this
intersessional period was “discuss the possibility for the creation of
an Antarctic Education and Outreach section on the ATS website”.
This document includes recommendations to enable the Antarctic
Treaty Secretariat web page to enhance the ‘discoverability’ of
content relating to Education & Outreach (E&O) and to promote
further the exchange of information relating to E&O among the
Parties.
Background
After the outcomes of the workshop on Education and Outreach
held during the ATCM XXXVIII (2015), the Meeting agreed to add
Education and Outreach as an additional priority issue for the
Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan; moreover, the Meeting decided to
establish an ICG on education and outreach within the ATCM
Forum (paragraph 374 of the Final Report).
Since then, the ICG has provided three reports to the ATCM (ATCM
XXXIX/WP25; ATCM XL/WP24; ATCM XLII/WP20) with the
outcomes of the ICG.
Several Parties have underlined their continued commitment to
education and outreach as one of the core elements of Antarctic
cooperation.
At ATCM XLII (2019) was agreed to continue the ICG on Education
and Outreach for another intersessional period. One of the agreed
Terms of Reference for the 2019-2020 intersessional period was to
“Discuss the possibility for the creation of an Antarctic Education
and Outreach section on the ATS website” (paragraph 208 of the
Final Report).
In addition, the establishment of a strategy and guidelines for
exchanging information between Members on Education and
Outreach for long term perspective is recognized as priority 3 in the
CEP five year work plan.
As stated in Xavier et al. (2019) “a longer-term goal is to create
synergies, reproduce activities in different languages, and embody
the Antarctic spirit of cooperation in the domain of outreach and
education.” Therefore, easy access to the educational resources of
the Parties through the ATS website would support this ambition. In
addition, with the global increase in digital engagement, Parties
wishing to develop new online educational activities may benefit
from ‘signposting’ resources in the ATS website
Proposal
The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website is a valued information
and document resource to exchange information between Parties. It
is attractive also as a source of information to the media and
general public.
After reviewing the ATS web page, we offer suggestions and
recommendations to enhance the visibility of the excellent work
and resources created by the Parties; and more generally, improve
‘discoverability’ through search engine optimisation techniques.
These suggestions and recommendations are intended to contribute
to the ATS mission to provide and disseminate information about
the Antarctic Treaty system and Antarctic activities.
At present, to discover any links to educational resources, visitors to
the website need to navigate to the “tools and resources” section
https://www.ats.aq/e/links.html. This area of the site would benefit
from providing a more inclusive list of links to resources created by
the Parties.
Whilst users performing a search under ‘education’ can find helpful
links to papers where this word is mentioned, none of the specific
content relating to this subject including the Intersessional Contact
Group for Education & Outreach, or the tools and resources content
are revealed in search. If the ATS wishes to improve the visibility of
these activities or resources, we suggest the addition of metadata
tags for ‘Education & Outreach across relevant content within the
site.
Recommendations
The ICG would recommend that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting:
Require Parties to provide the Secretariat with link(s) to their web
page(s) with educational and outreach resources;
Request the Secretariat to include these links in its “educational
resources” section; and
Request the Secretariat to present a short report of implemented
changes and site visit statistics annually during the ATCM.
Reference
Xavier JC, Mateev D, Capper L, Wilmotte A, Walton DWH (2019)
Education and Outreach by the AntarcticTreaty Parties, Observers
and Experts under the framework of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative meetings. Polar Record 55:241-244
