Review of the Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed
Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills and Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) No. 174 Stornes, East Antarctica
Review of the Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed
Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills and Antarctic Specially
Protected Area (ASPA) No. 174 Stornes, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia, China, India and the Russian
Federation
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia, China,
India and the Russian Federation have undertaken a review of the
management plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)
No. 6 Larsemann Hills and Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) No. 174 Stornes (located within the ASMA).
The review of the management plan for ASMA No. 6 identified the
need for only minor changes to the content of the plan. The
proposed changes do not alter the ASMA boundary or management
provisions. It is recommended that the CEP endorses the revised
management plan.
The review of the management plan for ASPA No. 174 concluded
that the current management plan provisions continue to be
appropriate to provide for the protection of the Area’s values, and
that no changes are required. It is recommended that the CEP
endorses this conclusion.
Background
The Larsemann Hills ASMA is located between the Vestfold Hills
and the Amery Ice Shelf on the south-eastern coast of Prydz Bay,
Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica (69o30’S, 76o19’58”E). The
Larsemann Hills were designated an ASMA under Measure 2 (2007).
The primary reason for designation was to promote coordination
and cooperation by Parties in the planning and conduct of activities
in the region – with the view to achieving greater environmental
protection outcomes.
A revised ASMA management plan was adopted under Measure 15
(2014). Concurrently, the western-most peninsula in the Larsemann
Hills, Stornes, was designated as an ASPA under Measure 12 (2014).
The primary reason for designation was to provide for the
heightened protection of the area’s outstanding geological features.
The Larsemann Hills ASMA also contains Historic Site and
Monument No. 92 Oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that
was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010, designated under
Measure 19 (2015).
The Parties active in the region (currently Australia, China, India
and the Russian Federation) have formed a Larsemann Hills ASMA
Management Group to oversee implementation of the management
plan. The Management Group meets during the annual general
meetings of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
to share information and discuss plans for cooperative activities to
be undertaken in the ASMA. At CEP XXII Australia, China, India and
the Russian Federation submitted ATCM XLII/IP40 Report of the
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills
Management Group, which advised that the Management Group
group had commenced a review of the ASMA and ASPA
management plans.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASMA No. 6
Minor amendments to the ASMA management plan are proposed.
The revised management plan is provided at Attachment A. The
amendments are summarised as follows:
References to the Environmental Domains Analysis for Antarctica
(Resolution 3 (2008)) and Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic
Regions (Resolution 3 (2017) have been added (Section 1.1).
Section 4.5 Access to the Area has been updated to reflect
restrictions applying to land, sea, air and pedestrian access to
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 174 Stones, which is
located entirely within the ASMA.
The description of the Larsemann Hills lake and stream biota has
been revised (Section 4.3.4).
The descriptions of Progress station (Section 4.6.2), the compacted
snow runway site (Section 4.6.5), and minor infrastructure in the
ASMA (Section 4.6.6) have been updated.
Information on a new Historic Site and Monument (#92) within the
ASMA has been added (Sections 4.6.6 and 4.7).
The list of supporting references has been updated (Appendix 3).
The map of Zhongshan has been updated (Map D), and a map of
Bharati has been added (Map F).
Minor editorial changes have been made throughout the document.
No changes have been made to the boundary of the ASMA or the
management provisions.
Review of the management plan for ASPA No. 174
A desktop review was undertaken of the management plan for ASPA
174. Only three visits have been made to the Area since the
management plan came into effect in 2014 (by personnel from the
Geological Survey of India and the Botanical Survey of India in the
2017-18 and 2018-19 seasons, and from the V.V. Dokuchaev Soil
Science Institute and Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian
Academy of Sciences in the 2018-19 season). The review concluded
that the current management plan provisions continue to be
appropriate to provide for the protection of the Area’s values, and
that no changes are required.
Recommendations
Australia, China, India and the Russian Federation recommend that:
the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASMA
No. 6 Larsemann Hills (Attachment A);
the CEP endorses the conclusion that no changes are required to the
management plan for ASPA No. 174 Stornes;
a further review of the management plans is undertaken no later
than 2026.
ASMA No. 6 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2007)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2007)
Any revisions to management plan:
First revision: 2014.
Current management plan:
Measure 15 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes; includes changes to graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it?
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Minor editorial changes (throughout).
1.1 Geography: Addition of references to the Environmental
Domains Analysis for Antarctica and Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions.
4.3 Natural features: Updates to description of lake and stream
biota (Section 4.3.4).
4.5 Access to the Area. Inclusion of information on access to Stornes
ASPA, and updated information on the helicopter landing site at
Progress.
4.6 Location of structures in or near the Area: Updates to Section
4.6.2 (Progress), 4.6.5 (Compacted snow runway site and associated
facilities) and 4.6.6 Minor structures, including to reflect the
addition of a tractor,‘Kharkovchanka,’ to the list of Historic Sites
and Monuments (#92).
4.7 Addition of reference to HSM 92.
Appendix 3. References and select bibliography: Updated.
Maps: Updates to Map D (Zhongshan); new Map F (Bharati).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
n/a
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the
Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If
yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Environment D - East Antarctic coastal geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes. Biogeographic Region 7 – East Antarctica
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
(Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASMA?
n/a
