Proposed Visitor Site Guidelines for Argentine Islands, Wilhelm
Archipelago
Proposed Visitor Site Guidelines for Argentine Islands, Wilhelm
Archipelago
Working paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
Visitor Site Guidelines have been prepared for Argentine Islands,
Wilhelm Archipelago, in accordance with the ATCM XLII Resolution
3 (2019) on assessing sites for new guidelines. The experience
gained over the last few years, regarding the conservation of the
site and the evaluation of the visits, evidenced the need to
producing the Visitor Site Guidelines so as to contribute to a better
management of the site. Ukraine recommends that the CEP submit
the site guidelines for adoption by the ATCM.
Background
The Argentine Islands (65ยบ15' S; 64ยบ16' W) are a small group of
islands in the Southern part of the Wilhelm Archipelago, lying 5-6
km North West of the Antarctic Peninsula, and separated from
Graham Coast by Penola Strait.
The site is recognised as being one of the southernmost recorded
Gentoo penguin colonies as well as a number of other confirmed
breeding bird species and a considerable coverage of old moss
banks and lichens communities.
Ukrainian Vernadsky station, situated on Galindez Island, has been
regularly visited by tourists since 1968, and it has seen a growth in
visitor numbers in recent years. According to the IAATO statistics,
this site is amongst the twenty most visited sites.
In order to minimize possible impacts on environmental values
more restrictions on access and numbers of visitors are required. It
is proposed that the maximum number of passengers should be 36
at a time and 270 per day, maximum ships per week limited to 2.
For the first time it is suggested to designate the landing
requirements not only for the cruise ships, but for the private
yachts, and limit the number of yachts visiting the site to three
yachts per day.
Special tourist routes are developed to divert visitors away from the
station buildings toward alternative attractions.
Proposed Visitor Site Guidelines for the Argentine Islands (see
Appendix A with attached two maps and supplementary photos)
have been prepared in accordance with the ATCM XLII Resolution 3
(2019) on assessing sites for new guidelines, and effectively
harmonized with previously adopted Visitor Guidelines for the
Winter Island (Resolution 1 (2010), as well as the Ukraine policy
regarding visits by tourists to Vernadsky Station (ATCM XXXIV
IP-110).
Recommendation
Ukraine recommends that the Committee for Environmental
Protection:
Approve the attached Visitor Site Guidelines (see Appendix A) for
the Argentine Islands.
Request the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to adopt the
Visitor Site Guidelines for the Argentine Islands.
