Eclipse in the Antarctic Peninsula
Eclipse in the Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile
Summary
In December 2021, a Total Solar Eclipse will be visible in the
Antarctic Peninsula, the Antarctic Ocean and the South Atlantic,
which could generate an increase in tourist and non-governmental
activities in its observation area. This document seeks to alert the
Parties about the possible risks that may arise as a result of the
possible increase in activities in the eclipse observation area, as well
as to promote coordination and communication between the Parties
to the Treaty in order to guarantee the effective control and
monitoring of activities during this event.
Background
On 4 December 2021, around 07:00 UTC, there will be a total solar
eclipse that will be visible from the Antarctic Peninsula [Figure 1].
These phenomena are not extraordinary and occur in this region
approximately every 20 years.
Figure 1 – Path of the Eclipse.
Figure 1. Path of the Moon's shadow on the Earth's surface during
the solar eclipse. [Google Maps and Solar Eclipse Paths, https://
eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/SEgoogle/SEgoogle2001/
SE2021Dec04Tgoogle.html]
Total solar eclipses generate great interest from the scientific
community and the general public. The scientific motivation to
observe these events in person is due to the fact that these
phenomena allow very specific studies and innovative research to
be performed. Additionally, a large number of researchers is
expected in the area, given the unique conditions of the Antarctic
Peninsula, which constitute a reference and a constraint that no
laboratory conditions can reproduce, and considering that such
measurements have only been carried out there once before
(Kameda et al. 2009). It is also foreseeable that this event will
attract the general public, and we anticipate a high demand for
tourist services.
It should be noted that the development of tourist activities during
the eclipse could be affected by the coronavirus pandemic and the
presence of public health restrictions. As we know, during the
2020-2021 season there was an unprecedented decrease in tourist
activity in the Antarctic Peninsula that could be replicated in the
2021-2022 season if the global health situation does not improve.
Currently, because of the evolution of the pandemic in the world,
there is uncertainty about whether the next Antarctic season will
unfold normally. It is likely that few tourist boats will actually
attend the eclipse observation. However, this does not impede the
possible increase in the presence of vessels that decide to carry out
expeditions without requesting authorization in accordance with
ATS rules.
As an illustration of the interest generated by these events, in 2020,
despite public health restrictions, thousands of tourists travelled to
Chile and Argentina to observe the solar eclipse that took place in
December of that year.
Possible risks associated with greater activity during the eclipse
In recent years there has been an increase in interest in visiting the
Antarctic Peninsula as a tourist using cruises and sports yachts as a
means of transport. Considering this trend and the tourist magnet
that this astronomical event represents, we consider that there are
reasons to believe that on the date of the eclipse there may be an
increase in navigation and a high concentration of boats and yachts
in the observation area. This is taking into account the impact that
the pandemic may still have on Antarctic activities for the
2021-2022 period.
Therefore, we want to draw the attention of the Parties to the
possible increase in vessel traffic. This could lead to an increase in
navigation in Antarctic waters by authorized vessels, but also by
unauthorized yachts and vessels in the area. Furthermore, public
health restrictions related to the pandemic could have the indirect
result of an increased presence of unauthorized vessels in the
Antarctic Treaty area. Although this situation may be limited to a
small number of vessels, it may represent a greater demand for
search and rescue (SAR) operations and an increase in
environmental risks associated with the development of activities
related to observing the eclipse.
It should be noted that the development of unauthorized activities
in the area has been addressed by the ATCM on multiple occasions
and controlling such activities constitutes one of the main
challenges of the STA. At ATCM XLII, in IP 107 Data Collection and
Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica 2018-2019 presented
by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Chile and IAATO, seven vessels
were reported to have operated in the region without the
authorization from a Party to the Antarctic Treaty, and the paper
urged that "the issue of unauthorized yachts be thoroughly
considered”. Likewise, 12 unauthorized vessels were reported in the
2019-2020 period.
In this context, and in order to prevent the departure of
unauthorized expeditions, it is essential to maintain a continuous
exchange of information and an effective and fluid communication
between the Parties to the Treaty through existing mechanisms
(EIES, bilateral contacts and diplomatic channels).
Furthermore, we call on the Parties to consider the risks that may
be generated by the presence of vessels that lack safety standards
and have crews without sufficient preparation to carry out
expeditions in Antarctic waters.
In this sense, it should be noted that the area in which the duration
of the eclipse will be the longest is in a sector of the Weddell Sea
that is difficult and dangerous to navigate as a result of its
proximity to ice shelves, and in the area of the Amundsen Sea,
where there is no permanent presence of vessels.
Both countries, as part of the International Convention for the
Safety of Human Life at Sea (SOLAS) of 1974 and the Maritime
Search and Rescue Convention (SAR) of 1979 and in compliance
with their obligations, deploy constant and coordinated efforts in
order to protect and assist human life at sea. In this context, the
increase in trips on yachts and sports boats can increase the risk of
accidents and emergencies in the area, which could generate
overloads in SAR operations for Antarctic operators. Consequently,
both countries remain willing to intensify cooperation and
collaboration with the actors involved in SAR operations and urge
the Parties to coordinate joint actions in the event of emergencies in
the area.
Finally, we want to draw attention to the impacts that a high
concentration of vessels in the area can generate on the Antarctic
environment and its associated ecosystems, especially considering
that the Antarctic Peninsula has the most pristine environment on
Earth and that relatively small disturbances can have significant
effects.
In this sense, the increase in expeditions and the risks of SAR
operations could generate pressures on the Antarctic environment
and its associated ecosystems and cumulative impacts in the
visibility area and at the eclipse observation points (Figure 2).
Figure 2 - Observation Points in Antarctica
Figure 2. Eclipse observation points with greater coverage and
duration. (Figure 1). These parameters were calculated using the
Javascript Solar Eclipse Explorer application, available at https://
eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/JSEX/JSEX-index.html
Therefore, in order to minimize the impact of human activities and
the risks of contamination of the Antarctic environment, we would
like to emphasize that activities be more carefully evaluated by
each Competent Authority, taking into account that multiple
activities would be carried out simultaneously in the area.
Recommendations:
Take note of the possibility of an increase in vessel traffic in the
observation area of the Total Solar Eclipse that will take place on 4
December 2021, and the risks associated with the potential increase
in the presence of unauthorized vessels in the area, in SAR
operations, and the environmental risks that tourism and non-
governmental activities related to this phenomenon could generate
in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Promote compliance with Resolution 3 (2004) Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities: Greater cooperation between the Parties
approved at ATCM XXVII in Cape Town, South Africa.
Intensify the exchange of information regarding vessels navigating
in the Antarctic Treaty area during eclipse observations, and
promote the use of current communication and coordination
mechanisms in order to exercise rigorous control of tourist and non-
governmental activities in the area. In particular, we encourage the
use of the Competent National Authorities forum to exchange
information in the authorization processes of tourism and non-
governmental activities on the occasion of the eclipse.
Intensify cooperation between the Parties to inform the countries
with Antarctic SAR responsibilities regarding any vessels that
depart from any of their ports and that plan to be in the eclipse area
during 4 December 2021.
