Report of the Informal Discussion on the Elaboration of a Manual of
Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area
English version provided by the authors
Report of the Informal Discussion on the Elaboration of a Manual of
Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area
Summary
During ATCM XLII, the contracting Parties adopted Decision 6
(2019), tasking the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to produce a
“Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area”, under
their guidance and with their assistance. An informal discussion
convened by France took place on a discussion Forum of the
Secretariat website.
The main objective was to gather all relevant documents addressing
tourism and non-governmental activities without modifying their
meaning or scope, to produce a user-friendly tool aiming to improve
knowledge of, and compliance with, the provisions applicable to
tourism and non-governmental activities.
Three different products derived from the work carried out since
ATCM XLII, on which the participants have reached a general
agreement. According to D6 (2019), the Manual is intended to be a
digital document, accessible via the Secretariat’s website. It will be
available in the following formats:
A “synoptic digital” version, containing only the name of each
provision and a hyperlink to its full text;
A “ready to print” version, containing the same provisions, along
with explanatory texts, and the full provisions in an appendix; and
A leaflet, intended to provide vessel-based operators with a synoptic
and user-friendly tool.
As a recommendation, ATCM should decide to endorse the three
versions of the Manual (drafts in Attachments A, B and C) and to
make them easily accessible on the website of the Secretariat.
Background
Through Decision 6 (2019), ATCM XLII decided to create a “Manual
of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area” (hereafter
referred to as “the Manual”). The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
(“the Secretariat”) was tasked with producing the document. In
order to enable Parties to guide and assist the Secretariat in this
task, an informal discussion, convened by France was held on a
dedicated forum of the website of the Secretariat. Decision 6 (2019)
also stated that the Manual will be a digital document, accessible
via the Secretariat’s website, and that the Secretariat will
periodically produce updated versions. The present Working Paper
presents the outcomes of this discussion, and the different products
that have stemmed from it.
Organisation of the informal discussion
The informal forum operated during the intersessional period that
extended between ATCM XLII and XLIII (2019 / 2021). Thirty-eight
contributions were shared by participants, namely Argentina, ASOC,
Australia, Chile, Germany, IAATO, Norway, Spain, the United
Kingdom, the United States, France as the convener and the
Secretariat.
The different formats of the manual were developed step by step,
following the same process throughout the discussions. The
Secretariat was in charge of producing inputs (e.g. an updated
version of the Manual) on
which participants were invited to comment. The convener was in
charge of summarizing this feedback, and transmitting it to the
Secretariat along with instructions to produce an updated version.
Summary of the discussions
During the first round of this intersessional discussions, participants
had the chance to debate, based on what was agreed by means of
Decision 6 (2019), on the general structure and content of the
Manual, and on the texts that were to be included.
As of the second round, discussions focused on a first draft version
of the Manual, which comprised four chapters and an appendix. The
first three chapters were structured around the steps usually
followed by an activity in Antarctica and incorporated references to
all the ATCM provisions related to Tourism and Non-Governmental
activities, with some explanatory texts for each reference. Chapter 4
contained references to legal instruments adopted outside the
ATCM framework. Finally, the appendix contained full texts of the
ATCM provisions (plus their attachments, if any) included in the
Manual.
As recommended by participants, the second draft was reorganized
in two sections (A and B), one mainly aimed for national competent
authorities (NCA), and the other one for non-governmental
operators. Hyperlinks were added to direct the reader to the full
texts of the provisions included in the draft Manual, and to connect
relevant cross-references. Likewise, all ATCM provisions included in
the appendix were grouped by type (Antarctic Treaty and Protocol
texts, Measures, Decisions, Resolutions, and Recommendations),
presented in chronological order and hyperlinked to the
corresponding section of the ATS website. Finally, all references to
legal instruments adopted outside the ATCM framework included in
Chapter 4 of each section, were linked to the relevant external
websites to avoid updating the Manual every time those texts were
updated or amended.
In the third draft, all explanatory texts were removed, and left aside
to be included into a "ready to print", off-line version of the Manual.
Chapter 4 turned into a common Section C and it was presented
after the first two sections. Some contents were further revised, and
additional relevant provisions were also incorporated. At this point,
it was indicated that certain provisions included in the Manual
would need to be revised by the ATCM to ensure their continued
relevance, as some of them might have turned out of date or
superseded by measures later agreed.
The following provisions have been identified as obsolete:
Recommendation X-8 (1979) Effects of tourists and non-government
expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area
Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994) Tourism and Non-Governmental
Activities
Finally, during the fourth round, both the “ready to print”, off-line
version of the Manual and a graphic “leaflet” that summarized the
main provisions of the Manual were presented for participants’
consideration. Discussions during this and the final fifth round were
devoted to refining both the format and contents of all the material
attached to this Working Paper.
General overview of the outcomes of the informal discussion
From the cosponsors’ perspective, the wide circulation of the
different formats of the Manual will improve knowledge of – and
therefore compliance with – the provisions applicable to tourism
and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. These documents,
gathering all relevant instruments addressing tourism and non-
governmental activities, will be a valuable tool for both operators
and government authorities, facilitating their work, in particular
that of NCAs.
Each version meets a specific purpose:
The digital synoptic version will help users with access to the
Internet to easily identify and access the provisions;
The “ready to print” version is a comprehensive digital tool, based
on the same core as the synoptic version, and containing the same
provisions. In addition, it provides explanatory texts of these
provisions, as well as their full texts, in an appendix. It can be used
offline -without the use of Internet- or with a poor connection (e.g.
on-board yachts).
The leaflet is intended to provide vessel-based operators with a
synthetic and user-friendly tool for quick reference.
The Manual gathers existing instruments without modifying their
meaning or scope. It does not create any new obligations.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the ATCM endorse the following Decision:
Decision X (20XX)
The Representatives,
Considering the issues relating to tourism activities and compliance
with current regulations;
Desiring to ensure that non-governmental activities in Antarctica
are carried out in full compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its
Protocol on Environmental Protection;
Desiring to improve the efficiency of the Antarctic Treaty system
and compliance with its legal framework;
Recalling Decision 6 (2019), through which it was agreed to create
the Manual of Regulations and Guidelines Relevant to Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Decide that:
The two versions of the Manual of Regulations and Guidelines
Relevant to Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the
Antarctic Treaty area and the Tourist Leaflet attached to the present
decision will be made available on the ATS website, in its most
appropriate section, so that they can be downloaded.
According to D6 (2019), the two versions of the Manual and the
Tourist Leaflet will be updated by the Secretariat, simultaneously,
upon request by the ATCM.
Recommendation X-8 (1979) and Recommendation XVIII-1 (1994)
will be withdrawn by means of an appropriate Decision, in line with
Decision 3 (2002), Decision 1 (2007), Decision 1 (2011), Decision 1
(2012), Decision 1 (2014) and Decision 2 (2015), which established
lists of measures that were designated as spent or no longer current.
Additional superseded provisions that may be identified in the
future will be considered in the same way.
