Management Plan for ASPA No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land.
Proposal to extend the existing plan
ZSPA 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Historic Site 46, Recommendation XIII-16 (Brussels, 1985)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)
Revisions to the management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)
Extension of expiry dates of management plan:
Proposal to extend for a period of 5 years (2026) the Management
Plan adopted in 2006 and renewed in identical terms in 2011 and
2016
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment made to it:
(i) Major or minor?
N/A
(ii) Any changes to boundaries or coordinates?
N/A
(iii) Any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the
captions only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) Any changes to the description of the Area relevant to
identifying its location or boundaries?
N/A
(v) Any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM located
within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any
merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or
site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which they are located.
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
If yes, please provide the reference to the relevant paragraph of the
CCAMLR Final Report here.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
the new designation (i.e., which section under Article 3.2 of Annex
V)?
N/A
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the document Environmental Domains
Analysis for the Antarctic Continent appended to Resolution 3
[2008])?
If yes, specify the main Environmental Domain here.
N/A
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions document appended
to Resolution 6 [2012])?
If yes, specify the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic
Region here.
N/A
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 [2015]) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Refer
to the Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary, appended
to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://
www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
If yes, specify the Important Bird Area(s) here.
N/A
Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.
166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land Proposal to extend the existing plan
Summary
France has carried out a five-year review of the Management Plan
for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 166, Port-
Martin, in Adélie Land. This review suggests renewing the
Management Plan without changes for a period of 5 years.
Introduction
In accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 6 of Annex V to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
France carried out a five-year review of the Management Plan for
ASPA 166, Port-Martin, in Adélie Land.
The isolated nature of the site, as well as the protection status it has
enjoyed since 1985 (as an HMS, subsequently as an ASPA), have
allowed it to remain in a state of conservation very similar to that
of January 1952, as it was left by the team that occupied it
following the fire which devastated it.
The main aim of the initial Management Plan which accompanied
the classification of Port-Martin as an ASPA in 2006 was to ensure
the protection of the site against any form of anthropogenic
degradation in order to preserve the major archaeological interest
of the site. Port-Martin is indeed a remarkable example of a post-
war Antarctic base.
This archaeological research could not be carried out over the
period covered by the previous Management Plan, in particular
because of the logistical constraints imposed by its isolated location.
However, the interest of this research remains unchanged.
The scheduling of an archaeological mission during the 2021/2022
season is under discussion. It is imperative to preserve the site from
any disturbance in order to allow this research to be carried out and
to define more precisely the most appropriate methods of
preserving artefacts. Access to the site must remain subject to
authorization, and be restricted only to activities in accordance
with the Management Plan.
France proposes that the Management Plan adopted by Measure 1
(2006) and renewed in 2011 and 2016 be extended for a new
period of 5 years.
Summary of information on the current Management Plan
See the table above.
Recommendations
France recommends that the CEP XXIII approves the request for
extension of the Management Plan for ASPA 166, Port-Martin,
Adélie Land, for a period of 5 years, and submits this to the ATCM
XLIII.
