Systematic identification of globally important geological sites in
Antarctica
Systematic identification of globally important geological sites in
Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
SCAR has developed and tested a systematic method to identify
globally-important geological sites in Antarctica (Antarctic
Geosites). SCAR recommends that the CEP:
acknowledges that the identification of globally-important
geological sites in Antarctica (Antarctic Geosites) could be useful as
a tool to assist Parties when conducting environmental impact
assessments and, more generally, when planning and conducting
activities in Antarctica;
endorses the proposed systematic method for identification of
Antarctic Geosites;
endorses the identified Antarctic Geosite representing the
Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) transition on Seymour Island; and
considers practical approaches for the implementation of the
proposed method to identify further Antarctic Geosites, including
through the SCAR Expert Group on Geological Heritage and
Geoconservation.
Introduction
Antarctica has many sites containing geological and
geomorphological elements (geological formations and structures,
landforms, minerals, rocks, meteorites, fossils, etc.) of global
scientific significance. Such sites allow us to expand our knowledge
of: (i) the geological history of the Earth, (ii) the processes which
have modelled it, (iii) past and present climates and landscapes, and
(iv) the origin and evolution of life (ATCM XXXIX IP31 Antarctic
Geoconservation: a Review of Current Systems and Practices).
The CEP has acknowledged the importance of guaranteeing
protection of geological values (CEP XVII Final Report). The issue of
the ‘Protection of outstanding geological values’ has been placed on
the CEP Five Year Work Plan to consider further mechanisms for
protection of outstanding geological values, including advice from
SCAR.
Organisations active in other parts of the world have developed
frameworks to identify, and if necessary protect, geological values
that form part of global geological heritage, e.g. UNESCO World
Heritage Cultural and Natural Convention, the International Union
of Geological Sciences (IUGS) and the European Association for the
Conservation of Geological Heritage (ProGEO). However, so far the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting has not agreed a method to
identify geological sites that are both scientifically and globally
important, within a systematic framework.
In recent years, there has been some progress in the development of
systematic environmental-geographical frameworks for the
protection of areas within Antarctica. This has been achieved
through the Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA; Resolution 3
(2008)), the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs;
Resolution 6 (2012)) and the list of Antarctic Important Bird Areas
(IBAs; Resolution 5 (2015)). However, while the ACBRs and IBAs
provide useful spatial frameworks for the further protection of
biological values, due to the nature of the data involved in these
classifications they are of limited value for identifying outstanding
geological features.
In this paper SCAR:
presents a systematic method to identify scientifically and globally
important sites in Antarctica (Antarctic Geosites), and
reports on progress for the testing of the proposed method.
Development and testing of a systematic method to identify globally
important geological sites
At CEP XVII, SCAR reported the establishment of the Action Group
on Geological Heritage and Geoconservation, which was charged
with considering the application of a method for systematic
identification of important geological values in Antarctica (ATCM
XXXIX IP31 Antarctic Geoconservation: a Review of Current
Systems and Practices).
SCAR has now developed a systematic method for identifying sites
of geological value within the Treaty area. The method is based
largely on existing methods used to identify geological heritage in
other parts of the world, but adapted to the unique circumstances
found within the Antarctic Treaty area.
Overall, there has been broad consultation in this work, engaging
geoscientists from at least 17 nations, including experts on
internationally accepted methods for the selection of geological
heritage. SCAR Action Group meetings and workshops were held in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (August 2016), Davos, Switzerland (June
2018), Madrid, Spain (November 2018) and Cambridge, UK (March
2019 and March 2020).
The details of SCAR’s advice can be found in Attachment A.
However, the method comprises two main elements:
The systematic classification of Antarctica’s geological past into
defined globally-important geological themes through the
identification of a list of ‘Geological Frameworks’.
The subsequent identification of Antarctic sites of exceptional
geological value (known as ‘Antarctic Geosites’) within each of the
identified Geological Frameworks.
To test the method, SCAR has already undertaken the systematic
classification of Antarctica’s geological past, with the initial
identification of nine Geological Frameworks (see Attachment A).
Furthermore, Antarctic Geosites have been identified for one of the
nine Geological Frameworks (the Cretaceous-Palaeogene (K-Pg)
Transition) (see Attachment A).
The Antarctic Geosites have and will be identified exclusively for
their exceptional scientific value and have no legal status under the
Antarctic Treaty System.
Application of the list of Antarctic Geosites
The identification of Antarctic Geosites would be useful as a tool to
assist Parties when conducting Environmental Impact Assessments
and, more generally, when planning and conducting activities in
Antarctica.
In particular, the Antarctic Geosite list may help identify locations
in Antarctica that represent ‘examples of outstanding geological,
glaciological or geomorphological features’ that might qualify for
consideration as ASPAs under Article 3.2(c) of Annex V. The list of
Antarctic Geosites would not be intended to be prescriptive, and
may be used in conjunction with other tools designed for these
purposes.
It should be noted that an aim of this work is to ensure that future
scientific research is not inhibited, but rather, that the scientific and
intrinsic values of geological sites are identified and preserved for
future researchers, as appropriate.
SCAR notes the benefits of – and would encourage other Parties in
supporting – further research that can contribute to future
assessments, and to the regular update of the Antarctic Geosites list
as a resource of ‘best available knowledge’ on the most important
geological sites in Antarctica.
The recently established SCAR Expert Group on Geological Heritage
and Geoconservation may be well-placed to facilitate further use of
the described method.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the CEP:
acknowledges that the identification of globally-important
geological sites in Antarctica (Antarctic Geosites) could be useful as
a tool to assist Parties when conducting environmental impact
assessments and, more generally, when planning and conducting
activities in Antarctica;
endorses the proposed systematic method for identification of
Antarctic Geosites;
endorses the identified Geosite representing the Cretaceous-
Paleogene (K-Pg) transition on Seymour Island; and
considers practical approaches for the implementation of the
proposed method to identify further Antarctic Geosites.
