Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No.103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast,
Wilkes Land, East Antarctica
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast,
Wilkes Land, East Antarctica.
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 103 Ardery Island and
Odbert Island. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V
and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2
(2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and
describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan.
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
management plan.
Background
Ardery Island and Odbert Island (66°22’20”S; 110°29’10”E, Map A)
were originally designated as Specially Protected Area No. 3,
through Recommendation IV-III (1966), after a proposal by
Australia. A management plan for the Area was adopted under
Recommendation XVII-2 (1992). In accordance with Decision 1
(2002), the site was redesignated and renumbered as Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 103. Revised management
plans for the ASPA were adopted under Measure 2 (2005), Measure
3 (2010) and Measure 3 (2015). The Area is primarily designated to
protect the unusual assemblage of breeding colonies of several
species of petrel. The Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica) and
the southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides) are of particular
scientific interest.
Review of management plan
The review of the management plan involved a literature review,
and consultation with personnel permitted to enter the Area during
the past five years and ornithologists who are familiar with the
Area. The revisions to the management plan seek to afford
enhanced protection of the values that the Area was designated to
protect.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 103
A revised management plan for ASPA 103 is presented at
Attachment A. No major changes are proposed, and there are no
changes to the Area boundary. Proposed minor amendments are
summarised as follows:
Section 6(i) revised to update climate data to reflect the period
1989 to 2021.
Section 6(i) revised to add details of related Important Bird Areas.
Section 6(i) revised to present an updated population estimate for
Adélie penguins on Odbert Island.
Section 6(i) revised to remove references to non-breeding bird
species that are not relevant to ASPA 103.
Section 7(ii) revised to include conditions regarding the use of
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), stating that overflights of
bird colonies are prohibited except where essential for compelling
scientific or management purposes, noting that such overflights
shall be undertaken in accordance with the Environmental
guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica.
Section 8 revised to update supporting documentation including
addition of recent publications.
Map B revised to include the location of one new automated
camera.
Editorial amendments have been made throughout the document.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
management plan for ASPA 103 Ardery Island and Odbert Island.
ASPA No. 103, Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast, Wilkes
Land, East Antarctica.
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Rec. IV-III (1966)
First adoption of management plan:
Rec. XVII-2 (1992)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Measure 3 (2010)
Measure 3 (2015)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2015)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 103
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. (Minor changes to graphics in Map C to show the location of
one new automated cameras).
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 6(i) revised to update climate data to reflect the period
1989 to 2021.
Section 6(i) revised to add details of related Important Bird Areas.
Section 6(i) revised population estimate for Adélie penguins on
Odbert Island.
Section 6(i) revised to remove reference to non-breeding bird
species that are not relevant to ASPA 103.
Section 7(ii) revised to include conditions regarding the use of
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), stating that overflights of
bird colonies are prohibited except where essential for compelling
scientific or management purposes, noting that such overflights
shall be undertaken in accordance with the Environmental
guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica.
Section 8 revised to update supporting documentation including
addition of recent publications.
Map B revised to include the location of one new automated
cameras.
Editorial amendments have been made throughout the document.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2(c) – areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment L Continental coastal-zone ice sheet.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes. ACBR 7 East Antarctica.
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report
available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
Yes. ANT 145 Ardery Island / Odbert Island.
