Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson
Land
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson
Land.
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 102 Rookery Islands. The
review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to
the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The
following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the
proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia
recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
management plan.
Background
The Rookery Islands are a group of small islands and rocks in the
western part of Holme Bay, north of the Masson and David ranges
in Mac.Robertson Land, East Antarctica (67°36'36" S, 62°32'01" E,
Map A and Map B). The Rookery Islands were originally designated
as Specially Protected Area No. 2 through Recommendation IV-II
(1966), after a proposal by Australia. A management plan for the
Area was adopted under Recommendation XVII-2 (1992). In
accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the site was redesignated and
renumbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 102.
Revised ASPA management plans were adopted under Measure 2
(2005), Measure 2 (2010) and Measure 2 (2015). The Area is
designated to protect breeding colonies of the six bird species
known to breed in the region, including the southern giant petrel
(Macronectes giganteus) and the Cape petrel (Daption capensis);
these species are not known to occur elsewhere in the region. The
Area is one of only four known breeding colonies of southern giant
petrels in East Antarctica.
Review of management plan
The review of the management plan involved a literature review,
and consultation with personnel permitted to enter the Area during
the past five years and ornithologists who are familiar with the
Area. The revisions to the management plan seek to afford
enhanced protection of the values that the Area was designated to
protect.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 102
A revised management plan for ASPA 102 is presented at
Attachment A. No major changes are proposed, and there are no
changes to the Area boundary. Proposed minor amendments are
summarised as follows:
Section 1 (and throughout the document) has been revised to
include Wilsons storm petrel as one of the species that breeds in the
Area.
Section 1 revised to include additional information on southern
giant petrel trends in East Antarctica.
Section 6(i) revised to provide a clearer description of the Area
boundary.
Section 6(i) revised to note that the Area is identified as Antarctic
Important Bird Area 121 on the basis of the Adélie penguin colony.
Section 6(i) revised to include more recent survey data for Cape
petrels.
Section 6(iii) has been revised to include the coordinates of three
additional cameras.
Section 7(ii) revised to include conditions regarding the use of
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), stating that overflights of
bird colonies are prohibited except where essential for compelling
scientific or management purposes, noting that such overflights
shall be undertaken in accordance with the Environmental
guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica.
Section 8 has been revised to include the addition of two more
recently published papers.
Editorial amendments have been made throughout the document.
Map B has been updated to identify three new camera locations.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
management plan for ASPA 102 Rookery Islands, Holme Bay,
Mac.Robertson Land.
ASPA No. 102, Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac.Robertson Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-II (1966) as ASPA No.2
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVII-2 (1992)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Measure 2 (2010)
Measure 2 (2015)
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2015)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 102
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No. Section 6(i) clarifies that the marine environment below the
low water mark is excluded from the Area.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. (Minor changes to Map B to identify the location of three new
cameras).
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Section 6(i) revised to provide a clearer description of the Area
boundary.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 (and throughout the document) has been revised to
include Wilsons storm petrel as one of the species that breeds in the
Area.
Section 1 revised to include additional information on southern
giant petrel trends in the East Antarctica.
Section 6(i) revised to note that the Area is identified as Antarctic
Important Bird Area 121 on the basis of the Adélie penguin colony.
Section 6(i) revised to include more recent survey data for Cape
petrels.
Section 6(iii) has been revised to include the coordinates of three
additional cameras.
Section 7(ii) revised to include conditions regarding the use of
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), stating that overflights of
bird colonies are prohibited except where essential for compelling
scientific or management purposes, noting that such overflights
shall be undertaken in accordance with the Environmental
guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) in Antarctica.
Section 8 has been revised to include the addition of more recently
published papers.
Editorial amendments have been made throughout the document.
Map B updated to identify three new camera locations.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2(c) – areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment D East Antarctic coastal geologic.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes. ACBR 16 Prince Charles Mountains.
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
Yes. ANT 119 Rookery Islands.
