Sustainable Antarctic station design: Reducing contributions to
climate change
Sustainable Antarctic station design: Reducing contributions to
climate change
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United Kingdom
Summary
New Zealand and the United Kingdom note that when Parties are
undertaking modernisation or infrastructure projects in Antarctica,
sustainable design standards are available for the design,
construction and operation of Antarctic infrastructure, to support
reducing contributions to climate change from these activities.
Context
In 2009, SCAR presented the Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment (ACCE) Report (IP 5, ATCM XXXII/CEP XII, 2010). In
one of the recommendations, “SCAR encouraged all treaty parties to
assess the contributions that their Antarctic operations make to
global warming with a particular regard to greenhouse gas
emissions and to adopt suitable mitigating protocols commensurate
with the potential for impact.”
The Parties undertook Decision 1 (2009) ‘to convene a Meeting of
Experts under the provisions of Recommendation IV-24, with the
aim of discussing relevant matters related to implications of climate
change for management and governance of the Antarctic region.’
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) was held in
Svolvær, Norway on 7-9 April 2010 and the Meeting reached
agreement on 30 recommendations (WP 63, ATCM XXXIII/CEP XIII,
2010). Of relevance to Antarctic infrastructure, the following
recommendations are noted:
Recommendation 4: The ATME recommends that Parties be
requested to:
acknowledge and encourage continuing efforts in developing and
exchanging experience of energy efficiency and alternative energy
practices so as to promote reduction of the carbon footprint of
activities in Antarctica and cut fossil fuel use from stations, vessels,
ground transportation and aircraft.
Recommendation 5: Recognizing the importance of emission cuts in
Antarctica and their symbolic value in the global context, the ATME
recommends that the ATCM encourage COMNAP to work with
national programmes to use consistent methods to quantify and
publish savings made by energy efficiencies, and which contribute
to both (a) reducing carbon footprint, and (b) reducing fuel
consumption and operating costs.
Recommendation 7: Welcoming the risk assessment approach taken
by Australia to identify potential climate change implications for
current and future Antarctic infrastructure, logistics and
environmental values, the ATME recommends that Parties be
encouraged to undertake and report on appropriate risk assessment
processes.
Recommendation 8: In developing EIAs for new facilities, the ATME
recommends that Parties be requested to take climate change
considerations into account.
With regards to Recommendation 8, ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (2016)
adopted Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessments
(Resolution 1 (2016)) in which the guidelines emphasized that, ‘as
far as possible, consideration should be given to anticipated/
potential environmental consequences of climate changes in the
location of the proposed activity, and over the timeframe of the
proposed activity, including the decommissioning phase where
relevant.’
Recommendation 19 of the 2010 ATME ‘recommended that the CEP
consider developing a climate change response work programme
(CCRWP).’ The first edition of the CCRWP was adopted in 2015
(Resolution 4 (2015)), updated in 2016 (CEP XIX Final Report,
Appendix 2) and the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change
Response (SGCCR) was established in 2017 to facilitate the efficient
and timely implementation of the CCRWP.
Climate change impacts to the built (human) environment is
considered an issue in the workplan with a gap/need and action
around identifying impacts on infrastructure and ways to mitigate
or counteract those impacts.
IP47 (ATCM XLII/CEP XXII, 2019) reported that 73% of the
COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs are currently
planning or in the process of modernisation of their station or
stations. A further seventeen percent (17%) indicated they may be
in the process of modernisation of their station or stations at some
point in the near future. Noting the likely increase in the need for
new and upgraded Antarctic infrastructure, this paper discusses
principles in sustainable design which support consideration of
reducing contributions to climate change from new or upgraded
infrastructure projects in Antarctica.
Sustainable Design Standards
Sustainable design is the concept of designing the built environment
in a manner that conforms to the principles of sustainability. A
sustainable building is a building that, in its design, construction
and operation and decommissioning/deconstruction, reduces or
eliminates negative impacts, and can create positive impacts on our
climate and natural environment. Sustainable buildings are also
designed to improve our quality of life. Sustainable buildings may
contain some or all of the following features World Green Building
Council - https://www.worldgbc.org/what-green-building: 
Operational efficiency, including energy, water and other resources;
Quantification of the impact on climate change through lifecycle
assessment including embodied carbon of products and materials;
Use of renewable energy;
Pollution and waste reduction measures;
Healthy indoor environmental air quality;
Use of materials that are non-toxic, ethical and sustainable;
Consideration of the environment in design, construction and
operation and decommissioning/ deconstruction;
Consideration of the quality of life of occupants in design,
construction and operation; and
A design that enables adaptation to a changing environment.
Sustainable buildings have many benefits including environmental
protection, efficient operations (i.e. reducing water and energy
consumption, the use of renewable energy and waste reduction
measures), reduced emissions of greenhouse gases (which may
result in economic benefits due to cost savings) and supporting the
health and wellbeing of people who work or live in these buildings.
The principals of sustainable design can be verified through the use
of design standards. Some well-known global sustainable design
standard examples include:
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED);
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
(BREEAM); https://www.breeam.com/
Green Star – Green Building Council https://www.nzgbc.org.nz/
Civil Engineering Environmental Quality (CEEQUAL) https://
www.ceequal.com/
Publicly Available Specification 2080 (PAS 2080) https://
www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/our-services/product-certification/
product-certification-schemes/pas-2080-carbon-management-in-
infrastructure-verification/
Existing design standards are generally specific to the urban
environment, where the majority of buildings and infrastructure
projects occurs. Assessing the risk of climate change, reducing
carbon emissions, and managing sustainability issues of buildings in
Antarctica is complex. Existing design standards are therefore not
applicable to the built (human) environment in Antarctica.
In addition to the EIA process, the UK has worked towards changing
its approach to sustainable design and adopting best practice. In the
past 5 years, British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has worked with the
Building Research Establishment (BRE) to tailor BREEAM for polar
environments. BAS currently uses a bespoke “Tailored Appendix”
for the BREEAM International scheme for new buildings which has
adapted many of the standard criteria to achieve the best possible
outcome with the most appropriate approach for the climate and
latitude. Infrastructure and civil engineering projects implement
CEEQUAL and undergo an extensive scoping exercise to ensure
appropriateness of the criteria. A minimum rating of BREEAM or
CEEQUAL Excellent is required by BAS policy in all new build
projects.
BAS is also developing internal processes to further support and
embed best practice in sustainable design and integrate sustainable
decision making throughout project management. BAS currently
implements a Sustainability Strategy with bespoke Sustainability
Management Plans for individual projects to track sustainable
decision making across the design and build of a project.
Additionally, every construction project will also produce a carbon
report using the PAS 2080 standard, to outline how carbon is being
managed at every stage and how a project contributes to carbon
targets.
The benefits of using both internal and externally validated
sustainability processes is delivering benefits across BAS in terms of
better quality design, a better user experience as well as helping
meet carbon reduction ambitions.
New Zealand collaborated with the New Zealand and Australian
Green Building Councils to develop a custom sustainable design
standard (Green Star Antarctic Tool), to independently verify the
proposed Scott Base Redevelopment building design (WP XX). The
tool utilises internationally recognised standards for addressing a
projects contribution to climate change, assessing the life cycle
impacts of materials and construction efforts, and enhancing
operational efficiency of buildings. The tool is an internationally
recognised system that verifies design and construction practices
that reduces contribution to climate change. Further information on
the application of the Green Star Antarctic Tool is presented in IP
XX. The tool can be shared with Parties and updated for any
Antarctic building or modernisation infrastructure project by a
Green Building Council.
Recommendation:
New Zealand and the United Kingdom recommend the CEP advises
the ATCM to recommend that Parties:
Consider the use of a sustainable design standard for the design,
construction and operation of new buildings or modernisation
infrastructure projects in Antarctica;
Note the availability of a custom Green Star Antarctic standard and
tailored BREEAM tools, which may be shared with Parties, and
adopted and adapted for any Antarctic building or modernisation
infrastructure project;
Consider adopting the PAS 2080 standard, or similar standard, to
manage and reduce the carbon emissions resulting from
construction projects;
If full sustainable design standards are not available, consider
developing internal sustainability processes that are aligned to
local, national and/or global sustainability initiatives; and
Encourage COMNAP to continue to share sustainable design
practices for station modernisation projects.
