Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
Construction and Operation of the Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
Construction and Operation of the Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
Working paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been
prepared by Ministry of Environment and Urbanization (MoEU), the
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK)
Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar Research Institute (PRI),
and Istanbul Technical University (ITU) for the proposed
construction and operation of Turkish Antarctic Research Station at
Horseshoe Island. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance
with applicable provisions of Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(2016).
This CEE describes constructional and operational activities,
reference environmental conditions, identifies potential impacts
resulting from the proposed activity, discusses alternatives to the
proposed activity, predicts impacts and presents mitigating
measures regarding the planned activities. The CEE concludes that
the scientific and logistic advantages of the proposed activities will
overcome its environmental impacts which is expected to be greater
than minor or transitory.
Circulation and translation of the CEE
Turkey notified the CEP Chair of the availability of the draft CEE
for ‘Construction and Operation of Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’ on 13 February
2021. Considering the procedures for intersessional consideration of
Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report, Appendix 3), CEP Chair issued
CEP Circular 6 / CEP XXIII on 15 February 2021 advising CEP
contact points of the availability of the draft CEE; stated the need to
establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to
review the draft CEE report; proposed that Australia’s CEP
representative, Mr Ewan McIvor, convene the ICG.
The CEE report, was available in English for download from http://
lodos.mam.gov.tr/kare/Draft_CEE_of_TARS.pdf and via the CEP
Workspace on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website:
https://www.ats.aq/devAS/EP/CEPWorkspace. All ICG
correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via
the CEP Discussion Forum. A link to the English language version of
the full draft CEE was posted to the Discussion Forum, together
with French, Russian, and Spanish versions of the Non-Technical
Summary and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment
in Antarctica (the EIA Guidelines) adopted under ATCM Resolution
1 (2016).
CEE findings
The draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) report
has been prepared regarding the construction and operation of the
Turkish Antarctic Research Station (TARS) that is proposed to be
established at Horseshoe Island in Antarctica. A non-technical
summary of the draft CEE has been prepared and attached to the
present working paper.
Polar research activities of Turkey gained momentum after being
taken under the auspices of Presidency of Republic of Turkey in
2017 and, subsequently, 5-year National Polar Science Program was
announced which outlined a roadmap for future polar science
activities. Since then, annual scientific Antarctic expeditions have
been organized which Turkish scientists have an intense demand for
participation for conducting field research. A temporary scientific
research camp was established on Horseshoe Island in 2019,
however, the
camp had limited capacity to meet logistics requirements for
scientific activities. Therefore, a need for a scientific research
station has arised to increase the quality and the quantity of the
scientific research to be conducted in Antarctica.
The station is designed for optimal use by 24 (max. 50) people and
planned for an operation of minimum 25 years. The construction
will consist of mostly pre-fabricated modules to reduce the
construction workload and waste. The proposed draft version of
TARS includes a main building, an energy center, a treatment
center, fuel tanks, wind turbines, solar panels, two hangars, and an
emergency shelter. Energy efficiency, reduction of waste
generation, and fuel consumption using renewable energy sources
of solar energy and wind power, along with maintaining safety and
wellbeing of the scientific team were the main design principles for
the operation of the station. The energy requirement will be
supplied by renewable energy sources, followed by generators.
TARS will be constructed in two stages over two consecutive
Antarctic summers.
Potential environmental impacts caused by the construction and
operation of TARS have been determined as air emissions, waste
and wastewater, noise, fuel and oil spills, and effects to flora and
fauna. Mitigation measures and relevant monitoring programs will
be applied to minimize the potential impacts. Present draft CEE
report prepared puts forth that operating the station will pose an
impact on the environment; however, the probable impacts will be
minimized by implementing the proposed protection measures.
Thus, the establishment of TARS is highly recommended as its
advantages, overcome its environmental impacts which is
considered to be more than minor or transitory.
Response to ICG
Republic of Turkey is grateful to Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, the
chair of CEP, Australia for convening the ICG, and to all ICG
participants for their valuable comments on the draft CEE. Turkey
will present a preliminary response to comments received to date
during its presentation of the CEE at CEP XXIII.
Comments raised by the ICG process, and any additional comments
made during discussions at CEP XXIII, will be addressed in the final
CEE.
