Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) to
Review the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
prepared by Turkey for ‘Construction and Operation of Turkish
Antarctic Research Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’
Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) to
Review the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
prepared by Turkey for ‘Construction and Operation of Turkish
Antarctic Research Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established
in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP
consideration of draft CEEs to consider the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) prepared by Turkey for
‘Construction and Operation of Turkish Antarctic Research Station
(TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’. ICG participants
commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity
described in the draft CEE, including Turkey’s stated plans to utilise
a prefabricated, modular station design that would minimise waste
generated during construction and facilitate an efficient
decommissioning process, to also minimise waste generation during
station operations, to utilise advanced wastewater treatment, and to
use renewable sources to meet a component of the energy
requirements and reduce carbon emissions. On the basis of
comments provided by participants, the ICG advises the CEP that
the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured and well presented,
and largely conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to
the Protocol on Environmental Protection. However, the ICG further
advises that the conclusion that the proposed activity would ‘lead to
minimum disturbance of the environment’ is not adequately
supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. The
ICG advises the CEP that Turkey should consider the issues raised
during the ICG and that, if it decides to proceed with the proposed
activity, there are several aspects for which additional information
or clarification should be provided in the required final CEE.
Background
On 13 February 2021 Turkey notified the CEP Chair of the
availability of the draft CEE for ‘Construction and Operation of
Turkish Antarctic Research Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island,
Antarctica’. The draft CEE was prepared by Ministry of Environment
and Urbanization (MoEU), the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) Marmara Research Center
(MAM) Polar Research Institute (PRI), and Istanbul Technical
University (ITU). The full document, in English, was available for
download from http://lodos.mam.gov.tr/kare/
Draft_CEE_of_TARS.pdf and via the CEP Workspace on the website
of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: https://www.ats.aq/
devAS/EP/CEPWorkspace.
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration
of Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report, Appendix 3) the CEP Chair
issued:
CEP Circular 6 / CEP XXIII (15 February 2021), which:
advised CEP contact points of the availability of the draft CEE;
advised of the need to establish an open-ended intersessional
contact group (ICG) to review the draft CEE;
proposed that Australia’s CEP representative, Mr Ewan McIvor,
convene the ICG;
proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convener and /
or terms of reference.
CEP Circular 7 / CEP XXIII (3 March 2021), which noted that no
comments had been received on the proposed convener or terms of
reference.
Terms of reference
The ICG addressed the four standard terms of reference outlined in
the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs:
The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of
Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol
Whether the CEE: i) has identified all the environmental impacts of
the proposed activity; and ii) suggests appropriate methods of
mitigating (reducing or avoiding) those impacts
Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported
by the information contained within the document
The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE
Method of operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and
Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. A link to the English
language version of the full draft CEE was posted to the Discussion
Forum, together with French, Spanish and Russian versions of the
Non-Technical Summary and the Guidelines for Environmental
Impact Assessment in Antarctica (the EIA Guidelines) adopted
under ATCM Resolution 1 (2016).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convener
of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional
consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any
Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of
the CEP or at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
The ICG commenced with an opening message from the convener
on 4 March 2021 and an initial comment period from that date
until 2 April 2021. On 31 March 2021 the Secretariat advised CEP
Members of revisions to the draft CEE, made by Turkey in response
to a request from a Consultative Party. The convener circulated a
draft ICG report for comment on 12 April 2021 and prepared a final
report, addressing comments received, by the 30 April 2021
deadline for submission of Working Papers to CEP XXIII.
Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by ten CEP Members
(Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, India, Italy, New Zealand,
Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States) and one
Observer (ASOC). The following sections summarise the main points
raised by ICG participants, in accordance with the ICG terms of
reference. The full submissions provided by participants are
available in the CEP Discussion Forum. If Turkey decides to proceed
with the proposed activity, it should also have reference to the
matters raised in those full submissions.
The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of
Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
ICG participants expressed the view that the draft CEE conforms, or
partially conforms, to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of
the Environmental Protocol, and highlighted the need to address
some elements of Article 3 in greater detail.
Participants commented favourably on several aspects of the
proposed activity, including Turkey’s stated plans to utilise a
prefabricated, modular station design that would minimise waste
generated during construction and facilitate an efficient
decommissioning process, to also minimise waste generation during
station operations, to utilise advanced wastewater treatment, and to
use renewable sources to meet a component of the energy
requirements and reduce carbon emissions.
Participants identified several aspects for which additional
information or clarification should be provided in a final CEE, if the
proponent decides to proceed with the proposed activity. The
following sections describe points raised by several participants.
Description of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Participants noted that the draft CEE presented a useful overview of
the construction and operation of the proposed station (Section 2).
They suggested that further details, including additional maps,
should be
provided to ensure the CEE adequately describes the full scope of
the proposed activity and associated actions, including further
information on the following matters.
Location, design, construction, operation and removal of the
temporary camp required to support a construction workforce of
130 personnel.
Which of the scientific activities identified as part of Turkey’s
National Polar Science Program would be supported by the station,
how those activities would benefit from establishing a new station
at the proposed location, and how those activities would
complement research supported by other stations in the region and
contribute to expanding scientific knowledge.
Logistical support activities for the construction and operation of
the station, including:
large vessel and small boats operations (e.g. vessel type, frequency
of activities, locations), including ship-to-shore operations and
clarification of whether any temporary or permanent land-side
infrastructure would be required (e.g. wharf or boat ramp)
use of helicopters for research and operational support (e.g. aircraft
type, frequency of activities, locations)
vehicle use during the operation of the station (e.g. vehicle numbers
and type, frequency of activities, locations), including consideration
of whether carrying out station operations largely on foot would
enable the effective operation and maintenance of the station, and
allow Turkey to achieve its stated scientific objectives.
Extent of any earthworks required to prepare the construction site
and access routes, and the number, type and size of foundations
required for the main station buildings and ancillary infrastructure.
As noted below under ‘Description of the initial environmental
reference state’, a prior study of the soil mechanics of the area
where the station will be located was recommended.
Detailed description and maps to illustrate the layout of the station,
presented on a detailed base map, including the location of fuel
storage, renewable energy sources, roads, scientific facilities, waste
storage, the incinerator and other ancillary infrastructure.
Details about the proposed Energy Management System, including
the diesel generators and their emission control parameters and
measures (e.g. particle filters), the type, location, construction and
operation of renewable energy sources (e.g. wind turbines and solar
panels), and the contribution renewable energy sources are
expected to make to meeting overall station energy requirements.
The status of collaborative arrangements with other national
Antarctic programs that will contribute to ‘cost-effective solutions
and to reduce carbon footprint in the region by means of joint
logistic activities’.
Technical information regarding the design and intended operation
of the incinerator (e.g. possible use of a wet scrubber),
arrangements for storing waste, handling of hazardous waste, and
plans for the removal of waste from the Antarctic region, including
whether arrangements are in place in the receiving country.
Information about how wastewater would be treated (i.e. specific
details about the technology to be used), where effluent will be
discharged and whether the location meets the requirements of
Annex III, Article 5.
Timing of the proposed works, including in what years the
construction activities would occur and further information about
the timing of specific construction / mechanical / electrical works.
Noting that the proposed two-year schedule might be ambitious,
consideration could be given to planning or allowing for
construction to extend into a third season.
Specific details of the volume, location and construction of fuel
tanks, types of fuel that will be stored, monitoring systems and
containment infrastructure.
Specific building materials to be used and details about their
environmental performance (noting the welcome intention to utilise
materials that would be durable and suitable for reuse, recycling
and recovery).
Possible alternatives to the activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
Participants noted that the draft CEE addressed several alternatives
to the proposed activity (Section 3), and suggested further
information could be provided regarding these and other possible
alternatives, including:
Why the site on Horseshoe Island was selected in favour of the
other locations, including further explanation of the criteria used in
the multi-criteria evaluation and a description of the comparative
environmental sensitivities of the sites considered.
Alternatives to the proposal to draw domestic water from nearby
lakes on Horseshoe Island, which might result in potentially
significant impacts on the scientific and environmental values of the
lakes and adjacent areas, and which might not ensure a sustainable
water supply. It was suggested that further information about
potential impacts and practical consideration should be provided
and that alternative water supply options, such as reverse osmosis /
desalination of seawater should be considered.
The option of collaborating with other national Antarctic programs
on the use of existing facilities.
Description of the initial environmental reference state (Annex I,
Article 3.2(b))
Participants noted that parts of the initial environmental reference
were well described (Section 4), however they suggested that other
elements should be further developed to ensure a comprehensive
basis for assessing and monitoring the environmental impacts of the
proposed activity, including the following matters.
Comprehensive information about the distribution and abundance
of both terrestrial and nearshore marine flora and fauna at the
proposed station site, and in other areas on Horseshoe Island and
the surrounding region that could be impacted by the proposed
activity. Details of surveys / studies undertaken to date should be
provided, and further surveys / studies undertaken as necessary to
fill gaps and ensure a comprehensive description of the
environment.
A comprehensive description of the presence of birds in the project
area and surrounding region, including bird flight paths, throughout
the season. This information should be collected and analysed
before finalising plans for the station, particularly the possible use
of wind turbines or helicopters. Particular concern was expressed
regarding potential impacts to breeding bird colonies at Lagotellerie
Island, which is located in relatively close proximity to the
proposed station site, and which is identified as an Antarctic
Important Bird Area and designated as Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) 115.
In addition to describing the climatic conditions at Horseshoe
Island, information about anticipated / potential environmental
consequences of climate change in the location of the proposed
activity, and also the possible implications of climate change for
proposed activities (e.g. sea level rise, permafrost melting,
availability of lake water / snow) and their associated
environmental impacts. It addition, it was suggested that
consideration should be given to risks from natural hazards such as
earthquakes and tsunamis which may occur at the Antarctic
Peninsula.
Geological and geotechnical site assessments undertaken to identify
and evaluate predicted impacts to geomorphology and non-living
values, as well to determine the suitability of the proposed station
design and construction methodology (e.g. local permafrost,
geology and ground conditions including ground water).
Maps to illustrate the proposed station location in the context of key
local and regional features / environmental sensitivities (e.g. flora,
fauna, ice-free areas, glacial features, ASPAs, HSMs, Important Bird
Areas).
Description of the methods used to forecast the impacts of the
proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(c))
Participants commented that the prediction of impacts (Section 5)
could be improved and better supported by describing the
methodology used for the impact identification and assessment
process, as suggested in the EIA Guidelines, including an
explanation of how the impact significance ratings (i.e. presented in
Tables 5-6 and 5-7) were determined. They also suggested that
significance ratings could be reviewed in light of recommended
additional information about the initial environmental reference
state.
Estimation of the likely direct impacts, indirect, cumulative and
unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity, and effects on the
conduct of scientific research and other existing uses and values
(Annex I, Article 3.2(d)(e)(f)(h)(i))
See ToR#2(i).
Identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties (Annex I,
Article 3.2(j))
Participants noted that the draft CEE provides a relatively brief and
general list of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties (Section 7).
They suggested that this section should be further developed to
provide greater detail, and to also discuss knowledge gaps and
uncertainties highlighted elsewhere in this ICG report, including:
details of the specific scientific activities to be supported by the
station, where they will be conducted, and the logistics required to
support them
gaps in knowledge of the initial environmental reference state at the
proposed station site
location of bird colonies and bird flight paths
the suitability and sustainability of the nearby lakes as a domestic
water source
details of the renewable energy sources to be used and their
contribution to total energy requirements
the potential effects of climate change on the environment and
implications for station operations
collaborative arrangements with other national Antarctic programs
operating on the Antarctic Peninsula.
Non-technical summary (Annex I, Article 3.2(k))
Participants noted that the Non-Technical Summary (NTS) generally
provides a clear and helpful summary of the information presented
in the main body of the CEE. It was noted, however, that the NTS
could be expanded to also include a figure showing the local and
regional setting and layout of the proposed station, and to include
summaries of the:
purpose of the proposed activity, including scientific activities to be
supported by the station
key alternatives considered
initial environmental reference state
spatial extent of proposed activities
nature and significance of associated environmental impacts
overall conclusion of the CEE regarding the predicted impacts of the
proposed activity, using the terminology of Article 8 and Annex I
(see also comments below at ToR#3).
Identification of mitigation measures, including monitoring
programs (Annex I, Article 3.2(g))
See ToR#2(ii).
Whether the CEE:
i) has identified all the environmental impacts of the proposed
activity;
Participants noted that some elements of the proposed activity were
not described or were not considered in sufficient detail (as outlined
under ToR#1) and that, consequently, the full impacts of those
activities on the terrestrial and nearshore marine environment
would need to be considered in detail in addition to those impacts
discussed in the draft CEE (Section 5). Participants also suggested
that further information and assessment was required for other
environmental impacts, including:
Information to support the assessment that the transport of
material, equipment, construction personnel and station personnel
during the station construction and operation would only result in
‘a minor risk of the accidental introduction of non-native biota’.
Location and extent of physical disturbance to ice-free ground and
related impacts to terrestrial flora and fauna due to earthworks and
excavation required to establish access routes and laydown areas for
materials and equipment, and to install foundations for station
buildings and ancillary infrastructure.
Impacts to the terrestrial and nearshore marine environment
associated with the generation of dust and sediment generated
during the construction and operation of the proposed station (e.g.
earthworks, vehicle use).
Changes to drainage and snow accumulation due to the presence of
the station buildings.
How the proposed activity, particularly the associated landscape
modification and physical presence of new infrastructure, would
alter the wilderness and aesthetic values of the area.
Further assessment and description of the indirect and cumulative
impacts of the proposed activity in the light of existing activities
and other known planned activities, including potential cumulative
impacts arising from:
the combination of the individual impacts of the proposed activity,
some of which were not addressed on described in sufficient detail
the conduct and support of research by Turkey once the station is
operational, within the immediate station area, elsewhere on
Horseshoe Island and in the broader Antarctic Peninsula region
interactions between the proposed activity and the research and
logistics activities of other national Antarctic programs in the region
interactions with tourism activities, including at the visitor site on
Horseshoe Island.
ii) suggests appropriate methods of mitigating (reducing or
avoiding) those impacts
Participants observed that the draft CEE identified measures to
mitigate a range of impacts associated with the construction and
operation of the station (Section 5). However they suggested that a
more comprehensive description of planned mitigation measures
was needed, including for those elements of the proposed activity
and associated impacts, that were not described or adequately
addressed in the draft CEE (as outlined at ToR#1 and ToR2(ii)).
Participants gave particular emphasis to the need to elaborate
mitigation measures for the following matters.
Specific arrangements for effective non-native species prevention
(including cleaning and inspections), monitoring and response,
particularly noting the high risk of introductions in the Antarctic
Peninsula region.
Preventing and responding to leaks and spills of fuel and other
hazardous liquids, including arrangements for safe ship-to-shore
fuel transfer, characteristics of fuel tanks and containment
infrastructure, procedures for refuelling and fuel handling both on
station and in the field, details of equipment, procedures and
training for responding to spills in the terrestrial and marine
(including ice-covered) environment, and arrangements for
remediating contaminated ground. This should include providing a
copy or summary of the planned emergency response and oil spill
contingency plans for both the construction and operations phases
of the proposed activity.
Waste management and disposal, including procedures for
incineration or storage of wastes for removal from Antarctica in a
manner that will prevent dispersal into the environment or
scavenging by wildlife. As above for the Oil Spill Contingency Plan,
this should include providing a copy or summary of the intended
Waste Management Plan.
Steps to prevent, and take action in response to, bird strikes on the
wind turbines.
Measures to prevent disturbance to wildlife during construction
activities, including due to noise.
Minimising the generation of dust arising from ground works and
vehicle use.
Participants welcomed the stated intention to develop a monitoring
program (Section 6), and suggested that further details of planned
monitoring activities should be presented, including:
objectives of the monitoring program
baseline values for parameters to be measured
inclusion of all potential impacts that will require monitoring as a
mitigation measure
number and locations of sampling sites
monitoring of biota, in particular birds
considering a higher frequency of measurements to allow rapid
detection and responses as required.
Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported
by the information contained within the document.
Participants considered that a CEE was the appropriate level of EIA
for the proposed activities.
Participants questioned the predictions presented in the draft CEE
that ‘the research station will reduce the human footprint by
decreasing the number of onboard crew and the vessel duration in
the region in a cumulative manner’ (pg. 11) and that the proposed
activity ‘will have less environmental impact in the region in the
long-term compared to short-term expeditions’ (pg. 45). They noted
that the impacts (or footprint) of the proposed activity extend
beyond carbon emissions, and that the operation of the proposed
station would still involve shipping support. It was suggested that
comparative information about fuel use / emissions could be
provided to support these predictions.
In general, participants felt that the overall conclusion that the
proposed activities would ‘lead to minimum disturbance of the
environment’ (Section 8) was not adequately supported by the
information contained within the draft CEE.
It was noted that a more comprehensive description of the proposed
activity (including scientific activities to be supported by the
station) and the initial environmental reference state (as
summarised under ToR#1 above), as well as further details
regarding mitigation measures, would be required to establish a
comprehensive basis for evaluating environmental impacts, and to
inform an assessment of whether such impacts would be
outweighed by the anticipated benefits.
Participants suggested that the conclusion of the draft CEE should
be presented using the terminology of Article 8 and Annex I of the
Environmental Protocol. Some participants considered that, on the
basis of the information available, the proposed activities were
likely to result in ‘more than a minor or transitory impact’.
The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Participants commented that the draft CEE is generally clear, well
structured and well presented.
As mentioned above, participants noted that further information
and clarification would be required to facilitate a comprehensive
description and assessment of the environmental impacts of the
proposed activity.
Participants emphasised that it would be valuable to provide further
maps and figures to complement the written description of the
proposed activity and initial environmental reference state, and to
help place the project in its local and regional setting. It was also
suggested that maps and figures include scale bars, north arrows,
labels and legends where appropriate.
Other suggestions for enhancing the clarity, format and
presentation of the draft CEE are contained in participants’ full
submissions, available from the CEP Discussion Forum.
Conclusions
Having reviewed the draft CEE prepared by Turkey for the
‘Construction and Operation of Turkish Antarctic Research Station
(TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’ in accordance with the
Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, the
ICG advises the CEP that:
The draft CEE largely conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of
Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, although there is a need to address some elements
of Article 3 in greater detail.
Turkey should consider the issues raised during the ICG and, if it
decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there are several
aspects for which additional information or clarification should be
provided in the required final CEE. These matters are outlined in
detail in the submissions made by participants, and are summarised
in this ICG report. In particular, the Committee’s attention is drawn
to the suggestions that further details should be provided regarding:
the description of the proposed activity, particularly including
details of the temporary construction camp, scientific activities to
be supported by the station, required earthworks, logistical support
activities including shipping, and small boat, helicopter and vehicle
operations, and further details regarding the design and
construction of the station buildings, collaborative logistics
arrangements with other programs, and specific arrangements for
energy, waste and wastewater management
alternatives to the proposed activity, including the reasons for
selecting the location for the proposed station, the alternative of
collaborating with other programs on the use of existing facilities,
and alternatives to utilising lakes on Horseshoe Island as a domestic
water supply
the initial environmental reference state, including a more
comprehensive assessment of terrestrial and nearshore flora and
fauna at the station site and broader region, in particular
consideration of the location of bird areas and flight paths, a
geological assessment of the proposed station site, and the possible
impacts of climate change on the environment
the methodology used to forecast the impacts of the proposed
activity, including the means of determining impact significance
ratings
potential environmental impacts, including for aspects of the
proposed activity not addressed or sufficiently well described,
particularly those impacts that might be associated with disturbance
of ice-free ground due to groundworks, operation of wind turbines,
use of nearby lakes for domestic water supply, and the potential
introduction of non-native species
cumulative impacts that might arise in light of existing activities
and other known planned activities in the area, including research
activities extending beyond the station site and potential interaction
with other national Antarctic program and tourism operations in
the broader region
mitigation measures, including for impacts not addressed or
sufficiently well described, particularly those measures related to
fuel management, non-native species prevention, waste and waste
water management, and avoiding impacts to wildlife from
construction, wind turbine and aircraft operations
the planned environmental monitoring program
gaps in knowledge, particularly including details of activities to be
supported by the station and required logistics, gaps in the initial
environmental reference state, uncertainties regarding the
suitability of the nearby lakes as a domestic water source, and gaps
in knowledge of climate change impacts and implications for the
operation of the station.
The conclusion that the impacts of constructing and operating the
proposed station would ‘lead to minimum disturbance of the
environment’ is not adequately supported by the information
provided in the draft CEE. The conclusion should preferably be
presented in the terminology of Article 8 and Annex I of the
Protocol and, in that regard, it is likely the proposed activity would
have ‘more than a minor or transitory impact’.
The draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well
presented, although additions and improvements to the maps and
figures are recommended and further information and clarification
is required to present a comprehensive assessment of the
environmental impacts of the proposed activity.
