Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2019-2021
Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2019-2021
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom on behalf of the
SGCCR
Summary
This Working Paper details the work and outputs of the SGCCR
during the period July 2019 to April 2021.
The SGCCR recommends that the CEP considers the following
recommendations:
The CEP is asked to endorse the updated and reformatted draft
CCRWP (2021) and use it to replace the current version of the
CCRWP (2015) (Attachment A)
The CEP is asked to endorse the addition of the identified CCRWP
science needs to those of the CEP 5-Year Work Plan (Attachment B)
The SGCCR asks the Committee to recommend to the ATCM that
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat provide support for the
development of webpages relevant to the communication of the
CCRWP, including translation of CCRWP presentations, in
collaboration with the SGCCR.
Acknowledging the desire of the CEP to review the effectiveness of
the SGCCR since its establishment, the SGCCR recommends that the
CEP considers the work undertaken to date by the SGCCR and
endorses the continuation of its work under its current Terms of
Reference.
Background
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was
adopted through Resolution 4 (2015), and the ATCM recommended
that Governments:
encourage the CEP to begin implementing the CCRWP as a matter
of priority, and provide annual progress reports to the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting on its implementation;
request the CEP to keep the CCRWP under regular review, with the
input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and
the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
on scientific and practical matters respectively; and
give consideration, within their own national scientific funding
systems and national Antarctic research programmes, as to how
they can address the science needs and actions identified in the
CEP’s CCRWP.
Following discussions within CEP regarding updating,
implementation and follow-up of the CCRWP, a decision was made
at ATCM XL (Decision 1 (2017)) to establish a new Subsidiary
Group on Climate Changes Response (SGCCR).
The Terms of Reference for the SGCCR are to facilitate the efficient
and timely implementation of the CCRWP by:
Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP
between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions
identified for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on
planned activities;
Drafting proposed annual updates of the CCRWP, including
management, research or monitoring actions;
Drafting annual progress reports on the implementation of the
CCRWP for the CEP to draw on in their updates to the ATCM.
In addition to the agreed Terms of Reference, CEP XX tasked the
SGCCR to develop operating mechanisms to support good
participation and efficient handling of work (CEP XX Final Report,
para 74). It should also
be noted that ‘Climate Change Implications for the Environment’ is
a Priority 1 issue on the CEP Five-Year Work Plan, with
‘Implementing the CCRWP’ a key action.
SGCCR operation during the 2019-21 intersessional period
Due to the cancellation of the CEP and ATCM meeting in Helsinki,
Finland, in 2020, the current report covers the work and outputs of
the SGCCR over the two-year period July 2019 to April 2021.
The SGCCR currently consists of 17 members from 13 CEP member
states (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, New
Zealand, Norway, Romania, South Africa, Spain, UK, USA and
Uruguay) and four organizations (ASOC, IAATO, SCAR and WMO).
The SGCCR is currently convened by one of the CEP vice-chairs (Dr.
Kevin Hughes). The SGCCR maintains flexibility regarding
membership and welcomes new members.
The work of the SGCCR is undertaken predominantly via e-mail.
Key documents developed by the SGCCR are posted on the SGCCR
page on the CEP Discussion Forum and are therefore accessible to
all CEP Members and Observers.
Until recently, the SGCCR has generally held its meetings, in
physical format, associated with the usually annual CEP meeting.
However, due to the possible movement of CEP XXIII to a virtual
format, the SGCCR held a virtual informal meeting on 13th April
2021.
CCRWP reformatting and updating
At CEP XXII, the SGCCR proposed a new format for the CCRWP
(ATCMXLII WP36). The Committee agreed that the SGCCR should
apply the suggested new format to the work programme. The
SGCCR has now completed this task (see Attachment A). In
addition, new graphics have been developed to help communicate
the different issue identified within the CCRWP (Figure 1).
Figure 1. New graphic developed to help communicate the main
issues identified within the CCRWP
Other general changes, undertaken as the reformatting was applied
across the identified CCRWP issues, included:
the addition of a brief introduction to the CCRWP
the amalgamation of the issue ‘Ecosystem change due to ocean
acidification’ into the issue ‘Change to marine near-shore abiotic
and biotic environment due to climate change’
the removal of the identified science needs to a separate document
(see later) and amalgamation of individual Tasks under each
Actions section, to simplify the layout and reduce complexity.
In accordance with its Terms of Reference, the SGCCR has also
updated the CCRWP.
The CCRWP has been revised to ensure content duplication with the
CEP 5-Year Work Plan is minimised.
Actions within each identified ‘Gap/need’ have been prioritised on a
scale of 1 to 3, and preliminary target dates for delivery have been
added.
A new issue has been identified entitled ‘Emerging issues’, which
includes the need to (i) consider the impacts of climate change on
plastic pollution entering the Southern Ocean and (ii) understand
the potential expansion of human footprint in Antarctica due to
climate change and any subsequent impacts upon Antarctic values.
Recommendation: The CEP is asked to endorse the updated and
reformatted draft CCRWP (2021) and use it to replace the current
version of the CCRWP (2015)
CCRWP science needs
As stated earlier, the CCRWP science needs were removed from the
CCRWP, and instead combined with the ‘Science knowledge and
information needs’ identified in the current CEP 5-Year Work Plan
(2019) (see: Attachment B). This was done to help facilitate
communication of CEP science needs to researchers (for example, in
SCAR, WMO and other research organisations) in a succinct and
easily understood manner. Care was taken to try to minimise
duplication and consolidate science needs within the final
document.
Recommendation: The CEP is asked to endorse the addition of the
identified CCRWP science needs to those of the CEP 5-Year Work
Plan (Attachment B)
Mechanism for CEP to receive best available science to inform its
advice to the ATCM
A great deal of consideration was given by the SGCCR into the most
effective mechanism by which the best available science could most
readily be made available to the CEP and ATCM to inform
implementation of the CCRWP. It was agreed that the SGCCR itself
was not best placed to synthesis available science, but rather other
science bodies might be better able to perform this task, including
for example, the World Meteorological Office (WMO), SCAR and
some of its associated groups including Integrating Climate and
Ecosystem Dynamics (ICED), the Southern Ocean Observing System
(SOOS) and the Antarctic Nearshore and Terrestrial Observing
System (ANTOS).
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), in
particular, is well placed to provide the CEP and ATCM with
independent scientific advice, and has several established
mechanisms to do so, including via the SCAR Lecture and policy
papers to the CEP/ATCM. More recently, SCAR has taken over the
management of the Antarctic Environments Portal
(www.environments.aq), which was launched in 2015 and endorsed
by the ATCM through Resolution 3 (2015). The Antarctic
Environments Portal links Antarctic science and Antarctic policy, by
providing easy access to information on a range of scientific issues
relevant to Antarctic environmental governance and management.
All scientific information available through the Portal is prepared
by experts and goes through a rigorous peer-review and editorial
process before publication. The Portal can act as a means of
supporting SCAR’s role in providing independent and objective
scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and
other bodies. The Portal
already includes state-of-knowledge reports on non-native species
(Issue 1 of the draft CCRWP), the vulnerability of Southern Ocean
biota to climate change (Issue 3 of the draft CCRWP) and articles on
key species (e.g., penguins and seals; Issue 4 of the draft CCRWP).
During the intersessional period, a process was developed whereby
the SGCCR could request Information Summaries relevant to the
implementation of the CCRWP from relevant science bodies (see
Attachment C). The process diagram describes provision of
information via (i) the SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal and (ii)
other science bodies. Close collaborative working by the SGCCR and
SCAR has shown that the Portal could support the SGCCR by acting
as a central repository of information of direct relevance to the
CCRWP. Furthermore, SCAR could commission and publish new
Information Summaries and other knowledge resources as required
by the SGCCR. The SGCCR would, of course, be open to receiving
and considering relevant scientific information that has not
specifically been requested by the SGCCR, and scientific
information which might take a form other than an Information
Summary, as commonly applied for the Antarctic Environments
Portal.
Communication
CCRWP presentation
During earlier discussions (reported in ATCM XLII WP36), the
SGCCR identified the need to communicate the content of the
CCRWP and work of the SGCCR to a wider audience. The SGCCR
saw merit in the production of a PowerPoint presentation to fulfil
this need. However, given that the draft updated CCRWP has not
received endorsement by the CEP and ATCM, the SGCCR has
produced two similar PowerPoint presentation, one referencing the
current (2015) version of the CCRWP (Attachment D) and the other
referencing the draft updated and reformatted CCRWP (2021)
(Attachment E). Both versions of the presentation briefly describe
climate change in Antarctica, the CEP’s engagement with climate
change issues, the CCRWP, the SGCCR and the role of science in
supporting the work of the CEP on climate change issues.
CCRWP webpages on the ATS website
To further communicate the CCRWP and the work of the SGCCR,
the group has commenced the preparation of potentially useful
content for the ATS webpage. New CCRWP webpages would allow
information relevant to the CCRWP to be held in one place,
including the CCRWP, details of the SGCCR (e.g., Terms of
Reference, working methods, process for attaining membership),
communication resources (e.g., CCRWP presentations) and links to
relevant information sources.
Recommendation: The SGCCR asks the Committee to recommend to
the ATCM that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat provide support for
the development of webpages relevant to the communication of the
CCRWP, including translation of CCRWP presentations, in
collaboration with the SGCCR.
Review of the SGCCR
The ATCM approved the establishment of the SGCCR through
Decision 1 (2017). The Framework and Terms of Reference for the
SGCCR were set out in Appendix 2 to the Final Report of CEP XX:
Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response – Framework.
Within Appendix 2, CEP XX noted its intention to review the
effectiveness of the SGCCR after 3 years. The review of the SGCCR
was due to occur in 2020; however, this was not possible due to the
cancellation of the meeting.
To help facilitate the SGCCR review process at CEP XXIII, we ask
the Committee to consider the outputs and developments listed in
ATCM XLI IP46, ATCM XLII WP36 and in this Working Paper,
including the Attachments.
Now that many of the practical elements of operating the SGCCR
have been developed (communication mechanisms, process for
provision of best available science, etc.), the SGCCR Member are
keen to continue their work with a particular focussing on
facilitating the implementation of the CCRWP. A longer-term work
plan for the SGCCR is appended (Attachment F).
Recommendation: Acknowledging the desire of the CEP to review
the effectiveness of the SGCCR since its establishment, the SGCCR
recommends that the CEP considers the work undertaken to date by
the SGCCR and endorses the continuation of its work under its
current Terms of Reference.
Recommendations
The SGCCR requests that the CEP considers the following
recommendations:
The CEP is asked to endorse the updated and reformatted draft
CCRWP (2021) and use it to replace the current version of the
CCRWP (2015).
The CEP is asked to endorse the addition of the identified CCRWP
science needs to those of the CEP 5-Year Work Plan.
The SGCCR asks the Committee to recommend to the ATCM that
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat provide support for the
development of webpages relevant to the communication of the
CCRWP, including translation of CCRWP presentations, in
collaboration with the SGCCR.
Acknowledging the desire of the CEP to review the effectiveness of
the SGCCR since its establishment, the SGCCR recommends that the
CEP considers the work undertaken to date by the SGCCR and
endorses the continuation of its work under its current Terms of
Reference.
