Promoting Scientific Research to Inform the Antarctic Decision-
Making
Promoting scientific research to inform the Antarctic Decision-
Making
Working Paper submitted by China
Summary
In 2019, the ATCM XLII and the CEP XXII discussed, inter alia, two
items such as marine spatial protection and management and other
Annex V Matters. Discussion of the two items touched upon the
science needs to support decision-making one way or another.
ATCM and CEP agreed to included the two items into the CEP Five-
Year Plan to continue and promote the study on them. In order to
further the fundamental role of science in the Antarctic governance,
China suggests promoting the Antarctic scientific research and
collating baseline data on Antarctica and Southern Ocean with a
view to increasing the reliability and countability of science used in
the Antarctic decision-making process and ensuring the adaptability
of the decisions to the future changes.
1. Introduction
In July 2019 the ATCM and the CEP held their annual meeting in
Prague. The meetings discussed, inter alia, two items such as
marine spatial protection and management and other Annex V
Matters. In respect of marine area protection and management, the
meetings considered a report (WP 48) by New Zealand on informal
intersessional discussions held by interested Parties to develop a
response to the ATCM request in Resolution 5 (2017) (ATCM Report
2019, paragraphs 74-79). On other Annex V Matters, the great
attention was given to the outcome of the Joint SCAR/CEP
Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Areas
System, held in Prague, Czech Republic from 27 to 28 June 2019
(ATCM Report 2019, paragraphs 80-83).
When discussing Resolution 5 (2017), the issue of the failure of
CCAMLR to develop the Ross Sea region Marine Protected Area’s
Research and Monitoring Plan was raised once again. In other
words, the issue relates to some extent to the possible relation of
research activities undertaken within the framework of the ATCM
and the CEP to the objectives of RSRMPA. On the outcome of the
Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop, distinct views were expressed and split
on the needs of scientific assessment of the current Antarctic
protected areas system. According to the publications and a report
presented during the Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop, assessment is the
very first step of systematic conservation plan. Many Members of
the CEP agreed upon the importance of assessment before moving
to a decision on the management choices (CEP Report 2019,
paragraphs 178-179).
Although the Joint SCAR/CEP Workshop in 2019 centered its work
on the Antarctic protected areas system, no scientific assessment
had been conducted as to the current protected areas. Only an
objective report about the current ASMA and ASPA was prepared
and forwarded to the CEP and then to the ATCM. After intensive
discussion, CEP ‘agreed to assess the effectiveness of the current
series of ASPAs with regard to the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex
V, and in light of the other provisions of the Environment Protocol
(including consideration of methodologies); encouraged Members,
SCAR and other Observers and Experts to prioritise and support
further research that will build on the existing body of scientific
evidence to support the further development of the protected area
system in accordance with Article 3.2 of Annex V; encouraged to
establish a repository of information relevant to identifying ASPAs
within a systematic environmental-geographic framework.’ To that
end, the CEP further ‘agreed to develop a guideline for
systematically developing the protected area system, including
identifying goals/objectives, assessment of current protected areas,
related science requirements, priorities for actions to be taken by
the CEP and Parties, timeframe for action and implementation, and
measures to evaluate progress.’(CEP Report 2019, paragraph 182)
At the end of the 2019 ATCM XLII meeting, the ATCM and the CEP
agreed to include into the CEP Five-Year Plan the issue of marine
spatial protection and management and the issue of Overview of the
protected areas system as items of Priority 2. In comparison with
other items included in the CEP Five-Year Plan, the introduction of
non-native species for instance, the two issues did not outline
specific scientific knowledge and information needs. To further the
fundamental role of science in the Antarctic decision-making
process, China hereby suggests that the CEP specify the scientific
knowledge and information needs for ‘marine spatial
protection and management’ and ‘overview of the protected areas
system’ by reference to ‘the introduction of non-native species’. By
so doing, it will help guide Members to plan and undertake their
Antarctic research programs and facilitate scientific cooperation
among Members.
2. Recommendations to the CEP
In regard of marine spatial protection and management, China
proposes that the CEP conduct a comprehensive marine
environment impact assessment on the scientific basis, and then
identify management gaps. Such a marine environmental
assessment may include the following scientific elements:
1) identification of key biotic and abiotic criterion, indicators and
parameters, to support the assessment of the status and trend of
terrestrial and marine environment of and its dependent and
associated ecosystems;
2) the history, status and trends of human activities under the
Protocol, and the extent of its impact on the environment;
3) the effectiveness of current management measures;
4) identification of the threats from human activities to be solved,
and the management gaps, especially the need for a higher level of
protection for specific values beyond that achieved by other forms
of planning and management measures under the Protocol
(Resolution 1 (2000);
5) building a comprehensive database, including the baseline data
in relation to the quality of the Antarctic marine environment..
As for the scientific knowledge and information needs for overview
of the protected areas system, China’s suggestions are as follows:
1) collating baseline data and undertake baseline study;
2) identifying the threats and risks to Antarctic environment
protection, in particular to distinguish the threats and risks arising
from human activities in the Antarctic and those from natural
changes;
3) identifying driving forces behind the threats and risks and their
indicators and parameters;
4) assess feasibility of protected areas system in addressing these
identified threats and risks in terms of the goals and cost-
effectiveness, and identify alternative options;
5) continue to research, monitor and assess the threats and risks
and their indicators and parameters.
