Preliminary COMNAP advice in regards to ATCM review of
Resolution 1 (2013)
Preliminary COMNAP advice in regards to ATCM review of
Resolution 1 (2013)
Background
ATCM XLII (2019) Final Report (paragraph 259) says “The Meeting
agreed that it would begin a process of reviewing and updating the
operative paragraphs of ATCM Resolution 1 (2013).” To assist
Parties in this process, COMNAP revisited the Resolution’s operative
paragraphs and offers preliminary, technical and practical, advice.
Outcomes of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop will likely
provide further advice. Refer also to COMNAP ATCMXLII (2019)
WP008 “Challenges that might occur in relation to increased air
operations in the Antarctic treaty area: A national Antarctic
program perspective”.
Summary of safety-related issues to address
Unreliable and incomplete advance information exchange
Requires improvement in clarity, completeness and consistency of
information across sources (such as between the Pre-season EIES
operational information and the COMNAP database that informs
AFIM)
De-conflict active airspace in the Antarctic Treaty area
Requires advance information exchange of all proposed air
operations (government and non-governmental)
Requires real-time information exchange of air activity type and
positioning
Requires information from all air operators (government and non-
governmental)
Requires information from all air infrastructure operators
(governmental and non-governmental)
Requires investment in and mandatory use of awareness, tracking
and distress technology in all aircraft and on the ground in
Antarctica
Address incident risk from increased activity
Requires ensuring all air operators are aware of safety requirements
Requires identification in advance of activity of alternative landing
sites
Requires advance communications between air operators and
operators of infrastructure at any landing sites or alternative
landing sites
Requires that operators of any identified landing site have been
consulted in advance of activity
Requires ensuring all air operators (via Parties) contribute
information into relevant databases (such as the Pre-season EIES
and the COMNAP database that informs AFIM)
Requires ensuring all air operators have access to AFIM
Address emergency response challenges from increased and
diverging types of activity
May require a threshold for activity in addition to the
environmental standard required in a EIA
Requires recognition of limited or no capacity to respond
Requires ensuring survival capacity until assistance arrives
Some of these safety issues can be partially addressed by reviewing
ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) in order to be more inclusive of all air-
related activity and infrastructure, and to ensure proper information
exchange in advance of any proposed air activity.
ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) Air Safety in Antarctica
Current operative paragraphs are considered below in light of the
issues above. Preliminary advice is provided following a track-
changes format and accompanying notes provide explanations for
each suggestion.
Operative paragraph 1. for the purpose of ensuring that measures
for improved air safety apply to all flights and all aviation-related
infrastructures in the Antarctica Treaty Area, measures to improve
air safety set out in paragraphs 2-8 below should be elaborated on
the basis of ICAO criteria, taking due account of the specific
features of Antarctica as well as of existing practices and services.
Note 1a: It is important that this operative paragraph continues to
apply to “all flights” so as to include governmental and non-
governmental activity.
Note 1b: It is suggested to add “and all aviation-related
infrastructures” in order to recognize that there is now a change in
circumstances and some Antarctic aviation infrastructure is now
operated by non-governmental entities.
Operative paragraph 2.
Note 2a: There are no suggested changes to the text as currently
presented in this operative paragraph.
Note 2b: It is suggested that the information fields of the EIES be
reviewed. This is because Resolution 1 (2013) replaced
Recommendation XV-20 (Paris, 1989). Recommendation XV-20 had
an attachment entitled “Advance notice (information on planned air
operations)” which was not carried forward with Resolution 1
(2013), since, by 2013 Parties had the EIES for “advance notice”
(i.e. “pre-season information exchange). However, comparing the
information requests of the XV-20 advance notice attachment, to
the information request fields of the EIES, there is information
requested in the advance notice missing/not requested to be
provided by Parties into EIES. Therefore, a complete, advanced,
overall picture of ATA aviation-related activities is currently not
possible. The EIES should be updated to add in the “overlooked”
information fields related to the Recommendation XV-20
attachment. This does not require a change to Resolution 1 (2013)
but would require Party agreement to add queries to the EIES pre-
season information exchange. COMNAP suggestions for EIES
additional information fields can be found in our ATCM XLII
WP008 (2019).
Operative paragraph 3. for the purpose of improving air safety in
Antarctica, all operators, governmental and non-governmental,
operating aircraft or managing air-related infrastructures, camps or
aviation facilities or services in the Antarctic Treaty Area, national
Antarctic programmes operating aircraft in Antarctica and their
aircrew s should, be providedat the request of their competent
authority or National Antarctic Program, be provided with a
continuously updated compendium produced by the Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and now
known as the COMNAP Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)
describing ground facilities, aircraft (including helicopters) and
aircraft operating procedures and associated communications
facilities operated by each national Antarctic programmein the
Antarctic Treaty Area (out of the use of which questions of liability
will not arise) and, therefore, they should:
facilitate the ongoing revision of AFIM by their national Antarctic
programme operators by collective action through COMNAP;
adopt a format in which information provided by each national
operator is kept in a manner that facilitates updating of
information;
request their national Antarctic operators to provide timely, current
and accurate information for the purpose of maintaining the AFIM;
ensure consistency of information across the various data
repositories within the Antarctic Treaty system.
Note 3a: Currently, this operative paragraph refers only to
governmental/national Antarctic programs as air operators and
should be broadened. Recognising that the situation is changing
with non-governmental operators of aircraft and infrastructures, we
suggest improved provision for requests from non-governmental
operators for AFIM, and also requests to non-governmental
operators to provide their data to inform AFIM.
Note 3b: Suggest inclusion of “competent authority” as the entities
with the broadest, collective oversite of all activities in the
Antarctic Treaty area by way of the EIA process.
Note 3c: Added “d” because there is often critical information
inconsistency across sources (for example between the Pre-season
EIES and the COMNAP database that informs AFIM).
Operative paragraph 4.
Note 4a: There are no suggested changes to the text as currently
presented in this operative paragraph at this time. However, we
believe this operative paragraph will require an update based on
the outcomes of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop.
Suggestions will be brought back to a future ATCM.
Operative paragraph 5.
Note 5a: There are no suggested changes to the text as currently
presented in this operative paragraph. However, we believe this
operative paragraph will require an update based on the outcomes
of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop. Suggestions will be
brought back to a future ATCM.
Operative paragraph 6: so as to ensure compliance with Article VII,
paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty and also Recommendation X-8,
Part IV, Parties should keep one another informed about non-
governmental flights, and should request COMNAP to provide
access to AFIM to any operator of a non-governmental flight or
infrastructure within the Antarctic Treaty Area. and a reminder
about the AFIM should be given to all pilots filing a flight plan for
flights to Antarctica.
Note 6a: It is suggested to explicitly involve the Parties in regards to
AFIM access requests since COMNAP only has awareness of
COMNAP Member activity.
Operative paragraph 7.
Note 7a: There are no suggested changes to the text as currently
presented in this operative paragraph.
Operative paragraph 8.
Note 8a: There are no suggested changes to the text as currently
presented in this operative paragraph. However, we believe this
operative paragraph will require an update based on the outcomes
of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop. Suggestions will be
brought back to a future ATCM.
Suggestions for two additional operative paragraphs:
Additional operative paragraph A: for the purpose of consideration
of emergency response that might be required, Parties should
consider that any increase in air activity brings with it increased
risks that must be managed or mitigated, and in cases of SAR or
emergency response it is the national Antarctic programs that are
often called upon to respond. This should be considered when
Parties are made aware of non-governmental applications for air
activities that are not in support of science.
Additional operative paragraph B: for the purpose of improving air
safety in Antarctica request that all Antarctic air operators,
government and non-governmental alike, ensure that they aware of
safety requirements and have identified alternative landing sites
and communicated their intentions in advance directly with the
operators of the alternative landing sites; Many airfields in the
Antarctic Treaty Area have limited and seasonal capacity and there
should be no presumption of capabilities, operations or ability to
assist.
