Important Marine Mammals Areas (IMMAs)
Important Marine Mammals Areas (IMMA)
Working Paper submitted by France, the United Kingdom, Chile,
Germany, Monaco and South Africa
Summary
France, the United Kingdom, Chile, Germany, Monaco and South
Africa recommend that the CEP advises the ATCM to recognise the
importance of Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) within the
Treaty area as a tool to assist Parties when planning and conducting
activities in Antarctica, through the adoption of a Resolution (see
Annex 1).
The WP co-authors further recommend that the CEP advises the
ATCM to give consideration to assessing the extent to which these
IMMAs could be useful in the development of new Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) with a marine component or in
the revision of management plans of existing ASPAs and Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs).
Introduction
To date, the CEP and ATCM has focussed on marine mammals
during discussion in several working and information papers,
among which ATCM XLII IP31 on the effect of noise on marine
mammals, ATCM XLII IP97 on IAATO procedures for operating in
the vicinity of whales, ATCM XLI IP59 on the polar code and
marine mammal avoidance planning, or ATCM XL IP75 on the use
of fisheries service for surveying marine mammals. In particular,
the IMMAs could help support the delivery of the recommendations
of ATCM XLII WP62 on the Status and Monitoring of Antarctic Seal
Species, especially for “assessing the available management tools
for the protection of Antarctic seals and considering whether
additional protection for Antarctic seals is required”.
It is clear that there is a need for further developments in our
understanding of marine mammal biology and distribution, as well
as their conservation. The CEP has started to look at more
systematic methods of protecting Antarctic bird colonies through
the endorsement of the Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas
(IBAs) as a useful planning tool (Resolution 5, 2015); however, as
yet, no such progress has been made with regard to the protection
of marine mammals.
Important Marine Mammal Area concept
The IMMA concept is modelled on the successful example of the
BirdLife International process for determining IBAs. The IMMAs are
identified according to specific criteria, that capture critical aspects
of marine mammal (seals and cetaceans) biology, ecology and
population structure, including vulnerability, distribution,
abundance, special attributes and key life cycle activities.
Workshop
During 15-19 October 2018 a scientific workshop was held in Brest,
France, to identify Important Marine Mammal Areas in the
Southern Ocean (see related Information Paper IP “Important
Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAS) within the Antarctic Treaty area:
An international collaboration to inform habitat-related
conservation decision-making and conservation planning for marine
mammal species” presented by IUCN and SCAR). The workshop was
held in cooperation with the French Biodiversity Agency and the
IUCN Global Marine and Polar Program, through its Marine
Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (‘MMPA Task Force’ or ‘Task
Force’). The workshop included 20 marine mammal scientists and
two observers from eleven countries selected by and from the SCAR
Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals.
The workshop focused on the Southern Ocean and extended from
Antarctica to the sub-Antarctic islands in the Atlantic, Indian and
Pacific oceans. The scientific workshop participants used evidence
published in the
peer-reviewed scientific literature to identify thirteen Important
Marine Mammal Areas in the Southern Ocean. Following an
evaluation by an external review panel, these IMMAs are now
presented in the Task Force e-atlas
(www.marinemammalhabitat.org/imma-eatlas/) and are
accompanied by concise profiles, boundaries and details of how
each proposal meets one or more of the eight IMMA criteria and
sub-criteria. The “Final Report of the Fourth IMMA Workshop”
(2018) IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force, 2020.
Final Report of the FourthIMMA Workshop: Important Marine
Mammal Area Regional Workshop for Extended SouthernOcean,
Brest, France, 15-19 October 2018. is a useful source of
information, contributing to the state of knowledge in the Southern
Ocean.
IMMAs within the Antarctic Treaty area
Importantly, the present Working Paper only considers the four
IMMAs (out of the 13 identified) that are located wholly or partially
within the Antarctic Treaty area, i.e.:
the Western Antarctic Peninsula Islands IMMA;
the Scott Islands and Iselin Bank complex IMMA;
the Ross Sea ecosystem IMMA; and
the section of the Scotia Arc IMMA which lies within the Antarctic
Treaty area.
It is noted that through Resolution 5 (2015) the CEP recognised the
usefulness of IBAs as a tool help to limit adverse impacts on the
Antarctic environment. Similarly, IMMAs could be useful to Parties
as a tool to assist when planning and conducting activities in
Antarctica, including:
by informing the Environmental Impact Assessment process;
the development of environmental monitoring programmes; and
the identification of potential future ASPAs and ASMAs
designations, or in the updating of existing protected area
management plans.
For example, although IMMAs include large proportion of marine
environments in their definition, they represent foraging zones of
seals that haul-out on the ice or come ashore to molt or reproduce.
As such, IMMAs may indicate the likely presence of haul-out/
breeding sites on terrestrial sites that may add to the environmental
values within an area considered for ASPA or ASMA designation.
Recommendations
France, the United Kingdom, Chile, Germany, Monaco and South
Africa recommend that the CEP advises the ATCM to:
recognise the importance of Important Marine Mammal Areas
(IMMAs) within the Treaty area as a tool to assist Parties when
planning and conducting activities in Antarctica, through the
adoption of a Resolution (see Annex 1);
request the CEP gives further consideration to assessing the extent
to which the scientific information behind these IMMAs could be
useful in the development of new Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (ASPAs) with a marine component or in the revision of
management plans of existing ASPAs and Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas (ASMAs).
Annex 1: Draft Resolution on Important Marine Mammals Areas
Resolution XXX (2021)
Important Marine Mammals Areas in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Recognising that, in some parts of Antarctica, a changing Antarctic
climate is having an observable effect on native wildlife, and is
projected to modify substantially the sea-ice dependent ecosystems;
Recalling Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), which requires that activities
in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to
limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment;
Recalling also the requirements of Annex II to the Protocol on the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora;
Desiring to ensure that conservation practices in Antarctica are
consistent with best scientific knowledge available;
Aware of the potential for harmful disturbance to marine mammals
in Antarctica from a range of human activities in the region;
Aware also that ongoing research is required to further improve the
state of knowledge of the status and trends of Antarctic marine
mammal populations;
Recommend that their Governments:
1. welcome and acknowledge the content of the “Final Report of the
Fourth IMMA workshop” (2018) (“the report”) for the three
identified Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) that are
within the Antarctic Treaty area (the Western Antarctic Peninsula
and Islands IMMA, the Scott Islands and Iselin Bank Complex
IMMA, and the Ross Sea Ecosystem IMMA) and the section of the
Scotia Arc IMMA which lies within the Antarctic Treaty area, which
covers reproductive grounds, molt grounds, feeding areas and/or
migration routes;
2. bring the report to the attention of the Secretariat of the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources;
3. take account of the information in the report on IMMAs within
the Antarctic Treaty area in the planning and conduct of their
activities in Antarctica, including in the preparation of
environmental impact assessments;
4. consider the extent to which the scientific information behind
these IMMAs could be useful to the development of new Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas with a marine component, or when
reviewing existing management plans of Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas; and
5. continue to undertake appropriate on-land and at-sea monitoring
of marine mammal populations to inform future management
actions that may be required.
