Proposal for a disciplinary regime and modifications to ATS Staff
Regulations
Proposal for a disciplinary regime and modifications to ATS Staff
Regulations
Working Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The purpose of this working document is to present a summary of
the discussions between the Consultative Parties on the ATS Human
Resources Policy and to propose further amendments. As a result of
informal discussions prior to the 42nd ATCM, Argentina drafted, in
consultation with the Secretariat, a Proposal for Amendments to
Staff Regulations, which were adopted by Decision 4 (2019).
However, from paragraphs 153 and 154 of the Final Report of said
ATCM, it appears that the Consultative Parties decided that a more
detailed evaluation was necessary on the disciplinary procedures
and legal actions in the case of disputes, and that there was also a
need to implement mechanisms for evaluating performance within
the ATS. Consequently, Argentina, in consultation with the ATS and
its legal advisers, proposes a new article containing a disciplinary
regime to be incorporated into the Staff Regulations should the
Consultative Meeting so decide. Likewise, in order to adapt the Staff
Regulations to the Argentine regulations on sickness or accident
leave, maternity leave, social security contributions, death, and
separation from service, proposed modifications to the relevant
articles are incorporated, according to ATS operational needs.
Attached to this document are i) a proposal for an article on Staff
Regulations, referring to the disciplinary regime, ii) a proposal for
an internal regulation on the disciplinary regime, to be applied by
the Executive Secretary by virtue of the new article on the matter,
and iii) a proposal of changes to articles 7.13, 7.14, 8.1, 8.2 and
10.5 of the Staff Regulations.
Background
In 2017, the 40th ATCM requested the Executive Secretary to
submit a report briefly listing the human resources policy issues
that, in his opinion, required the attention of the ATCM (ATCM XL
Final Report, para. 120). In response to that request, at the 41st
ATCM the Secretariat presented SP 7, including the analysis of these
issues. This in turn led to the creation of an ATCM discussion forum
(41st ATCM Final Report, para. 44), where the concerned
Consultative Parties agreed on the issues to be proposed for
modification by the next ATCM.
42nd ATCM
As emerged from Decision 3 (2019) regarding the involuntary
separation from service of staff, the Parties decided to create a new
Involuntary Separation from Service Fund, which would be
adequately covered by the General Fund. Regarding license rights,
the Regulation clarified that those arising from Argentine legislation
would be considered. Finally, amendments were made to adapt the
gender standards of the Regulation to best international practices.
The meeting adopted the new Staff Regulations through Decision 4
(2019) and the Secretariat implemented the Involuntary Separation
from Service Fund as reported in the 2019/20 Secretariat Report
(Appendix 2 Provisional Financial Report) approved through the
intersessional consultation procedure of Rule 46 of the ACTM Rules
of Procedure.
In accordance with paragraph 153 of the 42nd ATCM Final Report
in relation to disciplinary procedures and legal action in the case of
disputes, the Parties decided that such matters required further
evaluation since they had not been analysed between sessions.
Similarly, paragraph 156 of the Report contained the decision of the
Parties to continue with the consideration of other pending matters
regarding Staff Regulations at the 43rd ATCM, such as licenses and
separation from service. Argentina thus presents this new document
to the 43rd ATCM.
Proposals
As the country in charge of coordinating past informal discussions
and preparing proposals to amend the Regulations, Argentina
presents a proposal for an article on the disciplinary regime to be
incorporated into the Staff Regulations. Additionally, a draft of
internal regulations on the disciplinary regime of the Secretariat is
incorporated in our proposal according to Annex 1 detailed below,
which is not part of the Staff Regulations and which contains a list
of offences for informational purposes. Said texts were drafted in
consultation with the Secretariat, with the advice of their local legal
advisers on labour issues.
The wording of the proposed article is as follows:
" ARTICLE XX - DISCIPLINARY REGIME
XX.1 The Executive Secretary may apply disciplinary sanctions to
staff members for any non-compliance that is registered and
depending on its severity. Said sanctions will be duly notified to the
staff member that has committed the disciplinary offence.
XX.2 Three types of disciplinary offences are established, which
may be sanctioned according to their severity. These are:
Minor offences. These may be sanctioned with a warning.
Serious offences. These may be sanctioned with a warning or 1 to 4
days suspension without pay.
Very Serious Offences. These may be sanctioned with 5 to 10 days
suspension without pay or dismissal with just cause.
XX.3 Sanctionable offences will be listed in the Internal Regulation
on the Disciplinary Regime of the Secretariat, highlighting that said
list will not be comprehensive and shall leave non-listed actions
that deserve to be sanctioned at the discretion and analysis of the
Executive Secretary".
Furthermore, in consultation with the Secretariat and its team of
legal advisers, proposals have been made to modify the wording of
articles 7.13, 7.14, 8.1, 8.2 and 10.5 of the Staff Regulations. The
proposed changes tend to adapt the provisions of the Regulation to
local Argentine regulations to avoid situations of disadvantage or
excessive divergence between ATS Staff and the rest of the local
labour market. The drafting proposals are as follows:
"ARTICLE 7. SICKNESS LEAVE 7.13. Staff members will receive
leave for an accident or non-occupational illness in accordance with
the provisions of the current legal regime in the Argentine Republic.
In cases where the accident or illness prevents the staff member
from continuing to carry out their duties in the Secretariat, the staff
member and their dependants will have the right to return travel
and moving expenses to their country of origin or that of their
previous residence on behalf of the Secretariat."
"ARTICLE 7. MATERNITY LEAVE. 7.14. Staff members will have the
right to maternity leave as provided by the current legal regime in
the Argentine Republic. Likewise, the father will receive 10 days of
paid leave which can be used in the same period as previously
stated."
"ARTICLE 8. SOCIAL SECURITY. 8.1. Staff members will be
responsible for payment of the total of their personal Social Security
contributions. The Secretariat will make all employer contributions
to Social Security,
and will pay any mandatory insurance corresponding to the
employer, as provided by the regulations of the Argentine
Republic."
"ARTICLE 8. SOCIAL SECURITY. 8.2. In the event of the death of a
staff member, their dependants will be entitled to a death allowance
and payment of the return trip and moving expenses to their
country of origin or previous residence by the Secretariat,
regardless of any compensations to which they may be entitled by
the regulations of the Argentine Republic and those mentioned in
Article 10."
“ARTICLE 10 SEPARATION FROM SERVICE. 10.5. In the event of
involuntary separation from the service of a member of the general
services staff, compensation will be paid in accordance with the
regulations of the Argentine Republic. If the cause of termination
was a serious breach of the duties mentioned in Article 2, or having
incurred in offences established as very serious in Article XX, such
compensation will not be granted."
Recommendations
Argentina recommends that the ATCM:
discuss the proposed changes to the Staff Regulations;
request that the legal drafting group prepare the text of a new
decision, adding the new article and the modifications to the
articles of the Staff Regulations if all the Consultative Parties duly
accept the suggested amendments.
Annex 1 - Internal Regulation on the Disciplinary Regime
This annex is not part of the Staff Regulations, but must be read in
conjunction with Article XX thereof.
Minor Offences.
The following actions are considered minor offences:
Committing actions or omissions that, although they may not cause
damage, may affect the conservation of the materials, work items
and other property of the SECRETARIAT.
Occasionally and without justification abandoning tasks, as long as
this does not cause harm to the SECRETARIAT.
Failure to pay due attention in the performance of tasks,
compliance with working hours and application of policies,
regulations, procedures or instructions, as long as this does not
cause harm to the SECRETARIAT.
Keeping the workplace and work elements in disorder or wearing
inappropriate clothing for their functions in the SECRETARIAT.
Failure to complete or to carry out the procedures and tasks they
are responsible for in a timely manner, as long as this does not
cause harm to the SECRETARIAT.
Providing or sharing with another person their personal user
passwords for operating different systems, including email and
telephone access, as long as this does not cause harm to the
SECRETARIAT.
Serious Offences.
The following actions are considered serious offences:
Repeated minor offences.
Committing the offences mentioned as minor when they cause harm
to the SECRETARIAT.
Repeatedly abandoning tasks or being absent without authorization
during work hours.
Improper use, for private or other purposes, of work elements and
systems provided by the SECRETARIAT for the performance of
assigned tasks.
Failure to observe due reserve and care in the treatment of
SECRETARIAT information, disclosing it or commenting on it with
people not related to said information, both inside and outside the
SECRETARIAT.
Very Serious Offences.
The following actions are considered very serious offences:
Repeated serious offences.
Promoting acts of indiscipline in the workplace or other areas
within the SECRETARIAT.
Incurring in any of the acts or voluntary conduct considered to
constitute a conflict of interest or failing to report events that
generate said conflicts.
Participating in illegal actions related to the security of
communications, computer security, inviolability of secrets, or that
affect the assets of the SECRETARIAT.
Falsifying, modifying or altering in any way a document related to
the SECRETARIAT.
Failure to comply with the obligations and duties established in
Article 2 of the Staff Regulations.
Committing acts that are contrary to ethics, morality and due
conduct corresponding to an official of the SECRETARIAT.
