Permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica
Permanent facilities for tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by The Netherlands
Summary
One of the questions that has received substantial attention within
the broader ATCM debate relates to the desirability or need to
prohibit or regulate possible future initiatives to erect permanent
facilities for tourism or other non-governmental purposes, such as
hotels in Antarctica and accommodation for tourist in or near
research facilities, in Antarctica. ATCM discussions on this topic
between 2004 to 2008 have not resulted in consensus on specific
policy responses, however, since then circumstances have changed.
The ATCM has made further steps in its considerations on Antarctic
tourism, including the adoption of the General Principles of
Antarctic Tourism in 2009, which constitutes a jointly agreed
framework for the adoption of more specific policy measures.
Furthermore, IAATO has adopted more explicit policy on this issue
and recently a number of developments in Antarctica has shown
that concerns relating to permanent facilities for tourism or other
non-governmental purposes should not be considered theoretically.
In light of these changed circumstances, this paper recommends the
ATCM to revisit this topic and invites Parties to:
exchange views on the basis of this Working Paper;
share information on past and present initiatives to establish
permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica and possible related
concerns;
agree to engage in intersessional discussions on the question
whether the ATCM should take action relating to future plans for
permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica and, if so, what action
might be appropriate.
Past ATCM discussions on permanent facilities for tourism in
Antarctica
The issue of permanent infrastructure for tourists (any structure or
facility such as hotels and other buildings, wharves, jetties,
runways, etc.) was already included in the list of topics to be
discussed at the 1992 informal meeting on Antarctic tourism (pre-
ATCM meeting in Venice). This list was attached to
Recommendation XVI-13 (Bonn, 1991; see also ATCM42/IP 26).
The inclusion of the topic implies that already 30 years ago
Consultative Parties considered possible future permanent
infrastructure for tourists an important policy issue. However, the
topic received particularly detailed attention at the ATME on
tourism in 2004 (Final Report ATME on Tourism, 2004, paras
34-39) and following ATCMs (2004 – 2008). Despite intensive
debates, the ATCM was not able to agree specific policy responses.
For instance, a proposal for a moratorium on permanent land-based
tourist infrastructure, proposed at ATCM XXXII (2008), did not
receive consensus (Final Report of XXXIInd ATCM, paras 235-245).
The topic was revisited during the informal discussions of the
2011-12 Intersessional Contact Group on ‘outstanding questions on
Antarctic tourism’. The ICG described the question of permanent
facilities for tourism as follows: “Should additional regulations be
adopted in respect of permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica
(such as hotels), for instance, to prevent further degradation of
Antarctica’s wilderness values or to limit the risk of legal debates on
ownership?” In the ICG, this question was identified as one of the
five priority questions that should be considered by the ATCM. At
the XXXVth ATCM, the Consultative Parties continued discussions
on the topic (ATCM 35, para. 225-228), but did not take a decision
on the issue.
Since 2012 the issue has received little attention at ATCMs,
however, the Chairs’ summary of the discussions at the 2019
Rotterdam Tourism Workshop states: “It was noted that, in the past,
the ATCM has discussed the need to prohibit or regulate the
establishment of permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica
without reaching consensus and that it would be important to
revisit this issue” (ATCM42/WP19, §9).
Relevant Protocol provisions, Measures and Resolutions
The provisions of the Protocol also apply to Antarctic tourism
activities that fall under the jurisdiction of the Contracting Parties.
Examples of provisions that have particular relevance for tourism
activities include Article 3, EIA provisions (Art. 8 and Annex I) and
several provisions of the other Annexes to the Protocol. Relevant
Measures adopted since the adoption of the Protocol include ASPA
designations and related management plans (generally prohibiting
tourism in ASPAs with exceptions for a few ASPAs that include
historic sites) as well as the two Measures specifically relating to
tourism, adopted in 2004 and 2009. However, none of these legal
tools provide a clear and explicit answer to the question whether
new permanent facilities for tourism or other non-governmental
purposes should or should not be allowed in Antarctica.
Resolutions of particular relevance for the topic are Resolutions
5(2007) and 7(2009). Resolution 5 (2007) recommends that Parties
“discourage any tourism activities which may substantially
contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems”. With
the adoption of Resolution 7(2009) the ATCM has agreed on
General Principles of Antarctic Tourism, stating that “[t]ourism
should not be allowed to contribute to the long-term degradation of
the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems, or the intrinsic natural wilderness and historical values
of Antarctica.” In line with these resolutions, the Final Report of the
35th ATCM (2012, para. 226) stated that “[t]here was substantial
support for the view that tourism activities likely to have more than
a minor or transitory impact should not be authorised”. These texts
imply that permanent facilities in Antarctica should not be allowed,
however, the formulations leave space for different interpretations
and/or dispute in relation to concrete plans or projects.
Furthermore, resolutions are not legally binding, which may be
particularly problematic for managing non-governmental activities.
IAATO bylaws
According to IAATO’s bylaws (Article II, Section E) IAATO members
“subscribe to the principle that their planned activities will have no
more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment […].” In the past, interventions by IAATO at ATCM
have suggested that this bylaw excludes the option of establishing
permanent facilities in Antarctica, although temporary facilities
accompanied by site-remediation which can occur within a season,
could be acceptable (Final Report ATCM 35 (2012), para. 226).
Current developments: recent plans for permanent facilities in
Antarctica and related concerns
Recent plans
In the past various plans for establishing permanent facilities for
tourism in Antarctica have been developed. Examples include a
plan of Lars Erik Lindblad (1974) to lease Cape Hallett station in
the Ross Sea region (capacity: 60 people) and a plan of Rhode and
partners (1989) to establish ‘Project Oasis’, a joint science and
tourism facility in the Vestfold Hills with an envisaged capacity of
344 tourists, 70 scientist and 174 staff. These plans have never
materialised. Initiatives at a smaller scale that have been
implemented, includes the E(ducational)-Base by Robert Swan’s
organisation ‘2041’.
Recent developments have shown that further plans for permanent
infrastructure for tourism or other non-governmental activities are
being developed. A concrete example is the proposal for
establishing ‘The Andromeda Project’ near the Belgium Princess
Elisabeth Station. The project, initiated by the Belgium non-
governmental ‘International Polar Foundation’, is presented as a
new facility for science and education and is referred to as the first
Antarctic University. While research and education connect well
with ATS principles, it would be the first full non-governmental
initiative to establish permanent infrastructure in Antarctica with
expected revenues for flights and visit of above 20 million Euro in
2030 (Brochure of the International Polar Foundation, ‘The
Andromeda Project’, 2020). As noted in previous ATCM discussions,
there is a risk that in the future infrastructure may also be used for
other purposes, such as tourism. Furthermore, these initiatives
make the step towards the establishment of other non-governmental
permanent infrastructure, such as hotels, smaller.
Related concerns
Permanent facilities for tourism and non-governmental activities
may challenge or threaten ATS principles and values in various
ways. Based on previous ATCM discussions (summarised in the
Final Report of the XXVIIth ATCM, §195 and ATCM42/IP 26, p.35))
include the following:
environmental impact as a result of the building and use of the
facilities;
(cumulative) impacts on Antarctica’s wilderness values;
inconsistency with Antarctica's designation as a "natural reserve
devoted to peace and science";
increasing air traffic to and from Antarctica;
possible jurisdictional issues;
“the potential assertion of private property rights, and the possible
assertion of ‘rights to use’ through regular permitting.”
Most of these concerns have been discussed in more detail over the
years. For instance, in relation to property rights, one of the
Consultative Parties has “noted that non-governmental property in
Antarctica could be mortgaged, leased, sold, and inherited. The new
owner may be a citizen of a country which is not a Member of the
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol. In this case permanent structures
may be used not for their initially intended purpose even if an EIA
was available” (ATCM 35, para. 227; see also Final Report ATCM
2005, §173, referring to ATCM 2005/IP 71 (ASOC)).
Proposal to the ATCM
Since the last intensive debates on the topic of permanent facilities
for tourism in Antarctica (2004-2008), circumstances have changed:
In the 2019-2020 season, the number of tourists in Antarctica had
doubled compared to the 2006-07 season. While the pandemic has
resulted in a dramatic drop in numbers over the last season, it is
expected that in a few years the numbers will increase again;
The COVID-19 crisis provides an unprecedented momentum for
green and inclusive economic recovery based on the principle of
‘building back better’. It also underlines the importance of stepping
up our global climate ambition, ambitious carbon reduction targets
and active international promotion of the need for climate
measures.
The ATCM has made further steps in its considerations on Antarctic
tourism, including the adoption of resolutions on general standards
for acceptable environmental effects by tourism and the General
Principles of Antarctic Tourism in 2009, which constitutes a jointly
agreed framework for the adoption of more specific policy
measures. These resolutions imply that permanent facilities for
tourism and other non-governmental activities in Antarctica should
not be allowed, however, the
formulations leave space for different interpretations and/or dispute
in relation to concrete plans or projects, which may cause serious
concerns for competent authorities;
IAATO has adopted more explicit policy on this issue; and
recently a number of developments in Antarctica has shown that
concerns relating to permanent facilities for tourism or other non-
governmental purposes should not be considered theoretically.
In light of these changed circumstances, this paper recommends the
ATCM to revisit this topic and invites Parties to:
exchange views on the basis of this Working Paper;
share information on past and present initiatives to establish
permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica and possible related
concerns;
agree to engage in intersessional discussions on the question
whether the ATCM should take action relating to future plans for
permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica and, if so, what action
might be appropriate.
