Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during
the intersessional period 2019-2021
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
Report of activities during the intersessional period 2019-2021
Working Paper submitted by Argentina on behalf of the SGMP
Summary
During the 2019/21 intersessional period the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans (SGMP), in accordance with its Terms of
Reference 1 to 3, reviewed three draft Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (ASPA) referred by the Committee for intersessional review.
The SGMP recommends that the Committee adopts the attached
three revised management plans:
New ASPA Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
(United States);
New ASPA Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic
Peninsula (United Kingdom and the Netherlands);
New ASPA Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea (China,
Italy and Republic of Korea).
Also, under its Terms of Reference 4 and 5, the SGMP considered
options for supporting proponents to conclude the revision of
management plans that have remained under the scope of the
SGMP for several intersessional periods. A summary of the options
considered is provided for CEP consideration.
Tasks agreed by CEP XXII for the work of the SGMP during the
intersessional period
For the intersessional period 2019/2020 the SGMP had been
commissioned to work under the Terms of Reference (ToR) agreed
by CEP XIII (which can be found in Annex A) and in relation to the
tasks incorporated in the Work Plan of the Group, as agreed by CEP
XXII which is presented below, as reflected in paragraph 161 (CEP
XXII Final Report):
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional
review and provide advice to proponents (including the four
pending plans from previous intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for ﬁve year review
Consider options for supporting proponents to conclude the revision
of management plans that remain for several intersessional periods
under the scope of the SGMP.
Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XXIII against SGMP ToR 1 to 5
The SGMP was convened by the CEP Vice-Chair, Patricia Ortúzar
from Argentina. SGMP members participated in the intersessional
work, noting however that all plans were available for comment
from any CEP member during the SGMP process. Discussions took
place using the CEP Discussion Forum.
Due to the pandemic situation that led to the cancellation of the
ATCM scheduled for Finland in 2020, the intersessional period on
which this document reports covers the 2019/2021 period. It
should be noted that most of the work of the SGMP envisaged
according to the work plan adopted during ATCM XLII - CEP XXII
had been completed at the end of the 2019/2020 intersessional
period.
Task under Terms of Reference 1 to 3.
Review of Management Plans under Tors 1 and 3.
The SGMP was commissioned to give further advice and complete
the review process of three of the five Management Plans, initiated
in 2014, once the proponent (Chile) provided the updated versions
of those management plans. Management plans correspond to the
following Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs):
ASPA No. 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George (25 de Mayo) Island
(Chile).
ASPA No. 146: South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
(Chile).
ASPA No. 150: Ardley Island (Ardley Peninsula), Maxwell Bay, King
George (25 de Mayo) Island (Chile).
These three management plans are still under review by the
proponent (Chile), so the revised versions on which the SGMP
would provide advice were not available for this purpose.
Therefore, there is no progress to report at the time of the
presentation of this paper.
We recall that the revision of the management plan corresponding
to ASPA 144 “Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South
Shetland Islands" which was under the scope of the SGMP, was
placed on hold by CEP XXI, pending further discussions and
decisions on the possible de-designation of the Area (paragraph 68
of the CEP XXI Final Report)
Also, the management plan corresponding to ASPA 145 “Port
Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands”, whose review
was also ongoing under the scope of the SGMP, was the subject of
consultations and intersessional work between Chile and Spain
according to what was reflected under paragraph 77 of the CEP
XXII Final Report, when the proponent (Chile) informed the SGMP
that they were working with Spain on the revision of the limits of
ASPA 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands.
Chile had noted that the boundaries may be extended to improve
protection of the marine life in the region. These Parties agreed to
report to the Committee on the results of this work. If the proposal
to extend the limits arises from the discussions between Chile and
Spain, the Management Plan will no longer continue under the
scope of the SGMP.
Also, CEP XXII agreed to forward, for review by the SGMP, the draft
management plans related to the proposals for the designation of
three new ASPAs:
Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago (United
States);
Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula
(United Kingdom and the Netherlands);
Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea (China, Italy and
Republic of Korea).
The results of the reviews of these three new proposals are reported
below:
ASPA No. XX [NEW PROPOSAL] Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island,
Palmer Archipelago (United States)
At CEP XXII, United States submitted WP 6 “Proposal for a new
Antarctic Specially Protected Area at the Rosenthal Islands, Anvers
Island, Palmer Archipelago”. The United States recommended that
the Committee forward the proposal to the SGMP for review in the
intersessional period (paragraph 100 CEP XXII Final Report). The
CEP recommended referring the plan for intersessional review (para
110 of the CEP XXII Final Report).
As reflected in paragraph 101 (CEP XXII Final Report), while
expressing support for the proposed ASPA, some Members raised
questions regarding the nature of the proposed area, 75 percent of
which was marine, and to the ecological and environmental values
of the area. Those Members encouraged further discussion on these
aspects of the management plan during intersessional review by the
SGMP. The SGMP’s review of the management plan was
coordinated by the SGMP Convener.
On October 2019, the SGMP convener issued an invitation to all
CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft management
plan.
In December 2019 the SGMP provided its initial advice to the
proponent, recommending some modifications to the draft revised
management plan. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the
Discussion Forum. SGMP members included some suggestions and
consultations to the proponent, with the purpose of improving the
effectiveness of the plan. The main comments were related to:
Clarification about the northern limit of the proposed Zone.
A consultation on how the designation will strengthen protection
with respect to risks that it could face without the designation.
The provision of a set of geographical coordinates in the limits
section of the plan.
Further clarification about the prohibition of aircraft landings
within the Zone.
More description of the activities considered appropriate for
"educational and outreach purposes".
Identification and location on the camp map.
The SGMP members stressed that the plan provides a good
description of the proposed area and its values and is of high
quality. SGMP members also indicated that the provisions and
structure of the plan are consistent with other management plans.
They also indicated that the plan, with the suggested modifications,
is likely to be effective in achieving the goals and objectives.
In January 2020 United States provided an updated draft
management plan and a consolidated checklist with comments from
the proponent.
The SGMP concluded that the United States had appropriately
addressed feedback from the SGMP and that the updated draft
management plan was well written, of high quality and is likely to
be effective in achieving the goals and objectives.
The resulting final revised draft management plan is presented in
Attachment A to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a
coversheet prepared by the proponent are presented in Appendix 2.
We should note that information on the proposed ASPA had also
been submitted to CCAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem
Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM). The CCAMLR
Commission and its appropriate scientific and technical bodies
considered the proposal for the new protected area in 2019. The
Commission considered the discussion by the Scientific Committee
(SC-CAMLR-38, paragraphs 6.1 to 6.3) on the Rosenthal Islands and
agreed to give its prior approval to the draft management plan for a
new ASPA in this area (CCAMLR-38 Report (Meeting of the
Commission 21 Oct – 1 Nov 2019) as adopted on Friday 1 Nov
2019: Para 6.1).
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised
management plan prepared by United States for ASPA [XX]
Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago (Attachment
A).
ASPA No. XX [NEW PROPOSAL] Léonie Islands and south-east
Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula
At CEP XXII, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands submitted
WP 35 Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan
for the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic
Peninsula. A previous assessment had already been submitted by
the proponent for this proposed multi-site ASPA to CEP XXI. As
reflected in paragraph 104 (CEP XXII Final Report) the Committee
expressed support for the proposed ASPA and highlighted the
benefits of the prior assessment process for potential new protected
areas. The CEP recommended referring the plan for intersessional
review (para 110 of the CEP XXII Final Report). The SGMP’s review
of the management plan was coordinated by the SGMP member
from Uruguay.
On October 2019, the SGMP convener issued an invitation to all
CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft management
plan.
In December 2019 the SGMP provided its initial advice to the
proponents, recommending some modifications to the draft revised
management plan. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the
Discussion Forum. SGMP members included some suggestions and
consultations to the proponents, with the purpose of improving the
effectiveness of the plan. The main comments were related to:
The provision of more information on the presence of geological
values at the sites.
The addition of specific values relating to flora and fauna and the
location of installations/structures at each site to the maps to
provide greater clarity regarding their location.
Clarifications on the boundaries of the Area.
SGMP members recognized that the draft management plan
provides a good description of the proposed Area, its values and
proposed arrangements for regulation and management of activities
is consistent with other existing management plans. Also
highlighted, was the very high quality of the draft management
plan, which has been well considered and prepared and that
contains provisions that, with the suggested modifications, are
likely to be effective in achieving the stated aims and objectives.
In February 2020, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands
provided an updated draft management plan and a consolidated
checklist with comments from the proponent.
The SGMP concluded that the United Kingdom and the Netherlands
had appropriately addressed feedback from the SGMP and that the
updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality
and is likely to be effective in achieving the goals and objectives.
The resulting final revised draft management plan is presented in
Attachment B to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a
coversheet prepared by the proponent are presented at Appendix 3.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised
management plan prepared by United Kingdom and the Netherlands
for ASPA [XX] Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island,
Antarctic Peninsula (Attachment B).
ASPA No. XX [NEW PROPOSAL] Inexpressible Island and Seaview
Bay, Ross Sea
At CEP XXII, China, Italy and the Republic of Korea submitted WP
47 Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at
Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea (China, Italy and
Republic of Korea). The proponents informed that two workshops
had been held in Xiamen and Rome in the 2018/19 intersessional
period involving all parties with an interest in the area. The
Committee noted in particular the collaborative nature of the
process, and that matters raised during discussions on the proposed
area at CEP XXI had been considered during the development of the
draft management plan. The Committee expressed support for the
proposed ASPA.
The CEP recommended referring the plan for intersessional review
(para 110 of the CEP XXII Final Report). The SGMP’s review of the
management plan was coordinated by the SGMP member from
Australia.
On October 2019, the SGMP convener issued an invitation to all
CEP contact points to submit comments on the draft management
plan.
In December 2019 the SGMP provided its initial advice to the
proponent, recommending some modifications to the draft revised
management plan. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the
Discussion Forum. SGMP members included some suggestions and
consultations to the proponent, with the purpose of improving the
effectiveness of the plan. The main comments were related to:
- clarifying guidance for visitors to HSM 14, including to avoid
inadvertent entry to the ASPA - clarifying provisions for access to
the Area by boats, and access within and near the Area on foot -
providing further details regarding the camp sites located within
the Area - reflecting that the proposed ASPA is located within the
Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area designated by CCAMLR.
SGMP members recognised that the draft management plan is clear,
of high quality, and is likely to be effective in achieving the
proposed management objectives for the area. SGMP members also
recognised the value of the effective international cooperation and
stakeholder consultation during the process to prepare the draft
management plan.
In February 2020, China, Italy and Republic of Korea provided an
updated draft management plan and a consolidated checklist with
comments from the proponent.
The SGMP concluded that China, Italy and Republic of Korea had
appropriately addressed feedback from the SGMP and that the
updated draft management plan was well written, of high quality
and is likely to be effective in achieving the goals and objectives.
It is noted that information on the proposed ASPA had also been
submitted to CCAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring
and Management (WG-EMM). The CCAMLR Commission and its
appropriate scientific and technical bodies considered the proposal
for the new protected area in 2019. The Commission considered the
discussion by the Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR-38, paragraphs
6.2 and 6.3) on the Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay and
agreed to give its prior approval to the draft management plan for a
new ASPA in this area (CCAMLR-38 Report (Meeting of the
Commission 21 Oct – 1 Nov 2019) as adopted on Friday 1 Nov
2019: Para 6.1).
The resulting final revised draft management plan is presented in
Attachment C to this Working Paper. Introductory comments and a
coversheet prepared by the proponent are presented at Appendix 4.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP recommends that the CEP approves the revised
management plan prepared by China, Italy and Republic of Korea
for ASPA [XX] Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea
(Attachment C).
Task under ToRs 4 and 5
“Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for five year review”
Through the SGMP forum, Parties were invited to contact the SGMP
if they so wished. No requests were received from Parties that may
need advice to initiate the five-year review of Management Plans,
but we should recall that the SGMP is available to advise, facilitate
or guide the review tasks when necessary.
Consider options for supporting proponents to conclude the revision
of management plans that remain for several intersessional periods
under the scope of the SGMP.
This task was included in the work plan in order to discuss and
advise the Committee about possible mechanisms to provide
assistance for the completion of the five-year review of
Management Plans, when these plans remain for a long time under
the scope of the SGMP, in the cases where such revisions are
delayed and could benefit from cooperation from the SGMP and
other Parties.
For the first round document, participants discussed different
alternatives / tools to assist in such reviews. As a working modality,
the following guiding questions were proposed:
What management plans would be included in this assistance
process?
How long should it be considered before initiating an assistance
process for the review of these management plans?
What aspects of the management plan would be subject for
assistance?
Who could provide assistance?
What sources of information could be useful to assist in the
completion of the revision processes of the Management Plans?
What other assistance mechanisms could be considered?
Who would be responsible for the compilation of the information
(e.g. point 5 and 6), coordination and monitoring of the advisory
process?
Who would be responsible for completing the review and
submitting the working document to the Committee?
During the consultations, valuable contributions were received that
allow for potential progress in providing additional assistance to
Parties that are in the process of reviewing ASPA Management
Plans and whose review is delayed within the scope of the SGMP.
From the contributions received, there seems to be consensus
regarding the possibility of the SGMP providing additional
assistance once there is a significant delay in the completion of the
review. The “case-by-case” approach so far has more support than
the establishment of a new fixed procedure that leads to referral of
any management plan that is “delayed” to an external review
process. Several participants considered art 6.3 of Annex V as the
normative parameter that allows to affirm that the need for
additional assistance should occur before the end of a 5-year period,
after which, according to said article, a new revision should be
started.
The importance of understanding the reasons for the delay in the
conclusion of a review process, was also stressed. In this sense,
participants identified the information that the proponent can
provide, at the earliest possible stage, as a key aspect when defining
the need and possibilities of providing assistance for the completion
of the revision of a Management Plan under the SGMP scope.
Therefore, if there is no consensus for a change in the terms in
which the SGMP currently works, the mechanism by which this
assistance would be provided would be similar to the current one,
where the country in charge of management of the ASPA would
continue to be responsible for the completion of the review. The
change would be that the members of the SGMP could provide
specific information about the aspects of the plan identified in the
first year of review by SGMP and still require modifications. In this
process, they could consult with key actors identified in the first
round.
The collaborators (members of the SGMP) could resort to a number
of possible sources of information and key actors that could be
useful to assist the Party in charge of the review could be taken into
account when implementing the process of additional assistance.
In Appendix 5, a summary of the discussions is included. It is
suggested that CEP consider this Appendix as a source of
consultation on alternatives, key actors and sources of information
that may be useful to guide Parties, based on a "case by case"
analysis, to consider options for supporting proponents to conclude
the revision of management plans that remain for several
intersessional periods under the scope of the SGMP
Finally, the SGMP recommends that the CEP invites proponents
experiencing challenges with the timely review of a management
plan to present information to the Committee (i.e. describing the
challenges, the likely time frame for completing the review, and
identifying areas where external assistance would be helpful or
required). The CEP could then consider the matter and provide
advice direct to the proponent(s) to assist them to complete the
review, and/or establish a role for the SGMP to provide formal/
coordinated assistance.
Proposed Work Plan for the SGMP, for the intersessional period
2018/19
The SGMP proposes the following Work Plan, to which other
actions that CEP XXIII may consider appropriate may be added.
Terms of Reference
Suggested tasks
ToR 1 to 3
Review draft management plans referred by CEP for intersessional
review and provide advice to proponents (including the four
pending plans from previous intersessional period)
ToR 4 and 5
Work with relevant Parties to ensure progress on review of
management plans overdue for ﬁve year review
Review and update SGMP work plan
Working Papers
Prepare report for CEP XXI against SGMP ToR 1 to 5
Other issues: Operational matters, SGMP Members
The current list of members of the SGMP is as follows:
Patricia Ortúzar - Coordinator- (Argentina) pvo@mrecic.gov.ar
Eduardo Juri (Uruguay) - cientifica.director@iau.gub.uy
Anoop Kumar Tiwari (India) – anooptiwari@ncaor.org
Astrid Høgestøl (Norway) – astrid.hogestol@npolar.no
Ceisha Poirot (New Zealand) – c.poirot@antarcticanz.govt.nz
Ewan McIvor (Australia) – Ewan.McIvor@aad.gov.au
Heike Herata (Germany) - heike.herata@uba.de
Kevin Hughes (the United Kingdom) – kehu@bas.ac.uk
Polly Penhale (the United States) – ppenhale@nsf.gov
Verónica Vallejos (Chile) – vvallejos@inach.cl
Observers:
Amanda Lynnes (IAATO) - alynnes@iaato.org
Claire Christian (ASOC) - claire.christian@asoc.org
Parties are invited to propose more members to the Group.
Nonetheless, we should recall that all CEP members are invited to
participate in the discussions or intersessional tasks that are
established.
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP provides the following advice to CEP:
That the three management plans pending in the previous periods
continue to be within the scope of the SGMP, in order to provide
advice once the proposing country has made the revised versions
available to the Group and that the CEP endorses the proposal to
explore mechanisms and additional tools to facilitate the review of
pending plans.
That the CEP approves the management plan related to the
proposals for the designation of three new ASPAs.
That the CEP consider the results of the discussion held under ToRs
4-5 as a source of consultation on alternatives, key actors and
sources of information that may be useful to guide Parties, based on
a "case by case" analysis, to consider options for supporting
proponents to conclude the revision of management plans that
remain under the scope of the SGMP for several intersessional
periods.
That the CEP consider the Work Plan and suggests appropriate
modifications if needed, based on the deliberations during CEP
XXIII.
Appendix 1 Revised Terms of Reference for the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plans. (CEP XIII. Final Report. Appendix 1)
Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in
consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the
Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5Modified from “Terms of
Reference for an Intersessional Contact Group to Consider draft
Management Plans” ToR #2 (CEP VII Report, Annex 4). , and with
relevant CEP guidelines Currently including – for ASPAs –
Resolution 2 (1998) Guide for the Preparation of Management Plans
for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Resolution 1 (2000)
Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected
Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.;
its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness From
“Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New a nd Revised Draft ASPA
and ASMA Management Plans” paragraph 8 (CEP VI Report, Annex
4), and “Terms of Reference for an Intersessional Contact Group to
Consider draft Management Plans” ToR #2 (CEP VII Report, Annex
4).;
whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation
Agreement at CEP VIII (Report paragraph 187).; and
whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the
Antarctic protected areas system as a whole Agreement at CEP VIII
(Report paragraph 187)..
Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft
Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the
adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management
Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by
Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing
so. The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans
and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional
Working Group.
4) Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of
improving Management Plans and the process for their
intersessional review.
5) Develop and suggest procedures that would assist in achieving a
long-term goal aiming at ensuring that all ASPA and ASMA
management plans contain adequate content, and are clear,
consistent and likely to be effective Term of Reference added at CEP
XIII (Report paragraph162).
Appendix 2 Introductory comments by United States
Proposal for a new ASPA at the Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island,
Palmer Archipelago
The Rosenthal Islands are located on the western coast of Anvers
Island, in the Palmer Archipelago, Antarctic Peninsula, at 64°36'S
64°15'W. The site was first formally recognised for its exceptional
ecological and scientific values when it was designated as a
Restricted Zone under Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)
No.7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin in Measure 1
(2008). The purpose of the Restricted Zone under the ASMA was to
provide protection to sensitive bird colonies throughout the
breeding season, and also plant communities, by limiting access to
those conducting essential scientific research, monitoring or
maintenance between 1 October to 15 April inclusive. The
Restricted Zone was also designated because it was considered
important to protect the near-pristine state of the Rosenthal Islands,
which fewer than ~60 people are estimated to have ever visited.
The Restricted Zone was applied to the Rosenthal Islands under the
ASMA while more detailed information was being assembled with a
view to proposal of the site as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) because of its exceptional qualities.
Since designation of the site as a Restricted Zone in 2008, tourism
on the Antarctic Peninsula has continued to increase, and a greater
diversity of sites is now being visited. The number of yachts visiting
Antarctica has also increased over this period. Already it is known
that several tourist yachts have visited the site. In view of the near
pristine state of the Rosenthal Islands, and that such sites are
becoming increasingly rare in the Peninsula region, the United
States is concerned that strict protection is now put in place to
ensure that this value is not compromised or lost.
The United States has now gathered additional scientific
information on the site, and proposes designation of the Rosenthal
Islands and the adjacent islands, coastline and associated marine
area as a new ASPA. The proposal is strongly supported by world
renowned ornithologist Dr William Fraser, who has particular
knowledge of the Rosenthal Islands, having been one of the first
people to have visited the area in 1975, and who has conducted
repeated but infrequent research in the region since.
The United States has undertaken a review of the published and
unpublished literature on the site, compiled available scientific data
on birds made available by Dr Fraser, examined high resolution
remote sensing imagery indicating the likely presence of bird and
vegetation communities at sites where visits have not yet proven
possible, has examined records of all known past visits, and has
consulted with scientists who have visited the area. A brief field
visit was made in December 2016 to gather up-to-date data on
breeding birds, make the first survey of terrestrial invertebrates at
the site, improve mapping, and to make a first-hand evaluation of
site values under Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The Rosenthal Islands were identified to meet a number of criteria
for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area under
Annex V to the Protocol, in particular as an area:
with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major
colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
that is a representative example of regional avian and marine
ecosystems, in particular because of the diversity of breeding birds
present;
of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research;
to be kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activities; and
of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
With respect to Criterion (a) listed above, 7324 pairs of Gentoo
penguin were breeding within the Area in 2012/13, which meets
the threshold for identification as a Birdlife International Important
Bird Area (IBA) under IBA Criteria A4: “The site is known or
thought to hold congregations of ≥1% of the global population
of one or more species on a regular or predictable basis” (defined as
5680 breeding pairs for Gentoo penguins). This reaffirms IBA
No.88, which had been identified previously.
With respect to Criterion (d) listed above, it is intended to protect
the relatively undisturbed state of the Area to the maximum extent
practicable, although not to prohibit, prevent or unnecessarily
impede well-conceived and justified scientific research.
Following the appraisal of site values, a proposal for a new
Antarctic Specially Protected Area and draft Management Plan and
maps for the Rosenthal Islands were prepared. A number of
boundary options were evaluated, including the more limited scope
of the existing ASMA Restricted Zone, and the proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) was defined to include all of the
Rosenthal Islands, and the ecologically associated adjacent islands,
peninsulas and local marine environment, to encompass a total area
of approximately 111 km2.
Enlargement of the original Restricted Zone is considered justified
because there has been an observed close relationship between
fauna breeding on the islands and peninsulas and the adjacent
marine environment, which appears to be important as a local
foraging area. While more data on this ecological relationship are
needed, it was considered prudent and precautionary to include the
marine embayment south of the Rosenthal Islands, associated faunal
communities around this embayment, and a one-kilometer buffer
from the islands as the boundary of the Area.
On Anvers Island, the boundary has been defined to follow the
boundary of ASMA No.7, which is a one-kilometer buffer inland
from the coastline. In part this is for pragmatic reasons to maintain
consistency with the ASMA boundary, and in part in recognition of
the constantly and rapidly changing ice coastline, which is receding
in response to a changing climate, and which is also exposing new
areas of ice-free ground.
In the boundary appraisal consideration was given to how far north
the Area should be extended. A scattering of off-shore islands
extends northwards all along the coast of Anvers Island to Cape
Grönland. These islands are inaccessible, have had few surveys, and
reliable data on their ecological values are not available.
Examination of high resolution remote sensing imagery did not
reveal evidence of any substantial breeding bird colony (guano
staining) on islands close to the proposed northern boundary, nor
was there evidence of seals present. Some evidence of bird activity
on islands in the northeast of the proposed Area was apparent in
imagery, although breeding and numbers would need verification.
Some species of wildlife (e.g. terns, skuas) are not detectable using
remote sensing. Most of the islands in the north appear quite bare,
and some have probably emerged from under ice relatively
recently.
In effect, the proposed northern boundary provides a ‘buffer’ to the
islands of higher ecological value in the core of the Rosenthal group
further south. The line of latitude is coincident with the Palmer
ASMA. While it is not essential to make the ASPA consistent, in the
absence of a clear justification for extending further north at this
time, this seems a pragmatic place at which to draw the line. This
helps with the simplicity of boundaries, and ease of operational
identification at sea or from the air. On balance, considering the
lack of data on islands and comparative lack of features of high
value to the north, the proponent considered the pragmatic
boundary consistent with the ASMA to be preferable.
The primary reasons for designation of the Area are:
The outstanding diversity and number of breeding birds, which are
representative of the region;
The exceptional importance of the Area for ornithological and
ecological research;
The unusual Imperial shag (Leucocarbo atriceps bransfieldensis)
colony, which appears to have maintained a resident breeding
population at a similar level since first surveyed in 1975, in contrast
to a regional trend of population decline for this species;
The apparently extensive vegetation communities, although it is
acknowledged that more research on this aspect is needed;
The value as a reference site for comparative studies and long-term
monitoring;
The almost pristine condition of the Area because it has been rarely
visited; and
The exceptional aesthetic and wilderness values.
The proposed area is not the subject of any actual harvesting of
marine living resources, and the potential for harvesting within the
proposed area is also extremely limited and remote owing to its
rugged coastline and numerous shoals, which are potentially
dangerous. The proposed Area is approximately 75% marine, and it
was considered appropriate to provide CCAMLR with the
opportunity to review the proposal because it is intended that any
potential taking of marine living resources other than for scientific
research would be prohibited under the ASPA management plan.
The CCAMLR Commission and its appropriate scientific and
technical bodies considered the proposal for the new protected area
in 2019. The Commission considered the discussion by the Scientific
Committee (SC-CAMLR-38, paragraphs 6.1 to 6.3) on the Rosenthal
Islands and agreed to give its prior approval to the draft
management plan for a new ASPA in this area (CCAMLR-38 Report
(Meeting of the Commission 21 Oct – 1 Nov 2019) as adopted on
Friday 1 Nov 2019: Para 6.1).
ASPA No. XXX Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer
Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Measure 1 (2008), Measure 2 (2009), Measure 14 (2010)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
Yes
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Yes
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
CCAMLR-38 Report (Meeting of the Commission 21 October to 1
November 2019) as adopted on Friday 1 November 2019: Para 6.1.
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons
may be possible with localities that have been affected by human
activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment B – Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern latitudes
geologic’ and ‘Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and
other islands
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 3 – Northwest Antarctic Peninsula
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
Yes. IBA No.88 Islet south of Gerlache Island was identified prior to
the proposal of this protected area. Data on birds in the area have
been updated and if the ASPA is adopted the IBA will meet IBA
Criterion A4 for Gentoo penguins: “The site is known or thought to
hold congregations of ≥1% of the global population of one or more
species on a regular or predictable basis”.
The proponent has therefore informed Birdlife International
(manager of the global IBA database) on:
the protected area proposal for the Rosenthal Islands;
the latest data on birdlife and other values within the proposed
ASPA;
how the proposed ASPA meets IBA criteria;
the draft ASPA management plan; and
the potential change in the IBA No.88 boundary such that it would
comply with the new ASPA when / if adopted.
Following adoption, Birdlife International will be further informed
and update its database accordingly.
Appendix 3. Introductory comments by the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands
Proposal for a new ASPA at the Léonie Islands and south-east
Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands jointly propose the
designation of the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island,
Antarctic Peninsula, as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) under Annex V to the Protocol, primarily to protect a
combination of outstanding scientific, environmental, wilderness
and aesthetic values and, in particular, relating to the avifauna and
terrestrial biological communities within the Area.
At CEP XXI, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands submitted
ATCMXLI WP018 rev.1, which provided a prior assessment for a
proposed new multi-site ASPA on the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay,
Antarctic Peninsula. The Committee welcomed the comprehensive
information presented in the paper, agreed that the values within
the proposed ASPA merit special protection, and expressed its
support for the development of a draft management plan for the
area, led by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.
Following a review of the scientific literature and consultation with
scientists who have carried out research in the area, the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands prepared a draft management plan
for the proposed new ASPA. In a further development, following
discussion and consideration of how best to protected wilderness
and aesthetic values in the Area, a further site on the southeast of
Adelaide Island was added to the draft management plan for the
proposed multi-site ASPA. The draft management plan was
presented to CEP XXII (2019) attached to ATCMXLII WP35 Draft
Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for the Léonie
Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
CEP XXII referred the draft management plan to the Subsidiary
Group on Management Plans (SGMP) for review during the
intersessional period 2019-2021. In response to comments received
from the SGMP, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands refined
the draft management plan including clarifying the presence of
geological values within the Area, improving the description of
biosecurity requirements when moving between sites, better
defining the Area boundary and clarifying the location of
installations and structures. The management plan maps were also
revised with the inclusion of satellite imagery, improved labelling
and a better depiction of the Area boundary.
The revised draft management plan for the proposed ASPA on the
Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula,
is presented for consideration by the CEP.
ASPA No. XXX, Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island,
Antarctic Peninsula
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
Yes. The marine component is c. 3.3 km2 and is located at a
dynamic glacier front. The marine component is included within the
Area only to allow use of permanent features in the description of
the Area boundary. Values in the marine environment
are not afforded additional protection.
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
No. The criteria triggering referral to CCAMLR, as described in
Decision 9 (2005), were not met. Safety concerns would prevent
harvesting within 1 km of a dynamic glacier front. There are no
provisions specified in the draft management plan which might
prevent or restrict CCAMLR related activities.
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes,
please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reasons for designation of the multi-site ASPA are to
protect (a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that
future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been
affected by human activities; (b) representative examples of major
terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine
ecosystems; (c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of
species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or
mammals; areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned
scientific research; and (g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and
wilderness value.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Yes. Domain B Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern latitudes geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
ACBR 3 North West Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important
Bird Area(s) should be noted here).
The ASPA islands are contained within Antarctic Important Bird
Area (IBA) No. 47236 (AQ205), which was designated in 2018
(after the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ was
published).
Appendix 4 Introductory comments by China, Italy and Republic of
Korea
Proposal for a new ASPA at Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay,
Ross Sea
Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay is located in Terra Nova Bay,
Victoria Land, Western Ross Sea at 74° 54.2' S, 143° 43.5' E. The
proposed area is distinctive and the primary reasons for its
designation as an ASPA are that it hosts one of the oldest Adélie
penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony and an important breeding site
of South Polar Skua (Stercorarius maccormicki). Such a peculiar
ecosystem is related to the adjacent Terra Nova Bay polynya and
allows comparison with other nearby sites with different sea ice
dynamics along the year. Moreover, in the proposed area, several
lakes are influenced by guano nutrient inputs from birds, while
others are not impacted.
The first documented record of an Adélie penguin breeding group in
the Area was in 1963, and continuous monitoring has been carried
out from the 1980s to the present, with so far one of the earliest
statistical record of the Adélie penguin in the Ross Sea region. The
active penguin colony in the Area has had continuous occupation
for the past ~7,000 year, which is the longest existing Adélie
penguin colony in the Ross Sea region. The proposed area includes
crucial penguins’ foraging access area to Terra Nova Bay polynya.
The proposed area is listed as an important bird area (IBA178) by
Bird Life International and is described as Domain S (McMurdo-
South Victoria Land geologic) based on the Environmental Domains
Analysis for the Antarctic continent. Moreover, the proposed area
sits within Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) 8
Northern Victoria Land.
China, Italy and Korea are jointly proposing the designation of an
ASPA in the proposed area for long-term special protection because
of the outstanding scientific and ecological values and its potential
vulnerability to disturbance from scientific, logistic and tourist
activities.
The exceptional scientific and ecological values of the Area are
based on the following:
The Adélie penguin colony of Inexpressible Island is one of the
longest monitored Adélie penguin population in Ross Sea region
since 1963 and lasted in the past 30 years. Long-term population
monitoring will provide support for studying the dynamics of
breeding penguin populations, and the relationship between
populations and climate change.
It is the longest continuous occupation breeding colony of Adélie
penguin in Ross Sea area, and the subfossil bone samples that retain
DNA and guano in recent 7,000 years of the Adélie penguin have
been cryopreserved in the area. Study on the remains would
provide a rich and unique sample library for studying the historical
dynamics, climate change and molecular evolution on the geologic
scale.
The Inexpressible Island penguin’s population may act as a source
for neighboring subpopulations of Adélie penguin colonies in
Edmonson Point and Adélie Cove.
South Polar Skua nests are distributed around Adélie penguin
colony of the proposed area, and the Skuas have a low breeding
success in the Terra Nova Bay area in comparison with other areas.
Long-term monitoring and research on the reproductive population
dynamics, ecology and interspecific relationships of the top trophic
level omnivorous South Polar Skua not only supports the
conservation of the species, but also helps to reveal the response of
lower trophic levels to climate change.
The Adélie penguin colony located in a high-quality habitat nearby
the polynya. The easier foraging access between breeding colonies
and sea, could have a positive impact on the feeding efficiency and
diet composition of Adélie penguins thus explaining the possible
differences in the breeding success rate, and allowing comparison
studies with other areas of the Ross Sea.
The presence of the polynya offers opportunity to study the
undisturbed marine food-web structure and functioning under ice
free conditions allowing comparisons with the nearby areas where
sea ice coverage is more persistent. This proposed area is a
reference site concerning studies on the marine food-web structure
and the effect of sea ice dynamics on the ecosystem.
Several fresh-water lakes within the penguin breeding area are
present and are influenced by guano input and sea spray, which
determine a particular physiochemical and trophic status with
higher levels of nutrients. Highly influenced and some not
influenced lakes by guano and sprayed sea water would provide
references for the comparative limnetic ecological study.
The beaches of Inexpressible Island have risen by 30 m in the
Holocene, and there are the best-preserved ocean and glacial
landforms in Terra Nova Bay. The unique geomorphological feature
is of great scientific value for studying geological and glacial
changes, the evolution of penguin distribution patterns, and
Holocene climate change.
The proposed area is located in the eastern central part of
Inexpressible Island, including the Seaview Bay and the northern
part of the South Bay. The total area of the proposed ASPA is 3.31
km2, of which 2.32 km2 is terrestrial and 0.99 km2 is marine area.
The total extent of the borders is 7.86 km. Eastwards, the boundary
of the ASPA is mainly marine, and includes the foraging access
routes that penguins use intensively to access the sea. Westwards,
the boundary borders the current South Polar skua nesting area and
the historical distribution area of the Adélie penguin, including
freshwater lakes far away from the birds’ nests.
ASPA No. XXX Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
No.
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
Yes. The total area of the ASPA is 3.31 km2, of which 0.99 km2 is
marine area.
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Yes.
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes
If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant
CCAMLR Final Report should be given
CCAMLR-38 Report (Meeting of the Commission 21 October to 1
November
2019) as adopted on Friday 1 November 2019: Para 6.3.
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the 'Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Domain S (McMurdo-South Victoria Land geologic).
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes. ACBR 8 Northern Victoria Land.
If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
(Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to
ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://
www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
Yes. IBA178.
Appendix 5
Summary of the debates: Consider options for supporting
proponents to conclude the revision of management plans that
remain for several intersessional periods under the scope of the
SGMP.
• On the need for an additional assistance procedure
Participants considered that an additional assistance mechanism
could be useful for finalizing the revisions of the management plans
pending in the SGMP. However, it was noted not that there is no
agreement on the need to have a standard and fixed procedure.
There were also nuances regarding the assessment of the magnitude
of the problem in terms of the number and frequency of cases in
which this mechanism may be necessary, with some participants
anticipating a low frequency of cases while another participant
indicated that the cases would not be so infrequent.
In this context, several of the participants made comments in line
with the importance of understanding the reasons for the delay in
the conclusion of a review process. In this sense, they identified the
information that the proponent can provide, at the earliest possible
stage, as a key aspect when defining the need and possibilities of
providing assistance for the completion of the revision of a
Management Plan under the SGMP scope.
To assess each situation, a participant proposed the possibility of
having advice from the SGMP at the end of the first intersessional
period that might be presented and considered by the CEP on
whether the considered management plan would need special
assistance.
Also, situations in which there is no clear course of action or steps
taken in a reasonable period of time were also indicated as criteria
for assessing the need for additional assistance.
In line with the previous ideas, the majority of participants
indicated using the case-by-case approach, instead of considering
applying a mechanism that automatically sends management plans
that are not completed in an intersessional period within the SGMP.
The balance between flexibility and stagnation and concern
regarding ad hoc procedures that could generate more delays were
also was pointed out by a participant.
• About the deadlines to consider before starting an additional
assistance process
Regarding how much time should be considered before starting the
assistance process, several positions were presented:
On this aspect, several Parties also raised the need to consider case
by case. In line with this, the inconvenience of establishing a rigid
period of time was also mentioned.
We should also highlight that several participants considered art 6.3
of Annex V as the normative parameter that allows us to affirm that
the need for additional assistance should occur before the end of a
5-year period, after which, according to said article, a new revision
should be started.
From another point of view, one of the participants suggested that
after a period of two years in which a review is not completed, the
coordination of a review should pass from the Proponent to the
SGMP and have an “external” coordinator to moderate the
discussion.
Regarding the deadlines for the assistance process itself, one
participant noted that the timeframe for concluding a review
process will depend on the nature of any assistance that may be
required, and how long it might take to provide and act on that
assistance as it does not require the same amount of time to
perform additional monitoring tasks than to complete maps.
• About the aspects on which additional assistance could be
provided.
As a starting point to determine which aspects of a Management
Plan might require additional assistance, it was pointed out that in
principle it should be only those, which, according to the SGMP
advice, needed to be modified or supplemented.
Also, since the coordination of the ICG, a list of potential sources of
information was indicated by which additional information could
be obtained to complete the reviews.
The list provided in the initial post included:
ASPAs Post-visit reports.
Scientific publications developed within the ASPA.
Technical or management reports about the management of the
ASPA.
Reports of logistic support personnel (e.g. shelter repairs,
maintenance of beacons or signs that are within the Area)
Satellite images or aerial photographs.
Inspection reports
One participant contributed by linking potential sources of
information with the sections of a management plan to which they
could apply:
Fieldwork/site inspection support would support a review of all
aspects of the management plan
Literature review – link to Section 6 Description of the Area
Site specific information support (by those familiar with the Area) –
Sections 6 and 7
Stakeholder consultation and text review
Provision of data or information
Support in creating maps – Section 5
Another Party contributed by marking more examples of assistance
that could include:
identifying existing sources of research / monitoring data relevant
to describing the values of the Area and their status
undertaking research / monitoring in the Area
providing logistics to allow a Party to access an Area for research or
management visits
providing data for or preparing maps / figures
providing advice or information about best practice approaches
applied elsewhere to similar Area protection / management
challenges
participating in meetings or workshops to discuss issues and
solutions.
The ‘ASPA inspections’ were also indicated as a tool for Parties who
are not the original proponent of an ASPA to support ASPA
management plan reviews. These could be conducted by
opportunity, during a formal Treaty Inspection, or as a guideline for
scientists visiting the Area under permit, etc. Resolution 4 (2008)
provides a ‘Checklist to assist in the inspection of ASPA and ASMA’.
A review of this checklist/document might be a useful
consideration.
Additionally, remote monitoring was indicated as a useful source of
information for those cases where a remote location ASPA has not
been visited for a period of many years.
About key actors that could provide assistance
The ICG coordinator proposed, for discussion, a list of potential key
actors that could provide assistance. Parties, whose researchers,
managers, technicians or logistics personnel had carried out
activities in the ASPA in question in recent years, were mentioned
as possible key actors for the provision of additional information. It
was also suggested that other Parties, even if their personnel have
not worked in the field, could also provide
information obtained through remote techniques or assist in the
processing and / or compilation of information or data analysis.
Most of the participants agreed with this list. Contributions were
also received from the participants, pointing out the scientific
community in general and the stakeholders, with early
participation, as a key to successful management. On the latter, one
participant noted that this facilitates consensus building and
incorporating relevant knowledge when planning protected areas
management. The sooner all relevant stakeholders are involved in
the process of making decisions, the better.
One party clarified that the process would need to go through the
SGMP as it is composed of CEP representatives and Members – it
would allow for transparency and a broad communication to every
Member as the work of the SGMP is available on the CEP forum.
The proponent(s) can always contact interested Parties or
encourage them to actively participate in that assistance process.
Additional assistance mechanisms
Participants were consulted about other additional assistance
mechanisms. From the coordination of the ICG two possible
additional mechanisms were indicated, for the participants'
consideration:
Establishment of an advisory group for decision-making on key
aspects of the Plan, formed by Parties’ personnel with links to the
ASPA. This mechanism could be considered when the aspects to be
completed include issues related to the objectives of the area, limits
or general coherence of the Plan.
Joint visit to the Zone. This option would enable the collection of
additional field information when necessary, although it could be
expensive and logistically challenging.
While several participants agreed on these possible additional
mechanisms. One participant suggested the possibility of simply
adding a new topic under the SGMP in the CEP forum.
Assignment of roles in the compilation of information and
presentation of the revised document to the CEP (in case the
additional assistance process is implemented)
Participants were consulted about the responsibility in the
compilation instance of the additional information and the
presentation of the final version of the revised plan to the CEP.
As for the person responsible for the compilation of the information
provided by the collaborators, the majority suggested that there
should be no changes with respect to the process by which the
SGMP works, noting that this would be a mechanism that should
simply assist the proponent to complete their revision. Something
similar was indicated about the responsibility in presenting the
revised plan to the CEP. One participant indicated the importance
of avoiding unnecessary complexity in the review work of
Management Plans.
In this context, it was also indicated that it is perhaps useful if the
proponent Party identifies a point of contact to receive relevant
information. It might be helpful if the related SGMP review
coordinator was also kept ‘in the loop’.
One Party noted that depending on the circumstances, and nature of
assistance provided, it may be appropriate for other Parties to join
as co-proponents. Otherwise, the paper presenting the revised
management plan to the CEP for consideration could appropriately
identify any contributors to the review process.
One participant suggested that the process of assistance might be
similar to that for new proposals: a convener circulates the last
approved plan and opens the discussion to all Parties for comments.
All information, concerns or comments the proponent might have at
the time the assistance is initiated should also be presented at that
stage (or none if there isn’t any). All Parties (including the
proponent) have a certain amount of time to contribute to the
revision (e.g. 6 months?), and at the end of that time the convener
hands-in the information to the proponent. The proponent then has
a certain amount of time to present a revised plan.
