Antarctic Environments Portal
Antarctic Environments Portal
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The Antarctic Environments Portal has been designed and
developed to support the work of the CEP by providing accurate
and up-to-date information on issues of relevance to the
Committee’s work.
Since January 2020 SCAR has assumed oversight and management
of the Portal. A new website has been designed and launched with
the aim of ensuring easy access to Information Summaries.
This Working Paper provides examples of how Information
Summaries published in the Portal link directly to issues of priority
interest for the CEP.
The Paper recommends that the CEP continue to support the Portal,
acknowledge the support that the Portal can provide to the CEP’s
Climate Change Response Work Programme and identifies any
additional Information Summaries it would like to see prepared.
Background
The Antarctic Environments Portal (the Portal; environments.aq)
was launched in 2015 and endorsed by the ATCM by means of
Resolution 3 (2015).
The Portal ensures that the current state of knowledge on key issues
is commonly available to all CEP Members, as well as Antarctic
Treaty Parties and the public. The Portal aims to:
Meet the urgent and increasing Antarctic policy information needs
Provide reliable, policy-ready summaries on priority issues
Raise awareness of emerging issues
Support informed discussions and wise decision-making
Make information available to all Parties irrespective of their
Antarctic investment
Portal update
Until the end of 2019, the Portal was based at the University of
Canterbury, New Zealand and supported with funding generously
provided by the Tinker Foundation. In January 2020, with the
conclusion of the Tinker Foundation funding, the Portal was
formally transferred to SCAR.
SCAR have established a Portal Board comprising the SCAR
President, Executive Director, and Chief Officer of SC-ATS. A
representative of Gateway Antarctica, University of Canterbury
remains on the Board to assist with continuity. The Board meets
quarterly to discuss ongoing business. The Portal Editor reports to
the Portal Board. SCAR’s Executive Director acts as the Portal
Manager and SCAR’s Communications and Information Officer as
Assistant Editor, supporting the Portal Editor.
Since January 2020 funding for the Portal has generously been
provided by Australia, the UK, New Zealand and the Netherlands,
which will support SCAR’s management of the Portal for the next
two years. Support in kind has been generously provided by France
and Spain who assist in translating Information Summaries into
their respective languages. SCAR expresses its gratitude for all the
support that it has received.
During 2020 a new website was developed for the Portal. This was
launched in November 2020. The new website provides a structured
approach for presenting and accessing the Information Summaries,
which are grouped under six categories: Marine, Terrestrial, Human
Activities, Inland Aquatic Environments, Atmosphere, and
Cryosphere. The new website also allows for supplementary
material such as published reports and infographics to be appended
to the Information Summaries.
Since the launch, the new website has been viewed by over 3,300
users, with most users logging in from the US (606), the UK (275),
Australia (238), China (229) and France (171). The Information
Summaries on Microplastics in the Southern Ocean, Persistent
Organic Pollutants and Environmental Remediation have been
viewed most.
A dedicated Facebook page (1,060 followers; www.facebook.com/
AntarcticEnvironmentsPortal) and a recently established Portal
mailing list (currently 125 subscribers) notify the users about Portal
progress.
The work of the Portal has been presented at a range of webinars
and symposia, among them the 13th Polar Law Symposium (11th
November 2020), the APECS Antarctica Day webinar (1st December
2020) and the VI APECS-Brasil Symposium (2nd February 2021).
Support to the work of the CEP
Information Summaries published on the Portal website aim to
provide ‘state-of-knowledge’ reports targeted at the specific issues
that the CEP is addressing through its agenda and work
programmes; not least the research and information needs that have
been identified in the climate change response work programme
(CCRWP), as well as the science knowledge and information needs
that are included in the CEP’s five-year work plan.
Table 1 below provides some examples of how currently published
Information Summaries directly support the work of the CEP.
Further, it is contended that, collectively, the state-of-knowledge
reports provided in the Portal contribute to fulfilling one of the
CEP’s core functions of advising the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the
state of the Antarctic environment (Article 12(1)(j) of the Protocol
refers).
Content Management Plan
It is important that CEP Members (as the intended primary users)
continue to have input to identifying specific needs for the content
that is published on the Portal. The Portal Content Management
Plan is appended to this Working Paper and has been developed to
help facilitate a dialogue with the Committee over planned content
for the Portal.
Comments and suggestions on the planned Information Summaries
as set out in the Content Management Plan are encouraged.
Feedback can be provided during discussions at the CEP meeting or
at any time to the Portal Editor (editor@environments.aq).
Next steps and recommendations
SCAR will continue to support the Antarctic Treaty System by
providing independent and scientifically rigorous information. This
includes further development of the Antarctic Environments Portal
and the publication of further Information Summaries in accordance
with the Portal’s content management plan.
SCAR recommends that CEP and CEP Members:
Continue to support the further development of the Antarctic
Environments Portal and the publication of Information Summaries,
recognising its value in contributing to the work of the Committee;
Acknowledges the support that the Information Summaries
provided in the Portal can provide to the CEP’s Climate Change
Response Work Programme;
Identify and provide feedback to SCAR on any additional
Information Summaries that they would like to see prepared.
Table 1. Examples of how Information Summaries published in the
Portal link directly with issues of priority interest to the CEP.
Information Summary
Link to Information Summary
Relevance to CEP’s Work
The introduction of non-native species to Antarctica
https://environments.aq/publications/the-introduction-of-non-
native-species-to-antarctica/
Agenda item 10a on the CEP’s agenda.
Priority 1 issue on the CEP’s 5-year work plan.
Enhanced potential for NNS establishments is a key issue in the
CCRWP.
Pathways for the introduction of terrestrial non-native species.
https://environments.aq/publications/pathways-for-the-
introduction-of-terrestrial-non-native-species/
Status of known non-native species introductions and impacts.
https://environments.aq/publications/status-of-known-non-native-
species-introductions-and-impacts/
Non-native microbial introductions: what risk to Antarctic
ecosystems?
https://environments.aq/publications/non-native-microbial-
introductions-what-risk-to-antarctic-ecosystems/
Sources, dispersal and impacts of wastewater in Antarctica
https://environments.aq/publications/sources-dispersal-and-
impacts-of-wastewater-in-antarctica/
Antarctic wildlife diseases
https://environments.aq/publications/antarctic-wildlife-diseases-2/
Agenda items 10b and 10c on the CEP’s agenda.
Biodiversity knowledge is a Priority 2 issue on the CEP’s 5-year
work plan.
Human disturbance to Antarctic wildlife
https://environments.aq/publications/human-disturbance-to-
antarctic-wildlife/
Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
https://environments.aq/publications/important-bird-areas-in-
antarctica/
Southern elephant seals in the Antarctic Treaty Area
https://environments.aq/publications/southern-elephant-seals-
mirounga-leonina-l-in-the-antarctic-treaty-area/
Ross Seal
https://environments.aq/publications/ross-seal/
Antarctic marine biodiversity
https://environments.aq/publications/antarctic-marine-
biodiversity/
Changes in penguin distribution over the Antarctic Peninsula and
Scotia Arc
https://environments.aq/publications/changes-in-penguin-
distribution-over-the-antarctic-peninsula-and-scotia-arc/
Agenda item 7 on the CEP’s agenda.
Understanding the implications of climate change for Antarctic
biota is a key element of the CCRWP.
Climate change as an emerging threat to Emperor Penguins
https://environments.aq/publications/climate-change-as-an-
emerging-threat-to-emperor-penguins/
Vulnerability of Southern Ocean biota to climate change
https://environments.aq/publications/vulnerability-of-southern-
ocean-biota-to-climate-change/
The impacts of trampling and ground disturbances on Antarctic
soils
https://environments.aq/publications/the-impacts-of-trampling-
and-ground-disturbances-on-antarctic-soils/
Agenda item 6 on the CEP’s agenda.
Repair or remediation is a Priority 2 issue on the CEP’s 5-year work
plan.
Micropollutants in Antarctic waters
https://environments.aq/publications/micropollutants-in-antarctic-
waters/
Microplastics in the Southern Ocean
https://environments.aq/publications/microplastics-in-the-
southern-ocean/
Clean-up of past waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites in
Antarctica
https://environments.aq/publications/clean-up-of-past-waste-
disposal-sites-and-abandoned-work-sites-in-antarctica/
Environmental remediation
https://environments.aq/publications/environmental-remediation/
Specially protected and managed areas in Antarctica
https://environments.aq/publications/specially-protected-and-
managed-areas-in-antarctica/
Agenda item 9 on the CEP’s agenda.
Overview of the protected areas system is a Priority 2 issue on the
CEP’s 5-year work plan.
