SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field
Research Activities in Antarctica
SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field
Research Activities in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Following broad and extensive consultation, SCAR has updated
earlier advice to geoscientists undertaking field research in
Antarctica with the preparation of the SCAR Environmental Code of
Conduct for Geosciences Field Research Activities in Antarctica (see
Attachment A). SCAR recommends that the CEP considers the Code
of Conduct and, if agreed, encourages its dissemination and use
when planning and undertaking geosciences field research activities
in Antarctica.
Introduction
Exposed rock constitutes only c. 0.3% of Antarctica’s area, yet it is
within these ice-free areas that the majority of human activity
occurs. Potential threats to geological features of environmental or
scientific value by field researchers might include:
oversampling of rare rocks, fossils and minerals for scientific
purposes; or
inadvertent damage to the relevant scientific values of a location by
movement of rock and fossils out of their stratigraphical context
(e.g. movement of a surface fossil from one location to another may
give false information of the presence of that organism in the
stratigraphic record).
The CEP has previously acknowledged the importance of
guaranteeing protection of geological values and welcomed further
discussions on the matter (CEP Final Report 2014, para. 203).
SCAR has previously provided advice to researchers undertaking
geosciences research in Antarctica through the SCAR Geological
Sampling Code of Conduct (GeoReach Newsletter, SCAR
Geosciences Standing Scientific Group, Vol. 7, May 2008). The
original Code of Conduct, generated over a decade ago,
concentrated predominantly on geological sampling with little or no
consideration of other issues relevant to geosciences fieldwork.
Following the establishment of the SCAR Action Group on
Geological Heritage and Geoconservation in 2014, the need was
identified for more comprehensive guidelines on geological field
research activities to promote effective conservation of Antarctic
geological values.
SCAR Codes of Conduct
SCAR has an established record of developing Codes of Conduct
that provide non-mandatory advice to those undertaking research
activities in Antarctica (see: https://www.scar.org/policy/scar-
codes-of-conduct/). The Codes of Conduct are often considered
useful in planning, including during the environmental impact
assessment process, and undertaking activities within the Treaty
area. Examples of SCAR Codes of Conduct include the:
Code of Conduct for the use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in
Antarctica (Resolution 4, 2019);
Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field
Research in Antarctica (Resolution 5, 2018);
Code of Conduct for the Exploration and Research of Subglacial
Aquatic Environments (Resolution 2, 2017); and
Code of Conduct for Activity within Terrestrial Geothermal
Environments in Antarctica (Resolution 3, 2016).
Following wide consultation with the geoscience community,
COMNAP and CEP (see ATCM XLII IP50 Draft SCAR Code of
Conduct on Geosciences Field Research Activities in Antarctica),
SCAR has now
updated the existing advice and expanded the scope to produce the
SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct on Geosciences Field
Research Activities in Antarctica (see Attachment A). The Code of
Conduct includes issues worthy of consideration before going into
the field, once in the field and once fieldwork is completed. It also
highlights issues relevant to geological work on fossils,
geomorphological features, meteorites and the use of specific
techniques including cosmogenic analysis and other geophysical
methodologies (e.g. seismic surveys, electrical resistivity,
tomography or radar surveys). The Code of Conduct also includes,
as an Annex, a preliminary list of national repositories (museums,
universities, institutes, etc.) housing Antarctic geological and
palaeontological specimens.
Recommendation
SCAR recommends that the CEP:
recognizes that broad and extensive consultation has been
undertaken in the development of the voluntary SCAR
Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field Research
Activities in Antarctica (Attachment A);
recognises that this Code of Conduct replaces the earlier SCAR
Geological Sampling Code of Conduct;
considers the Code of Conduct for dissemination and
encouragement of adoption when planning and undertaking
geoscience field research activities in Antarctica; and
recommends that Parties maintain updated information concerning
their national repositories housing Antarctic geological and
palaeontological specimens, as recorded in the SCAR list available
at: https://www.scar.org/scar-library/search/science-4/
geosciences/5595-list-of-national-geosciences-repositories/file/
Annex A. Draft Resolution
Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field Research
Activities in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Recalling Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), which requires that activities
in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and conducted so as to
limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent
and associated ecosystems;
Recognising that Antarctica may contain geological,
palaeontological, glaciological and geomorphological features of
high environmental and scientific value;
Acknowledging that the Antarctic environment may be at risk from
impacts associated with research activities, including oversampling
of fossils, rocks and minerals;
Welcoming the development by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (“SCAR”) through broad consultation, including
with the input of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programmes (“COMNAP”), of the SCAR Environmental Code of
Conduct for Geosciences Field Research Activities in Antarctica
(“SCAR Code of Conduct”) that Parties can apply and use, as
appropriate, to assist with meeting their obligations under the
Protocol;
Recommend that their Governments:
endorse the non-mandatory SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct
for Geosciences Field Research as representing current best practice
for planning and undertaking geoscience field research activities in
Antarctica;
encourage the consideration of the SCAR Environmental Code of
Conduct for Geosciences Field Research during the environmental
impact assessment process for geoscience field research activities
within Antarctica and encourage their researchers to abide, to the
best of their ability, by the contents of the Code of Conduct in
conducting geosciences field research activities in Antarctica; and
maintain updated information concerning their national repositories
housing Antarctic geological and palaeontological specimens.
