Report on informal discussions on marine protection measures
Report on informal discussions on marine protection measures
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
This paper reports on informal discussions among interested
Members to respond to the request from the ATCM set out in
Resolution 5 (2017).
Background
At ATCM XL (2017), the Parties agreed Resolution 5 (2017) which
welcomed the establishment of the Ross Sea Region Marine
Protected Area (RSRMPA) and invited the CEP to:
consider any appropriate actions within the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting’s competence to contribute to the
achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR
Conservation Measure 91-05, particularly in the designation and
implementation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas in the Ross Sea region and the
management of relevant human activities; and
identify opportunities to conduct and support relevant research and
monitoring activities that support the objectives and the
forthcoming Research and Monitoring Plan of the RSRMPA, in
particular through international collaborations.
At CEP XX (2017) the Committee discussed the benefit of looking at
the connectivity between ocean and land, and agreed to consider if
and how complementary measures within the framework of the
Environmental Protocol, in particular Annex V, could support and
strengthen marine protection initiatives. An action was added to the
CEP Five-year Work Plan under the Priority 2 issue of marine
spatial protection and management to “consider connectivity
between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be
taken by Parties with respect to MPAs.”
At CEP XXI (2018), Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, the
Netherlands, New Zealand and the United States submitted WP 12
on Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the
Antarctic Treaty System which proposed that an ICG be established
to identify options, within its mandate, to contribute to the
RSRMPA. The CEP did not agree to establish an ICG and New
Zealand offered to lead informal intersessional discussions on these
matters and report back to CEP XXII.
At CEP XXII (2019), New Zealand submitted WP 48 Harmonisation
of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty System,
which reported on informal discussions held by interested Parties to
develop a response to the ATCM’s request in Resolution 5 (2017).
Work focussed on drafting a list of general complementary
measures within the framework of the Protocol that could support
connectivity between land and ocean, and strengthen marine
protection initiatives within the Antarctic Treaty System. The
intersessional discussions did not have sufficient time to conclude
the discussion and New Zealand offered to continue to facilitate
informal discussions during the next intersessional period.
Intersessional discussions
Since CEP XXII (2019), New Zealand held informal discussions with
some Members to consider how to address the request of the ATCM
as set out in Resolution 5 (2017) and did not focus on the
connectivity between land the ocean.
It was noted that the roles of the ATCM and CEP in relation to
CCAMLR are considered different by some Parties and the
consideration of the term complementary does not accurately
reflect the relationship between
the ATCM and CCAMLR, rather coordination or cooperation are
considered more accurate. Therefore, using the RSRMPA as a case
study, a number of indicative examples where the ongoing work of
the CEP is contributing to the objectives outlined in CM 91-05 were
identified.
The Committee was invited to comment on the identified scientific
research and monitoring in the RSRMPA and CEP measures related
to the protection of the marine environment through the CEP
Forum. Appendix 1 presents the actions within the ATCM’s
competence that can or already is contributing to the achievement
of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation
Measure 91-05 and relevant research and monitoring activities in
the RSRMPA.
Additional issues
Participants raised a number of additional issues that were not
discussed or agreed during the informal intersessional discussions,
but which may warrant further consideration and discussion by the
Committee to progress work on marine spatial protection and
management. These include:
Facilitate access for the CEP to SC-CCAMLR Working Group on
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management papers on summaries of
past and current research projects in the Ross Sea region MPA.
Consider the criteria from the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring
Programme and Annex B and C of CCAMLR Conservation Measure
91-05 when encouraging Parties to conduct research, and
monitoring activities related to the protection of the marine
environment across the Ross Sea region.
Integrate the CCRWP with CCAMLR initiatives, particularly with
regard to climate change resilience building.
Consider how the network of ASPAs and ASMAs in the Ross Sea
region can be enhanced to support the protection of the terrestrial
and marine environment from activities not covered by CCAMLR,
such as contributing to climate change resilience, addressing land-
based sources of pollution and considering areas exposed by glacial
retreat.
Consideration to be given to holding a SC-CAMLR and CEP joint
workshop as identified in the CEP Five Year Work Plan under Issue/
Environmental Pressure: Marine spatial protection and
management. The workshop might useful consider the CEP Five
Year Work Plan task to, ‘Consider connectivity between land and
ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties
with respect to MPAs.’
Identify how the identified CEP tools in Appendix 1 address the
specific objectivesThe MPA is designated to contribute to the
following specific objectives, in line with Article II of the CAMLR
Convention: To conserve natural ecological structure, dynamics and
function throughout the Ross Sea region at all levels of biological
organisation, by protecting habitats that are important to native
mammals, birds, fishes and invertebrates;To provide reference areas
for monitoring natural variability and long-term change, and in
particular a Special Research Zone, in which fishing is limited to
better gauge the ecosystem effects of climate change and fishing, to
provide other opportunities for better understanding the Antarctic
marine ecosystem, to underpin the Antarctic toothfish stock
assessment by contributing to a robust tagging program, and to
improve understanding of toothfish distribution and movement
within the Ross Sea region;To promote research and other scientific
activities (including monitoring) focused on marine living
resources; To conserve biodiversity by protecting representative
portions of benthic and pelagic marine environments in areas where
fewer data exist to define more specific protection objectives;To
protect large-scale ecosystem processes responsible for the
productivity and functional integrity of the ecosystem;To protect
core distributions of trophically dominant pelagic prey species;To
protect core foraging areas for land-based top predators or those
that may experience direct trophic competition from fisheries;To
protect coastal locations of particular ecological importance;To
protect areas of importance in the life cycle of Antarctic
toothfish;To protect known rare or vulnerable benthic habitats;
andTo promote research and scientific understanding of krill,
including in the Krill Research Zone in the north western Ross Sea
region. of the RSRMPA in paragraph 3 of CM 91-05.
Consider how the designation of Important Marine Mammal Areas
and Marine Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas can support
protection of the marine environment in the Ross Sea region.
Consider the adoption of standardised monitoring to support future
management.
Consideration of a step-wise approach to marine protection
whereby Parties collaborate to conduct a regional-scale
comprehensive environment impact assessment on the scientific
basis to identify management needs and gaps. Such an assessment
could include a number of elements to be identified in a
collaboration between the CEP and SC-CAMLR (see the CEP Forum
for further information).
Recommendations
New Zealand, on behalf of the participants of the informal
intersessional discussions, recommend that the CEP:
Respond to the request of the ATCM as identified in Resolution 5
(2017) and note Appendix 1, which identifies
relevant research and monitoring activities in the RSRMPA; and
actions within the ATCMs competence that can or already are
contributing to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth
in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05.
Discuss the identified additional issues and consider options for how
to progress any of these issues as part of the CEP Five Year Work
Plan.
Appendix 1: Existing examples of CEP ‘tools’ that may contribute to
the protection of the marine environment and CCAMLRs objectives,
in particular to the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (as
defined in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05).
CEP Measures related to the protection of the marine environment
CEP measure identified in WP48 and further refined through
informal intersessional discussions and identified.
CEP tools
Examples within the
Ross Sea Region
Scientific research and monitoring to support decision-making
Encourage Parties, where appropriate, to conduct research, and
monitoring activities related to the protection of the marine
environment across the Ross Sea region.
Consider existing and planned research.
Ross Sea region Adelie penguin census
Ross RAMP project
Top Predators study
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (Note: Papers are not
publicly available)
Provide advice and recommendations to the Parties on the need for
scientific research, including environmental monitoring related to
the implementation of the Protocol, and on the state of the
environment, including the marine environment.
CEP Five-Year Work Plan and incorporated science, knowledge and
information needs
State of the Environment report
No examples identified.
Management of human activities through the provisions of the
Environmental Protocol and its Annexes
Support prior environmental impact assessment of all proposed
activities (Annex I), and the planning, management and monitoring
of activities to avoid or minimise significant adverse effects on the
environment, including the marine environment.
Environmental Impact Assessment (Annex 1)
Environmental Impact Assessments and related environmental
monitoring
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(Resolution 1 (2016))
All activities undergo an EIA.
View the EIA Database and consult with National Antarctic
Programmes operating in the region.
Prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a
changing climate, including through the implementation of the
Climate Change Response Work Program, which addresses climate-
related issues relevant to the marine environment (Resolution 4
(2015)).
Climate Change Response Work Programme (Resolution 4, 2015)
CCRWP applicable across all of Antarctica
Prevent non-native species introductions to Antarctica, including to
the marine environment (including through the ongoing
development of the Non-Native Species Manual).
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (Annex II)
CEP Non-Native Species Manual. Revision 2019.
Annex II and the CEP Non-native Species manual applicable across
all of Antarctica.
National Antarctic Programme specific examples.
Clean-up of past and present waste disposal sites, abandoned
facilities and contaminated sites in coastal areas, noting the
potential impact to the marine environment (including through the
ongoing development of the Clean-Up Manual).
Waste Disposal and Waste Management (Annex III)
Revised Clean-up Manual 2019
Annex III and the Clean-up manual area applicable across all of
Antarctica.
Former joint USA/NZ Cape Hallett Station site cleaned up by USA/
New Zealand effort, aided by Italy, to remove remaining staged
waste.
Prevent marine pollution (Annex IV), reduce plastic pollution in
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (Resolution 5 (2019) and
manage ballast water (Resolution 3 (2006)).
Prevent marine pollution (Annex IV)
Ballast water exchange (Resolution 3, 2006).
Reducing Plastic Pollution in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
(Resolution 5, (2019)).
Measures applicable across all of Antarctica. No specific Ross Sea
Region examples.
Minimise potential impacts arising from waste disposal and waste
management, including in the marine environment (Annex III).
Waste disposal and waste management (Annex III)
National Antarctic Programme specific examples.
Consider risks to the marine environment when establishing and /
or reviewing contingency plans to respond to environmental
emergencies in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol.
The Protocol, Article 15 Emergency Response Action
Liabilities arising from environmental emergencies (Annex VI – not
yet in force)
National Antarctic Programme specific examples.
Consider updating the General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic (Resolution 3 (2011)) and updating or developing new
Visitor Site Guidelines for sites that are adjacent, near or within
MPAs, where updates or new guidelines would complement the
protection of the marine environment.
General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic (Resolution 3 (2011)
Visitor Site Guidelines
General Guidelines for Visitors applicable across all of Antarctica
Cape Royds Visitor Site Guidelines
Seabee Hook, Cape Hallett Visitor Site Guidelines
Consider the designation of Specially Protected Species
Specially Protected Species (Annex II)
The Ross Seal is designated as a Specially Protected Species.
Undertake appropriate monitoring of bird populations in the Ross
Sea region to inform future management actions and consider the
extent to which Important Bird Areas are, or should be, represented
within the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, in
particular those areas that might qualify as “major colonies of
breeding native birds” (Resolution 5 (2015))
Important Bird Areas
IBA 165 Cape Adare (ASPA 105)
IBA 170 Cape Hallett (ASPA 106)
IBA 175 Edmonson Point (ASPA 165)
IBA 176 Cape Washington (ASPA 173)
IBA 182 Blue Glacier to Chocolate Island (No ASPA)
IBA 186 Caughley Beach (ASPA 116)
IBA 187 Cape Crozier (ASPA 124)
IBA 188 Beaufort Island (ASPA 105)
Promote regular and effective monitoring on the values protected in
ASPAs and ASMAs;
Consider how the designation and implementation of Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
can support protection of the marine environment in the Ross Sea
region (Resolution 5 (2017)), drawing on the best available
scientific advice; and
Identify the need for a higher level of protection for specific values
beyond that achieved by other forms of planning and management
measures under the Protocol on the basis of scientific assessment.
ASMA
Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans
(Resolution 1 (2017))
ASMA 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
ASPA
Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected
Areas (Resolution 1 (2000)
Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (2011))
Checklist to assist in the inspection of Antarctica Specially Protected
Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (Resolution 4 (2008)
ASPA 104 Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
ASPA 105 Beaufort Island
ASPA 106 Cape Hallett
ASPA 116 New College Valley, Cape Bird
ASPA 121 Cape Royds
ASPA 124 Cape Crozier
ASPA 137 Norwest White Island
ASPA 154 Botany Bay, Cape Geology
ASPA 161 Terra Nova Bay
ASPA 165 Edmonson Point
ASPA 173 Cape Washington
ASPA XXX Inexpressible Island and South Bay.
