Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 1
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 1
Any revisions to management plan:
Rec. XIII-9 (1985), Measure 1 (2002), Measure 5 (2009), Measure 2
(2014).
Current management plan:
Measure 2 (2014).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979),
Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998), Decision 1 (2002), Decision 9 (2005), Resolution
4 (2009), Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics and new map added for guidance on
aircraft access.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. The air access provisions have been clarified to be consistent
with ASPA No. 157, which is adjacent.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment P – Ross and Ronne-Filchner ice shelves.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 9 – South Victoria Land.
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
Cape Royds has not, under the criteria used, been identified as an
IBA.
ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds was last
revised in 2014, and review thus fell due in 2019. Accordingly, the
United States has made a number of revisions to the Management
Plan, both as a result of a detailed review of the scientific
knowledge of the Area by Dr D. Ainley, a leading scientific
authority on the Area, and in light of agreements reached by the
Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
Cape Royds was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific
Interest (SSSI) No. 1 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) for its
value as the most southerly Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae)
colony known. A marine component was included in 1985 to
protect seaward access and feeding grounds of the Adélie penguin
and to allow research on Nototheniid fish. The marine component
was reduced in 2009, although the marine area surrounding the
colony was retained to protect the primary access route to the
colony by penguins. The current Management Plan reaffirms the
values of the Area.
While revisions to the scientific description of the Area have been
detailed, and a new map has been added, substantive changes to the
values of the Area, its boundaries, or to the overall management
policies have not been made. Therefore the revisions have been
classified as ‘minor’ in nature and in effect.
The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management
Plan include:
Revisions to the scientific description of the Area, including updates
on the number of breeding penguins within the Area;
The Latin name for South polar skua (Stercorarius maccormicki)
recently changed to Catharacta maccormicki (see BirdLife
International Data Zone: http://datazone.birdlife.org/species/search
Accessed Jan 2021). The management plan has been amended as
appropriate.
Revisions to take account of new agreements and guidance reached
by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted,
and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
Section 5 Maps. A new Map 2 covering air access has been added
and the previous Map 2 has been renamed as Map 3. Map graphics
have been improved, including an update to show the extent of
breeding penguin sub-colonies in 2019.
Section 7(ii) Aircraft access and overflight. Aircraft access
provisions have been clarified and updated, and made consistent
with ASPA No. 157. The recommendation was added that:
“overflight / landings of all aircraft within ½ nautical mile (~930
m) of ASPA No. 121 are strongly discouraged, except for scientific
or management purposes (Map 2)”. This recommendation is
consistent with Resolution 2 (2004), the ‘Guidelines for the
Operation of Aircraft Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica’,
and aims to raise pilot awareness of the need to follow these
guidelines when operating in the region.
Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been
updated.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
