Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 155 Cape Evans, Ross Island
Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 155 Cape Evans, Ross Island;
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has
conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 155: Cape
Evans, Ross Island. The review was carried out concurrently with
other ASPAs in the Ross Sea that are designated for their historic
values.
The review was conducted with reference to Annex V of the
Protocol and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to
Resolution 2 (2011).
Stakeholder including Parties active in the Ross Sea region,
Antarctic heritage professionals at the Antarctic Heritage Trust, and
IAATO were consulted on the revisions.
The revisions are minor and outlined in the cover sheet and text
below.
Recommendation
The attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 155 Cape
Evans is recommended for consideration by the Committee for
Environmental Protection and adoption by the ATCM.
ASPA No. 155 Cape Evans, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes, ASPA
First designation:
Measure 2 (1997)
First adoption of management plan:
Adopted at first designation.
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 12 (2008), Measure 8 (2010), Measure
11 (2015).
Current management plan:
Measure 11 (2015)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Recommendation VII-9 (1972), Decision 1 (2002), Resolution 2
(2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Minor correction to coordinates of the NE and NW boundary
corners listed in the management plan.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Minor changes to map graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Annex V, Article 3.2 (h) Sites or monuments of recognised historic
value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment S – McMurdo South Victoria Land geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Region 9 – South Victoria Land
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
N/A
ASPA No. 155 Cape Evans, Ross Island (HSM No. 16, HSM No. 17)
is designated to protect the historic hut and associated artefacts
from the British Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition of 1910-13 led by
Captain Robert Falcon Scott. The site is of exceptional historical
importance and interest, and strict measures are set out in the ASPA
management plan to ensure protection is comprehensive and
effective, including conditions for regulating access.
The Management Plan was last updated in 2015, and in accordance
with Annex V Article 6.3 New Zealand has undertaken a review of
the Management Plan review. New Zealand has carried out the
review concurrently with other ASPAs in the Ross Sea that are
designated for their historic values. This helped to ensure policy
consistency across all of the ASPA plans for historic sites in the Ross
Sea.
Updates were made taking into account recent information on the
status of the values and features within the Area, changes made in
other ASPA management plans recently adopted, and the latest
agreements by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.
A process of stakeholder consultation on the revisions involving
Parties active in the Ross Sea region, Antarctic heritage
professionals at the Antarctic Heritage Trust, and IAATO was
undertaken over a period of more than six months.
Extensive editorial improvements to the structure, organisation and
clarity of the text have been made, in particular through:
the addition of an Introduction;
clarification of Aims and Objectives (Section 2);
elaboration of Management Activities in more detail (Section 3);
restructuring the Description of the Area (Section 6). Incorrect
coordinates that were cited in Section 6 for the northwest and
northeast boundary corners have been corrected;
elimination of duplicative text in the sections relating to Access to
the Area (Section 6(ii) and Section 7(ii)), and the addition of
important policy detail on access to Section 7(ii);
clarifications about structures within and near the Areas (Section
6(iii));
focus of information on other protected areas in proximity that are
relevant to the historic values of the site (Section 6(iv));
edits to General Permit Conditions (Section 7(i)) so these are
consistent with wording used in other recent ASPA plans;
provision of more specific detail on the conditions of access to the
Area, including on pedestrian, vehicle, small boat and aircraft
access, and for use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
within the Area (Section 7(ii));
improvement in the clarity of limits to the numbers of people that
are permitted within the ASPA at any given time (Section 7(ii));
reorganisation of the Code of Conduct (Section 7(iii)) and clarifying
that it is mandatory so that items of greater importance appear
earlier in the list, the potential for fire in the historic huts being of
greatest concern. Use of selfie sticks inside huts has recently
emerged as a concern because of their potential to knock delicate
artefacts within a confined space, and this item has been added to
the Code;
strengthening provisions on the import of materials and organisms
into the ASPAs, consistent with provisions made in other ASPAs and
in the CEP Non-native Species Manual (2019) (Section 7(vi));
clarification when materials for heritage purposes may be
introduced into the Area (Section 7 (vii));
clarification of the conditions under which materials may be
removed, in particular those that pose a threat to the historic values
of the site, and that where items may be removed for conservation
purposes their return is the preferred outcome unless they are at
risk of being damaged or destroyed (Section 7(viii));
clarification of measures necessary to meet the aims of the
Management Plan (Section 7(x)), in particular that people
responsible for managing site visits must be trained to be capable of
fulfilling their roles and that they must actively monitor activities
and take actions to correct any behaviour that is not in compliance
with the Management Plan;
addition of a brief list of supporting documentation and a list of
boundary coordinates (Section 8).
Maps to support the management plans were improved.
Revisions to the management plan attached to this Working Paper
have been extensive, and have involved detailed review and
discussions by stakeholders, and in particular among national
programmes operating in the region, with the Antarctic Heritage
Trust and IAATO. However, New Zealand has classified the
revisions as ‘minor’ because matters of critical policy substance,
such as the values protected by the site, the policies on numbers of
visitors allowed, activities that are allowed, the conditions of
access, and the boundary configuration have not changed.
