Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
Proposed Scott Base Redevelopment
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
Proposed Scott Base Redevelopment
A working paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been
prepared by Antarctica New Zealand for the proposed Scott Base
Redevelopment and replacement of the Ross Island Wind Energy
network. The draft CEE was prepared following the requirements of
Article 3, Annex I to The Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty. The Non-Technical Summary is attached as
Annex A to this Working Paper.
The draft CEE considers the proposed construction and logistics
activities, the potential environmental impacts and proposed
mitigation and monitoring measures and concluded that the
proposed activities are likely to have more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.
Circulation and translation of the CEE
New Zealand has circulated of the draft CEE to the Parties to the
Protocol. It was made available by Antarctica New Zealand on 15
February 2021 from Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation |
Antarctica New Zealand (antarcticanz.govt.nz). Notification of the
report was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and was also
circulated by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (through CEP Circular
5/2021).
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration
of Draft CEEs, an Intersessional Contact Group was established,
convened by Spain, to review the draft CEE. ICG correspondence is
available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP discussion
forum. New Zealand is grateful to all participants of the ICG and
will address all comments when producing the final CEE.
CEE findings
The draft CEE has been prepared to assess the potential
environmental impacts associated with the proposed Scott Base
Redevelopment and replacement of the Ross Island Wind Energy
network.
The proposed activities are required because the current Scott Base
buildings, facilities and associated infrastructure including the wind
farm, are reaching the end of their functional life and safety and
environmental risks are escalating.
It is proposed to replace the existing Scott Base with a full new
station at the same location on Pram Point, Ross Island. The Scott
Base Redevelopment proposes the deconstruction and removal of
the existing Scott Base. The new station is proposed to be fully
constructed in New Zealand and shipped as modules in a single
voyage on a large vessel, to be assembled again once on Pram
Point. The proposed Scott Base is designed to be more efficient,
resilient, and sustainable in order to provide a safe and healthy
environment for its occupants and support the New Zealand science
programme for the next 50 years. The Ross Island Wind Energy
network replacement proposes two options. The second and
preferred option is to install four new turbines on the existing
Crater Hill site, to supply 98% of the energy demand.
Pram Point and Crater Hill have been the site of scientific and
operational activities since 1957. They are representative of an ice-
free environment that has been the receptor of significant and
ongoing human impacts for more than 60 years and the terrestrial
and nearshore marine environments are well understood.
The draft CEE presents a full Environmental Impact Assessment of
the proposed activities. The assessment identifies a range of direct,
indirect and cumulative impacts on environmental receptors. The
most significant potential impacts identified are the release of
greenhouse gases contributing to global climate change;
changes to the physical landscape, to watercourses and meltwater
pathways and disturbance of the permafrost; physical damage,
destruction and modification in the distribution, abundance or
biodiversity of terrestrial flora and micro fauna; and contamination
of the nearshore marine environment and smothering of the
nearshore biota from increased sediment discharges. Mitigation
measures are proposed, ranging from the design and location of the
proposed Scott Base, to construction methodology and on-site
practices.
Following the comprehensive assessment of the proposed activities
and associated mitigation measures, it is concluded that the
proposed activities are likely to have more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. The draft CEE
concludes that this level of impact is considered acceptable, in light
of the positive safety, environmental and scientific support
improvements that the proposed activities will deliver.
Response to ICG
New Zealand is grateful to Spain for convening the ICG, and to all
ICG participants for their constructive comments on the draft CEE.
Comments raised by the ICG process, and any additional comments
made during discussions at CEP XXIII, will be addressed in the final
CEE.
Annex A
Non-technical summary
Introduction
This draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been
prepared by Antarctica New Zealand to assess the potential
environmental impacts associated with the proposed Scott Base
Redevelopment and replacement of the Ross Island Wind Energy
network. The proposed activities are required because the current
Scott Base buildings, facilities and associated infrastructure are
reaching the end of their functional life and safety and
environmental risks are escalating.
The three wind turbines of the Ross Island Wind Energy network
have a design capacity of 990kW and an end of life period of 2030.
The current Ross Island Wind Energy network was developed to
supply renewable energy to the existing station and infrastructure.
Energy modelling for the proposed Scott Base indicates that the
total energy load is higher than the current Scott Base energy load.
Therefore, replacement of the existing Ross Island Wind Energy
network, in conjunction with the Scott Base Redevelopment, is
proposed in order to optimise and utilise logistics and construction
resources. The larger design capacity will support the increased
energy load of the proposed Scott Base and provide more renewable
energy for Ross Island (both Scott Base and McMurdo Station
(United States)).
This draft CEE has been prepared following the requirements of
Article 3, Annex I to The Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty, the Revised Guidelines for Environmental
Impact Assessments in Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2016)) and
applicable New Zealand legislation.
The scope of this draft CEE includes two main components:
The Scott Base Redevelopment; and
The Ross Island Wind Energy network replacement.
Description of the proposed activities
The Scott Base Redevelopment involves the full replacement of the
existing Scott Base with a new station. The site for the proposed
activities is Pram Point, where the current station is located. The
Scott Base Redevelopment proposes the deconstruction and removal
of the existing Scott Base. Civil works including bulk earthworks are
proposed to prepare the site and improve the safety of operations
on the Scott Base to McMurdo Station road. Foundation and
enabling works, including the relocation of some Long-Term
Science experiments are also part of the proposed activities.
The new station is proposed to be fully constructed in New Zealand
and shipped as modules in a single voyage on a large vessel, to be
assembled again once on Pram Point. The proposal includes a
temporary wharf consisting of bollards and cantilevered frames to
accommodate the vessel at Pram Point. A temporary station, also on
Pram Point, is proposed to support both the Scott Base
Redevelopment and New Zealand’s scientific and environmental
protection programmes during the proposed activities. The
proposed Scott Base is designed to be more efficient, resilient, and
sustainable in order to provide a safe and healthy environment for
its occupants and support the New Zealand science programme for
the next 50 years.
The Ross Island Wind Energy network replacement was developed
to the feasibility stage at the time of preparing this draft CEE with
two options under investigation. The first option is to install three
new turbines to supply 80% of the proposed Scott Base’s energy
demand. The second and preferred option is to install four new
turbines to supply 98% of the demand. Both options are supported
by a battery energy storage system to provide continuous energy in
periods of low wind. The proposed activities place the new wind
turbines on Crater Hill, where the current turbines are located. The
proposed activities include the removal of the existing turbines and
their foundations and their replacement with three or four larger
wind turbines, placed on new foundations. The replacement of all
ancillary plant (e.g. cabling, frequency converter, electrical
substation) is also proposed.
The temporal scope for the Scott Base Redevelopment begins in the
austral summer of 2021/22 until the end of the 2026/27 austral
summer. The Ross Island Wind Energy network replacement is
proposed to begin in the austral summer of 2023/24 until the
austral summer of 2025/26.
The seasonal activities for the proposed project are:
Season 0 (2021/22) – Testing of foundation design and completion
of Long-Term Science relocation;
Season 1 (2022/23) – Shipping and staging of equipment and plant,
temporary station site preparations, prepare staging areas,
commencing construction of new buildings in New Zealand;
Season 2 (2023/24) – Construction of a temporary base, Scott Base
to McMurdo road realignment, water and wastewater intake and
outlet structures installation, bulk fuel tank platform establishment
and the preparation and piling for a temporary wharf, construction
of new buildings in New Zealand;
Season 3 (2024/25) – Existing Scott Base decommissioning and
deconstruction, bulk earthworks, piling/foundations, establishment
of a haul road from temporary wharf to building site, temporary
wharf bollard installation and first new wind turbine installation,
construction of new buildings in New Zealand;
Season 4 (2025/26) – Finalise bulk earthworks and haul road,
piling/foundations, decommission existing wind farm, install
remaining turbines and commission new wind farm, install fenders
on temporary wharf, ship new building modules to Pram Point,
install new building modules on foundations, fit out and
recommission new buildings over the winter of 2026; and
Season 5 (2026/27) – Occupy new Scott Base, deconstruct
temporary Scott Base and remaining structures, final earthworks to
finish building access ramps, demobilise plant and containers back
to New Zealand.
Summary of alternatives
The alternative of not proceeding with the Scott Base
Redevelopment was considered at the initiation of the project. The
alternative was discounted because it would result in the closure of
Scott Base, as the critical life support systems and infrastructure at
Scott Base is at the end of its life. Alternatives for the design of the
proposed Scott Base, its location on Pram Point, the type of civil
and mechanical engineering solutions to build and operate the
proposed station, as well as the logistics for the project and the
deconstruction of the existing station were identified and assessed
to identify preferred solutions.
The alternative of not upgrading the wind farm was considered. “Do
nothing” would result in the wind farm being decommissioned after
2030 and Ross Island relying entirely on fossil fuels. The alternative
was discounted because it goes against New Zealand’s commitment
to managing its environmental impacts in Antarctica.
Description of the environment
Pram Point and Crater Hill are representative of an ice-free
environment that has been the receptor of significant and ongoing
human impacts for more than 60 years. Despite extensive ground
disturbance moss, lichen and algae and micro-fauna are found
around Scott Base and the wider Pram Point area. No significant
vegetation has been recorded on Crater Hill. The Pram Point
nearshore marine environment displays high biodiversity, as well as
historical anthropogenic debris in some places. Wildlife is largely
limited to Weddell seals that congregate on the sea ice in front of
Scott Base. No birds breed at Crater Hill but Snow Petrels
(Pagodroma nivea) are occasionally seen there. Antarctic Specially
Protected Area No. 122 Arrival Heights is located near Crater Hill
and Historic Site and Monument No. 75 Hut A (Trans Antarctic
Expedition Hut) is found within the Scott Base footprint. No non-
native species are known to be established in the terrestrial or in
the nearshore marine environment.
Environmental Impact Assessment
This draft CEE presents a full Environmental Impact Assessment of
the proposed activities. The methodology for the impact assessment
is informed by the Guidelines for Environmental Impact
Assessments in Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2016)) and follows a four-
step analysis including:
Identifying the aspects arising from the proposed activities;
Identifying the environmental receptors that may be affected;
Identifying the impacts; and
Assessing the significance of the identified impacts.
The assessment identifies a range of direct, indirect and cumulative
impacts on environmental receptors. The most significant potential
impacts expected to arise from the proposed activities are:
The release of greenhouse gases contributing to global climate
change;
Changes to the physical landscape, to watercourses and meltwater
pathways and disturbance of the permafrost;
Changes to soil quality, release of soil salts and changes of the
depth to ice-cement;
Physical damage, destruction and modification in the distribution,
abundance or biodiversity of terrestrial flora and micro fauna; and
Contamination of the nearshore marine environment and
smothering of the nearshore biota from increased sediment
discharges.
The operation of the proposed Scott Base and wind farm, on
completion of the proposed activities, is expected to result in the
following environmental impacts:
Changes to baseline intrinsic values as a result of the changes in the
appearance of Scott Base and the wind farm; and
Changes in the intensity of potential contamination of the terrestrial
and marine environments from accidental releases of hazardous
substances due to increased volumes of hazardous substances stored
at Scott Base.
In general, the proposed activities are expected to deliver a number
of benefits on the environment including:
Reduced contribution to global climate change thanks to increased
generation of renewable energy and greater efficiency of buildings
and systems of the proposed station;
Reduced contamination of the local marine environment through
best practice wastewater treatment;
Reduced risk of introduction of non-native species with fit-for-
purpose dedicated biosecurity facilities;
Increased ability to support scientific research through improved
lab spaces and better facilities;
Improved resilience supporting New Zealand’s ability to conduct
scientific research safely and efficiently; and
Improved facilities that support the wellbeing and health and safety
of Scott Base’s occupants better than the current station.
Mitigation measures
Preventative mitigation measures were considered at the outset of
the project and integrated into the design of the proposed Scott
Base. In summary, preventative mitigation measures include:
Selecting an existing, highly impacted site, rather than finding a
new, less impacted, site for Scott Base;
Developing and applying a bespoke rating tool to build a
sustainable Antarctic station;
The proposal to upgrade the Ross Island Wind Energy network to
support either 80% or 98% renewable energy use by Scott Base;
Restricting construction and operational activities to the highly
impacted operational area as far
as practicable;
Construction of the proposed station in New Zealand, thereby
minimising the transport of materials and waste between New
Zealand and Antarctica and reducing the build time;
Early engagement of the preferred main contractor with
environmental management requirements;
The utilisation of existing infrastructure to establish a temporary
base; and
A full-time environmental advisor dedicated to the Scott Base
Redevelopment project.
Mitigation measures for the proposed activities are planned to be
delivered through Antarctica New Zealand’s Environmental
Management System and project-specific mitigation and monitoring
measures. A Construction Environmental Management Plan is under
development, supported by a suite of specialised management
plans, including but not limited to waste management,
contaminated land remediation and biosecurity control.
Monitoring programmes
Antarctica New Zealand has established a monitoring programme
that commenced in advance of, and will continue throughout and
beyond the Scott Base Redevelopment, made of three components:
The monitoring programme established as part of this draft CEE;
Monitoring of construction activities, defined through the
Construction Environmental Management Plan and topic-specific
management plans; and
Monitoring through the existing environmental and carbon
management systems as part of the Antarctica New Zealand’s
Environmental Management System.
Gaps in the knowledge
The scope and timeline of the proposed activities are based on
funding being granted in its entirety in the 2021/22 Financial Year.
Should the project’s funding be deferred, or partially granted, this
draft CEE would be reviewed and updated as necessary.
This draft CEE was prepared using the design information known at
the time of drafting. The temporary base and the Ross Island Wind
Energy network replacement were at a feasibility stage only. While
significant departures from the proposed activities described and
assessed in this draft CEE are not anticipated, minor changes to the
final design and delivery of the activities may occur.
The proposed construction and logistics strategies rely on a large
vessel being able to berth at Pram Point. There is a high degree of
confidence in the suitability of the location, with final confirmation
expected in early 2021, after the finalisation of this draft CEE.
Conclusions
Following the comprehensive assessment of the proposed activities
and associated mitigation measures, it is concluded that the
proposed activities are likely to have more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. This draft CEE
concludes that the proposed activities should proceed on the basis
that the positive impacts in terms of improvements to safety,
environmental protection and ability to support science are greater
overall than the negative impacts associated with the proposed
activities.
