Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
Summary
India has conducted review of Management Plan for Antarctic
Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 163, Dakshin Gangotri glacier,
Droning Maud Land. With minor amendments and improve quality
of maps, India recommends that CEP approves the attached
Management Plan.
Background
India introduced a Working Paper at XXV ATCM (WP47) on a draft
management plan for a proposed site of Special Scientific Interest
for Dakshin Gangotri Glacier Snout, Schirmacher Hills, Dronning
Maud Land. The Committee noted that this should be termed an
ASPA rather than SSSI. Accordingly, during XXVI ATCM India
submitted a draft management plan for Antarctica Specially
Protected Area (XXVI ATCM/WP-38) and thereafter resubmitted
revised management plan during XXVII-ATCM (WP 33). The
management plan was adopted by Measure 2 (2005) and designated
ASPA 163 during XXVIII ATCM (WP 25). This Management Plan
was further reviewed after five years with minor changes, while
submitted to XXXIII-ATCM (WP055 rev1.) and adopted under
Measure 12 (2010). Thereafter Management Plan reviewed after
five years and with minor changes submitted to XXXVIII-ATCM (WP
42) and then adopted under Measure 15 (2015).
ASPA-163 is situated west of Maitri station in Shirmacher Hills,
Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. In accordance with Annex V
to the Madrid Protocol and the “Revised Guide to the Preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
“appended to Resolution 2 (2011), Management Plan is further
reviewed and being submitted. Each year, observational visits have
been made to the area since 2015. No significant changes to the
plan have been made, boundaries of the plan are not changed.
Minor changes to the existing management plan include:
6(i) Description of the Area: Recent observations on Glacier retreat
have been introduced.
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms, which can be brought
into the Area: Text added on use of Non-native Species manual
Map 2, Map 3, Map4 and Map 5: Replaced with better resolution
and colour enhanced map
Map 6: Updated with latest image and named as Figure 2
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection and further to be adopted
by ATCM.
ASPA No. 163 : Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 163
First designation:
Measure 3 (2005)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 3 (2005)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 12 (2010)
Measure 15 (2015)
Current management plan:
Measure 15 (2015).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes, in graphics (Map2, Map3, Map 4 and Map 5) and Map 6 is
replaced with name Figure 2
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The Supporting Information has been updated.
The following text has been added under section
7(i) Access to and movement within or over the Area: ‘Overflight of
bird colonies within the Area by RPAS shall not be permitted unless
for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a
permit issued by an appropriate national authority’.
6(i) Description of the Area: Recent observations on Glacier retreat
have been introduced
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area? Yes/No
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? Yes/No
(If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant
CCAMLR Final Report should be given)
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 [2008])? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental
Domain should be noted here).
Domain I and Domain L
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 [2012])? Yes/No
(If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here).
ACBR 6 Dronning Maud Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 [2015]) represented by the ASPA? Yes/No (If
yes, the Important Bird Area[s] should be noted here.)
N/A
