Updating requirements for Information Exchange on national
expeditions
Updating requirements for Information Exchange
on national expeditions
Working Paper submitted by the United States and Italy
Abstract
The United States proposes revisions to the information Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties (CPs) submit to the Treaty’s Electronic
Information Exchange System (EIES) regarding their national
expeditions. Additionally, we strongly encourage all CPs to provide
all requested information to the EIES.
Introduction
The Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol have
fundamental information sharing requirements, as elaborated in
Antarctic Treaty Articles III and VII, and Environmental Protocol
Article 17 and Annex I. The ATCM decided via Decision 4 (2012)
that CPs would use the EIES to exchange information in the most
efficient and timely manner possible, and in accordance with the
Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. The Annex to Decision 4
(2012) provides details about the information that CPs agreed to
provide. This Annex has been updated four times, with the most
recent update approved at ATCM XLII (Prague) via Decision 7
(2019) as proposed by Argentina in WP66. The updates to the
Decision 4 (2012) Annex demonstrate the importance that CPs
place on information sharing and that, as the agreed upon
implementation tool, the EIES can and should be periodically
refined. Previous updates to the Decision 4 (2012) Annex focused
on information exchange related to non-governmental expeditions.
This proposed update serves as a complementary refinement by
focusing on national expedition information.
CPs input information to the EIES via a password-protected portal
at https://www.ats.aq/e/exchange-requirements.html in one of
three reports: Pre-Season (upcoming season, preferably by October
1), Annual (previous season by October 1), and Permanent
Information (at any time). The most recent two seasons of those
three reports are available to the public at Latest Reports. The
Annual Report for many years is available in the Archives. The
information submitted by the CPs only becomes available to other
CPs and the public when the CPs authorize it. The Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat provides technical assistance for EIES.
It is noted that for the EIES to serve its intended functions and for
Parties to meet relevant Treaty obligations, it is important that all
CPs consistently and timely report required information. The United
States strongly encourages all CPs to provide all requested
information to the EIES specified above and as agreed in Decision 4
(2012) and subsequent decisions.
Proposal
The United States proposes a number of updates to the Annex to
Decision 7 (2019) in order to facilitate the input and usage of
information concerning national expeditions in the EIES. In addition
to the brief explanation of the proposed changes below, a marked-
up version of the Annex is attached to this working paper.
For Section 1.1 Pre-Season “Operational information”, the United
States proposes:
1.1.B “Vessels”: replacing “vessels” with “ships” to align the EIES
with the Treaty text and clarify that these are non-military ships;
1.1.C “Aircraft”: eliminating the field for reporting intracontinental
and local helicopter flights and clarify that these are non-military
aircraft;
1.1.E “Military”: streamlining information about the personnel in
expeditions, clarifying that armaments on all military personnel and
equipment should be reported, adding guidance on the information
that should be provided about military equipment located in the
Antarctic Treaty area, and adding the same fields for military ships
and aircraft as exist in 1.1.B and 1.1.C for non-military ships and
aircraft.
For Section 3 “Permanent Information”, the United States proposes:
3.2 “Operational Information”: Editing this field to have similar
format and information as proposed in the Pre-Season report,
including delineating non-military and military vehicles and
equipment.
