Suggested guidelines for the de-designation of Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (ASPA)
Suggested guidelines for the de-designation of Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (ASPA)
Working Paper submitted by Norway, Australia, China, New
Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States
Summary
This Working Paper with its attachment puts forward a proposal for
guidelines for the de-designation of Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas (ASPAs). Norway, Australia, China, New Zealand, the United
Kingdom and the United States propose that the CEP endorses these
guidelines for ASPA de-designation for use and guidance by
Members and the Committee. It is also suggested that these
guidelines be included as part of the package of guidance material
to be considered in the upcoming programme of work to review and
rationalise the existing protected area guidance materials.
1. Background
The Protocol does not include provisions that expressly address de-
designation of ASPAs, but nor does it actively disallow such a
process. Annex V to the Protocol requires that each ASPA must have
a management plan identifying a period of designation, if any
(Article 5.3(d)). Management plans must undergo periodic review
(Article 6.3), and can be amended or revoked (Article 6.4). While
these provisions indicate the option for ASPAs to be time-limited or
de-designated, Annex V does not outline a de-designation
procedure. Still, as of today all ASPAs have been designated for an
“indefinite” period.
In recent years, the Committee has been asked to consider proposals
to de-designate ASPAs including the following:
ASPA 107: Emperor Island, Dion Island – refer to discussion
reflected in para. 133-137 of the final report from CEP XIX
ASPA 118: Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land –
amalgamated into ASPA 175 (Measure 13 (2014))
ASPA 130: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island –
amalgamated into ASPA 175 (Measure 13 (2014))
ASPA 114: Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands – the
values were no longer there (Measure 16 (2014))
ASPA 144: Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South
Shetland Islands – pending.
The Committee has agreed on the importance of the Antarctic
protected area system being dynamic but has also recognised that
de-designations should not be taken lightly, and that rigorous
consideration is required.
The Committee has welcomed Norway’s stated intention to develop
suggested guidance/criteria for de-designating ASPAs, first raised as
a potential need at the meeting of the Committee in 2014, and as
subsequently reflected in the Five-Year Work Plan adopted by CEP
XX (2017).
At CEP XXI, Norway advised that it was continuing to work on the
guidance/criteria. At CEP XXII, in cooperation with Australia, New
Zealand and the United Kingdom, it brought forward a proposal for
consideration. The Committee welcomed the proposal and
emphasised the importance of discussing and formulating criteria
for the de-designation of protected areas. The Committee agreed
that some further work
on the guidance/criteria was required and welcomed the offer from
Norway to continue to lead the intersessional work with the aim to
report back to the CEP XXIII.
On the basis of further intersessional work, Norway, Australia,
China, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States
have refined the proposal and put forward guidelines for de-
designation of ASPAs for the consideration of the Committee.
2. Intentions with the guidelines for de-designation of Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPA)
The guidelines are intended to be used by Parties and the CEP as
the basis for the consideration of the de-designation of ASPAs. The
decision to advise the ATCM to de-designate an ASPA is a decision
to be made by the CEP. Any such decision by the CEP needs to be
made on the basis of solid assessment and consideration by one or
more Parties. These guidelines provide Parties with the basis for
such an assessment process, and the CEP with guidance on the
procedures for any de-designation consideration. With guidelines as
suggested, the CEP can ensure a coherent and consistent process in
considering any de-designation proposals.
3. Recommendation
Norway, Australia, China, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and
the United States propose that the CEP:
endorse the guidelines for ASPA de-designation and make use of
them when considering any future de-designation processes; and
include these guidelines as part of the package of guidance material
to be considered in the upcoming programme of work to review and
rationalise the existing protected area guidance materials.
Attachment: Suggested guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs
