





Annual Report Pursuant to the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report Pursuant to the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty


1. Notification of measures taken pursuant to Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the Protocol
In Japan, the Law relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica (Antarctic Environment Law) entered into force on 14th January 1998, on the same day when the Protocol itself entered into force.  Since then, Japan has worked for the full implementation of the Protocol through the Antarctic Environment Law.  According to the Antarctic Environment Law, in principle, no person shall engage in any activity in Antarctica other than Antarctic Activity Plan that has been certified by the Minister of the Environment, Japan.
The Government of Japan worked to implement the Measures, revised management plans for ASPA 9 and 19, as well as the new HSM, adopted at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) held in New Delhi, through revising the Ministerial Ordinance of the Antarctic Environment Law.    
The Government of Japan issued and distributed pamphlets, and set upwebsite to provide Japanese citizens of information on natural features, legal procedures required to visit Antarctica, the history of Japanese Antarctic Research and alike.  
2. Contingency Plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol
Based on the COMNAP Guideline, Japan adopted the Oil Spill Contingency Plan in 1996 which covers its activities at the Syowa Station.  Information regarding this plan can be obtained from:
Environment Planning Unit, Planning Section, Office of Polar Expeditions, 
National Institute of Polar Research(NIPR)
1-9-10 Kaga, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8515,
JAPAN 
Tel : +81-3-3962-0548
3. Circulation of Information pursuant to Article 6(1) of Annex I to the Protocol 
3-1. Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures
According to the Antarctic Environment Law, no person shall engage in any activity in Antarctica other than Antarctic Activities that has been certified by the Minister of the Environment as satisfying the conditions to protect the Environment in Antarctica in accordance with Annex I of the Environmental Protocol (so called the ‘Certification System’).  Engaging in an Antarctic Activities without a certification from the Minister of the Environment is an offence carrying liability to a fine.
Information regarding the Certification System can be obtained from:

Antarctic Section, Global Environment Issues Division, Global Environment Bureau
Ministry of the Environment  
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 100-8975
JAPAN
Tel : +81-3-3581-3351(#6748) 
E-mail: antarctic@env.go.jp

3-2. List of Initial Environmental Evaluation
The following Initial Environmental Evaluation was prepared in accordance with Article 2 (2) of Annex I to the Protocol.
Supervisor: The Director General of Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(The Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology)
Activity: Civil engineering and construction works
Location: Syowa Station
3-3. Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with  Article 2(2) and (5) of Annex I to the Protocol
During the 2007/2008 season, no significant information has been obtained from monitoring procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I.
3-4. Comprehensive Environmental Evaluatins
During the 2007/2008 season, no activity requiring a comprehensive Environmental Evauation was planned .
4. Report pursuant to Article 6(2) of Annex II to the Protocol 
Permits issued under Annex II for the 2007/2008 season are noted in the table in Appendix 1.
5. Report pursuant to Article 9(1) of Annex III to the Protocol
5-1. Waste Management Plan
The Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) introduced the Code of Conduct on Waste Management, and JARE manages the wastes at the Syowa Station in accrodance with it. Some combustible wastes are incinerated and sewage and grey water are treated by the biological treatment plant before released into the ocean.  In addition, ash, sludge and other wastes are brought back to Japan.
Large wastes such as snow vehicles and building materials left at Syowa Station are also brought back to Japan according to the 4 year-Clean-up Operation Plan from 2004 to 2008. 
A Comprehensive Waste Manegement Plan which fully meets the requirment pursuant to Article 8 (2)(a)to(d) of Annex III, as well as inventories of past activities, are under preparation. 

5-2. Report of Information regarding implementation of the Waste Management Plan
As shown in Appendix 2, during the 2007/2008 season, JARE treated the wastes in accordance with the waste disposal classification system described in Article 8(1) of Annex III.  
6. Report pursuant to Article 10(2) of AnnexV to the Protocol 
Permits issued under Annex V for the 2007/2008 season are listed in the table in Appendix 3.

