





Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants 
Notes on a Request from the Stockholm Convention






Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants 
Notes on a Request from the Stockholm Convention

Introduction 
The Conference of the Parties to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) has requested its Secretariat to bring the work undertaken under the Convention to the attention of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and to request assistance of its Parties and others who are members of the Antarctic Treaty “to provide data on persistent organic pollutants in the Antarctic through their respective regional organization group.”
The above mentioned request is contained in a letter addressed by the Executive Secretary to the Stockholm Convention, Donald Cooper, to the Executive Secretary of the Antarctic Treaty, Jan Huber. The letter has been conveyed by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty Parties and also to the Chairman of the Committee for Environmental Protection Dr. Neil Gilbert who has suggested that the CEP consider the request from the Secretariat of the Stockholm Convention for information on Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants under Item 9 of its Agenda: “Environmental Monitoring and Reporting”.
In the past, Chilean Delegations to Antarctic Treaty Meetings provided an informative review on international treaties, agreements and activities whose scope and substance could be of interest to the ATCMs. Interaction with legal instruments of global application which contain provisions of great relevance to Antarctica: UNCLOS, the Basel Convention, the 1972 London Convention, MARPOL 73/78, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), the Climate Change Framework Convention and the Biodiversity Convention, among other relevant instruments, have been reviewed in aspects concerning or considered relevant to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATCM XIX-WP 20 & ATCM XX-WP 30). In order to update those contributions, international agreements with a substantial relationship and/or connection to the Madrid Protocol should continue to be reviewed.
The request made by the Parties to the Stockholm Convention demands that the Antarctic Treaty Parties, acting as a “regional group” provide data on persistent organic pollutants in the Antarctic. In some ways the Antarctic and Arctic polar regions can both be considered subject to special regional rules of environmental protection. In particular, the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol apply to a defined area with special provisions for dependent and associated ecosystems. However, compliance with the principles and rules of the Antarctic special legal and political regime is not bound by the constraints of its Area of Application. And the protection of the Antarctic Environment and its dependent and associate ecosystems cannot be appropriately implemented without taking into consideration the interdependence of terrestrial and marine ecosystems with the surrounding atmosphere. 
 The Antarctic Environment
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have recognized that prime responsibility for Antarctic matters, including protection of the Antarctic environment, lies with States active in the area which are Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. They have also stated that measures adopted by them should be consistent with the interests of all mankind, that they were committed to exercise appropriate controls with respect to harmful environmental effects which activities and uses of the Antarctic Treaty Area may have, and that they shall continue to monitor changes in the Antarctic environment, irrespective of their cause, and to exercise their responsibility for informing the world community of any significant changes caused by man’s activities outside the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
Since the discovery of the depletion of the ozone layer, awareness of the importance of Antarctica and the value of scientific research undertaken in the Antarctic has increased as the international community becomes increasingly aware of the contribution Antarctica can make to understanding of global phenomena.  The Declaration on the promotion of international scientific effort (XV-14); and its follow-up Recommendation XV-15, The Declaration on the Ozone Layer and Climatic Change also made at the XV ATCM; Recommendations XIII-5 and XV-16, on Facilitation of scientific research: comparability and accessibility of Antarctic Scientific Data; the proclamation of the Decade of Antarctic Scientific Cooperation (1992-2002); the Edinburgh Declaration on the International Polar Year (2006) are some outstanding examples of the commitment of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to international scientific cooperation.
The Stockholm Convention 
On the other hand, the 2001 Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants regulates the production, use and transboundary movement of hazardous chemicals known as Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). These are chemicals that remain intact in the environment for long periods, become widely distributed geographically, accumulate in the tissue of living organisms and are toxic to humans and wildlife. The Convention that came into force on 17th  May 2004 requires State Parties to prohibit and/or take the necessary action to eliminate the production and use of chemicals listed in Annex A to the Convention, and eventually restrict the use of other harmful chemicals, such as DDT, listed in its Annex B. In order to understand the objective of the Convention and its relevance to the Antarctic Environment, it is important to focus on its goal of gradual reduction and final elimination of the release of POPs into the environment. Under its Article 16, Parties are required to evaluate the effectiveness of the Convention periodically, and develop procedures to monitor the presence of chemicals controlled under the Convention and trends in their environmental levels.
The implementation Plan to that end will be organized and implemented regionally by five regional organization groups (ROGS) none of which specifically include Antarctica. On that basis, the Parties to the Stockholm Convention wish to establish a long term framework for POPs monitoring in Antarctica “that ideally capitalizes on the existing research programmes undertaken among Parties to the Antarctic Consultative Meeting”. Such Parties would play the role of an additional ROG which would contribute from the outside for the purposes of effectiveness evaluation of the Stockholm Convention.
Monitoring Changes in The Antarctic Environment
The objective of the Madrid Protocol, which supplements the Antarctic Treaty, without modifying or amending its provisions, is the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. Such goal is based upon the conviction that the systematic and comprehensive approach taken by the Protocol is “in the interest of mankind as a whole”. The comprehensive approach specifically requires activities in Antarctica to avoid adverse effects on climate or weather patterns; air or water quality; changes in atmospheric, terrestrial, glacial or marine environments; changes in fauna and flora;  further jeopardy to endangered species; and degradation or substantial risk to areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance.
The Chair of COMNAP has proposed that national Antarctic programmes envisage the possibility of  strengthening the linkages among their respective monitoring activities, including observatories, installations, antennas, laboratories, and other structures and facilities dedicated to monitoring projects. Better knowledge of their respective monitoring activities is at the heart of the promotion of international scientific cooperation, in particular Recommendation XV-15 which “recognizes the scientific importance of environmental monitoring programme in the broadest sense and that without these programmes many advances in Antarctic science which are of global significance would not be possible”. A framework for integrated monitoring would necessarily include the parameters mentioned by Article 3 of the Environmental Protocol as adverse effects, changes, further jeopardy and degradation or substantial risk to Antarctic areas   of  special significance. 
These parameters encompass most if not all of the objectives of environmental conventions and other instruments of global significance. While it is obvious that all States must cooperate to conserve nature through common activities and relevant actions, and implement the applicable international provisions to protect the global environment, division of labour to that end between independent treaties and agreements is not a simple matter. The desire by the Parties to the Stockholm Convention to integrate into their procedures of data gathering and effectiveness evaluation the research undertaken by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties is understandable but the pattern of cooperation considered to that end does not seem entirely appropriate.
The protection of the Antarctic Environment is the primary responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the release of POPs into the environment of Antarctica is incompatible with the comprehensive approach of the Protocol; therefore the obligation to monitor the introduction of these substances is vested upon the Parties to the Protocol. Monitoring changes in soil, water and atmosphere is generally linked to activities in the Treaty area under article 3, but early detection of outside impacts is also included in paragraph 2 e). Nevertheless, such early detection is not feasible without cooperation with other Parties, organizations and agreements that have developed goals, rules, strategies and practices to cope with similar environmental challenges. In this context, it is important to recall the concept of “information exchange” enshrined in the Stockholm Declaration and by Principle 9 of the Rio Declaration which support exchanges of scientific and technical knowledge, and the more encompassing nature of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty when interpreted in the light of the reference in the Preamble to the “interests of science and the progress of all mankind”. 
Preliminary Conclusion 
The broad obligations acquired by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol, under the provisions of both instruments, cannot be satisfactorily complied without reference to the complex web of international agreements which seek similar or supplementary objectives. Articles 4, 5 and 6 of the Protocol seek consultation and cooperation having regard only to other instruments within the ATS or eventually cooperation with other Parties which may exercise jurisdiction in areas adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty Area. On the other hand, application of Article 3 of the Antarctic Treaty, paragraph 2, may be subject to constructive interpretation when, in addition to the Specialized Agencies of the United Nations, every encouragement shall be given also to the establishment of co-operative working relations with “other international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica”. In addition to the CEP, the ATCM Working Group for Institutional and Legal Affairs could consider the terms of a possible cooperation with the Parties of the Stockholm Convention. 

