





Helicopter accident and air-borne medical evacuations during German summer season activities






Helicopter accident and air-borne medical evacuations
during German summer season activities
1. Introduction
During summer season 2007/2008 the Alfred Wegener Institute for Marine and Polar Research (AWI) asked the community for logistic support and assistance to perform two medical evacuations. The first medevac concerned a crew member on board MV Naja Arctica in January 2008. The ship was carrying the cargo for the construction of the Neumayer Station III. The second action concerned the evacuation after the crash of one helicopter of RV Polarstern on the Ekström Ice Shelf in the beginning of March 2008. 
2. Helicopter accident and subsequent medical evacuation
2.1 	Helicopter accident 
On 02 March 2008 at 0820 UTC one of the helicopters (BO 105 CBS4) of RV Polarstern crashed on the Ekström Ice Shelf (70°38.19’S, 008°11.70’W) about 1.5 nm east of the German Neumayer Station II. 
The helicopter took off from RV Polarstern to fly three passengers of her scientific staff to Neumayer station. The injured helicopter technician managed to activate the emergency call, which was firstly received at Neumayer station. Rescue and recovery were immediately organised by the staff of Neumayer station and members of the Neumayer III construction team and a first statement of facts was given to RV Polarstern.
The accident left two persons dead - the pilot and one passenger - and three seriously injured - the helicopter technician and the other two passengers. By 1015 UTC all injured persons were transported back to RV Polarstern by the second ship’s helicopter. Medical treatment started immediately in the ship's hospital. The medical status of the patients became stable but the physicians recommended early evacuation.
RV Polarstern was on her 24th Antarctic expedition (ANT XXIV-leg 3). During expeditions in polar waters two helicopters are operated as well for scientific and logistic purposes and as to support navigation in ice covered waters. Beside the scientific program RV Polarstern was tasked to call for Atka Bay in order to carry provisions and fuel to Neumayer Station II for the coming winter season. Just after beginning of unloading the first helicopter flight started for Neumayer station; this flight ended up in the accident.
All necessary information on the accident, casualties and medical status of the three injured persons were forwarded to the relevant institutions in France (LOCEAN), The Netherlands (NIOZ) and Germany (AWI) and families the same day. 
On 03 March, a commemoration ceremony was conducted at AWI in Bremerhaven followed by a memorial service on board RV Polarstern in the evening. About 130 persons, the scientists and crew, the staff of Neumayer Station II and the construction team of Neumayer Station III joined in commemoration of their friends and colleagues, who lost their lives in this accident.
        2.2 Emergency management and air-borne medical evacuation
Medical evacuation from Antarctica to Cape Town
In parallel to the on site measures an emergency task force was formed at AWI and the relevant national programs were informed on the accident. AWI emergency task force requested for help and support to jointly organise urgent medical evacuation. This operation was coordinated within the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (Dromlan) by the Dromlan aircraft operator Antarctic Logistics Centre International (Alci) and the agency Meihuizen International in Cape Town.
The schedule for the regular intercontinental Dromlan flight (D10) planned for beginning of March was rearranged to additionally accommodate the urgent medevac flight of the three injured and one escort physician as well as to include the transport of the two victims from Neumayer Station via Runway Novo to Cape Town. In addition two persons of the rescue and recovery group asked for immediate return, because of psychological stress. 
Alci rearranged the feeder flight schedules of the two aircraft BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) and BT-67 (Lidia C-GEAI) in consultation with the other Dromlan parties. The evacuation mission started two days later on 4 March. In the afternoon the regularly scheduled flight with 8 Pax and cargo was performed by the aircraft BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) from Neumayer to Runway Novo. On 5 March the IL-76TD aircraft took off from Cape Town at 0739 UTC and landed at Runway Novo at 1322 UTC. Just after the IL-76TD take off the BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) departed from Runway Novo for destination Neumayer about one hour later at 0846 UTC. Despite of unstable weather conditions at Neumayer the flight weather forecast was very precise and thus able to guide the aircraft for landing at 1113 UTC during a short interval of good weather. After landing the three patients were transported by vehicle over approximately 20 km from RV Polarstern to the runway at Neumayer. At 1306 UTC the aircraft was ready for take off with three patients and the escort physician on board. After landing at Runway Novo the group was directly accommodated on board the IL-76TD. The take off was at 1755 UTC and landing in Cape Town at 2323 UTC. 
The patients were safely delivered to the Milnerton hospital in Cape Town. Medical treatment was continued  and advice was further given by the escort physician from Neumayer station.
Repatriation from Cape Town to home destinations
The further arrangements for medical treatment in Cape Town and the repatriation flight of the injured persons were coordinated by the operator of the Polarstern helicopters, Heli Service International GmbH (Bremerhaven) in cooperation with the relevant national insurance companies. Local arrangements were supported by the escorting physician of AWI and the agency Meihuizen International. The patients recovered very well. After four days only the repatriation was possible from the medical point of view. After some coordination work a joint repatriation flight took place as requested by the escort physician with the commercial airline KLM on 12 March, arrival at Schipohl airport (Amsterdam) at 1110 LT on 12 March.
Representatives from AWI and NIOZ as well as relatives and friends came and met the group. It was very important having this last coming together and – once again – to jointly overcome the burden of the accident. Afterwards the different groups departed from Schipohl airport to the home destinations.
2.3 	Accident investigation and lessons learnt
Accident investigation
The German Federal Bureau of Aircraft Accidents Investigation (BFU) was informed on the helicopter crash in parallel during the organization and performance of medical evacuation. The statement of facts and testimonies were recorded and forwarded. As the BFU decided not to perform an on-site investigation all parts of the crashed helicopter were removed from the accident site and loaded on board of RV Polarstern. After return to Bremerhaven the broken helicopter pieces were forwarded for further investigation to BFU on 20 May.
The German Federal Bureau of Aircraft Accidents Investigation (BFU) issued a preliminary status report in May 2008 (http://www.bfu-web.de/ Publikationen – Bulletins – Bulletin0803 – pp 29-30). This preliminary report summarizes the evaluation of statement of facts, records of rescue and recovery measures, testimonies, video records and photos made by the three passengers during the flight, documents on the pilot´s qualification and technical certifications of the helicopter as well as weather and visibility conditions. At present the cause of the accident is not finally clear. A technical reason can not be excluded yet. However, the status report admits as possible that the pilot did not strictly observe the flight regulations for helicopter missions on board RV Polarstern. The investigations are still ongoing. The final report by BFU (German and English) is anticipated by March 2009.
Lessons learnt
At the current stage of investigation the following items need further consideration by the Treaty parties and might be helpful to improve the performance of polar operations or emergency management:
    • After-accident treatment of psychological stress experienced by rescue and recovery personnel and by the staff remaining at the station needs more attention
    • Although not mandatory for this type of helicopter – the installation of flight recorders should be technically checked in order to easier indentify technical reasons in case of an accident
    • Different policies of insurance companies might cause additional problems in coordination and performance of evacuation activities
    • Decreasing risk awareness particularly with regard to experienced personnel working in the field, at stations and at air missions
3. Air – borne medical evacuation from MV Naja Arctica
AWI chartered the 1A ice-classed Danish MV Naja Arctica (Royal Arctic Line A/S, Nuuk, Greenland), a ship which is employed in the Denmark-Greenland trade during most of the year, for transport of the new Neumayer Station III and construction equipment from Bremerhaven to Atka Bay in the Antarctic. The ship left Bremerhaven with 3,494 tons resp. 16,680 m3 (incl. 258 TEU containers) of cargo and arrived the area on 18 December 2007. Because of heavy sea and pack ice conditions the unloading was delayed by about four weeks. The unloading site at the Ekström Ice Shelf became accessible after a seven day ice breaking operation by RV Polarstern on 16 January 2008. Unloading began immediately and continued the following days. 
On 19 January one crew member got ill and medical assistance was requested from the physician at Neumayer Station II. After several medical examinations indications of a stroke were evident. As further necessary investigations could not be done in Antarctica the master of the ship agreed for medical evacuation. AWI informed Alci and the South African station SANAE IV on the medical emergency on board the ship.
On 21 January the MV Naja Arctica left the shelf ice edge because of heavy drifting ice. So it was necessary to firstly arrange the transportation from the ship to Neumayer Station II and secondly to decide on the flight routes. Alci rearranged the flight schedule and mobilized the aircraft BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) for the medevac via Rothera or via South Pole depending on weather conditions. 
On 22 January the Helicopter BO 105 from SANAE IV station with medical equipment and stretcher on board landed at Neumayer at 1830 UTC. On board the hold 3 was prepared. The helicopter landed at 1915 UTC and took off at 1940. The patient and escorting physician arrived Neumayer at 1955 UTC. The patient was accommodated under permanent supervision in the station´s hospital overnight.
On 23 January the aircraft BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) landed at Neumayer at 1043 UTC. After consultation with Rothera Station on the weather conditions the chief pilot decided to take the route via Rothera. The patient resting on a basket stretcher with vacuum mattress was permanently monitored by the escorting physician. At 1618 UTC the BT-67 departed from Neumayer and landed at Rothera station 7.5 hours later. Over night the patient was accommodated at the station, monitoring as before.
On 24 January the flight was continued at 1152 UTC. The BT-67 arrived Punta Arenas at 1750 UTC. The agency Ultramar/Chile arranged the transport and the accommodation of the patient and the escorting physician in the Clinica Maghellanes. The CT-scan made shortly after hospitalisation was without pathological results. Likewise the magnetic resonance scan taken the following day. After medical examinations the patient was accommodated in a hotel.
On 28 January the patient returned by commercial flight. At 1309 UTC the aircraft BT-67 (Mia C-GEAJ) departed via Rothera and Halley back to Novo Runway, where it landed at 2031 UTC on 29 January. 
The MV Naja Arctica left Atka Bay on 3 February 2008 for Cape Town after finishing the cargo operations and later returned safely to Europe. 
4. Acknowledgement
AWI is very grateful to the physicians, the pilots of aircraft and helicopters, the crew of RV Polarstern and to all staff at Neumayer station, at Runway Novo, at SANAE IV, at Rothera station, and at Halley station for the great assistance and work done during these respective medevac missions. 
Likewise we highly acknowledge the very professional management of the Alci team in Cape Town to coordinate the medevac flights from Neumayer station via Runway Novo to Cape Town and via Rothera station to Punta Arenas. The Dromlan cooperation has once more proven an efficient emergency response to rescued lives. All flight operations went very successful because last but not least of the very professional flight weather forecast provided by the forecaster of the German Weather Service (DWD) at Neumayer station.
On behalf of the German Antarctic Program thanks are to the national operators of Norway, Russia, South Africa, UK, US for assistance, advice and preparedness.
AWI also highly appreciates the great number of responses received from Treaty Parties expressing deepest sympathy with and condolence to the Dutch and German families. The funeral services took place on Texel (The Netherlands) on 18 March 2008 and in the city of Ibbenbüren (Germany) on 19 March 2008.

