





India’s Antarctic Science Programme 2007-08





India’s Antarctic Science Programme 2007-08
Introduction
This paper highlights the significant research activities carried out during winter as well as current austral summer. “National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR)” Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, is the nodal agency to undertake, organize and co-ordinate Indian Polar Science Programme and the logistics support to Antarctica scientific research. . This is a multi-institutional scientific research programme where India’s premier national institutes, universities participate. During the austral summer of XXVII ISEA, thirty one new and ongoing long term scientific programs were taken up by members from eighteen national organizations and institutions. Under the student participation programme a student from Visva Bharati University, West Bengal, participated. 
The Antarctica research programme is concentrated in the fields of but not limited to:  Earth science, Geophysics, Meteorology and Atmospheric Science, Glaciology, Environmental Science, Human Physiology and Medicine, and Engineering and Communication. Various scientific activities carried out during winter 2007 and summer 2008 are briefly enumerated below.
Atmospheric and Meteorology 
Study of VLF phenomena through Direction Finding Techniques at Antarctica
Whistlers are very low frequency (VLF) electromagnetic waves generated by lightning discharges which propagate along the magnetic field lines of the Earth, get dispersed due to the field aligned irregularities and are heard as descending tones with higher frequencies coming first and lower frequencies arriving subsequently falling tone. The study of VLF propagation acquires its importance because of its ability to allow atmospheric scientific community to understand the electron density variation in 500 - 1200 km region. This is derived from the dispersion characteristics of simultaneously observed whistlers at different suitable stations as well as the effect of solar wind - magnetosphere interaction on the propagation of whistlers along the field aligned irregularities. 
The installation of VLF Antenna/Receiver and observation of ionosphere activities are aimed at the study of formation and deformation of layers of ionosphere. As also to observe its irregularity by monitoring the VLF signal and build up a theoretical model of ionosphere. This would also throw light on the extra terrestrial source of ionosphere activities like solar flares, gamma rRay burst (GRB), and strong pulsars in a totally new condition. Through this study we would be able to co-relate the unusual behavior of Ionosphere layer formation with seismic activity and decipher the thunderstorm and whistler phenomena through VLF data. 
Meterological Observations
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) Programme is specifically aimed at preparing a data archive of meteorological parameters over Antarctica to understand the aspects of Indian weather in general and its possible influence in the monsoonal regime. Continuous recording of the surface and upper air meteorological parameters including synoptic hour’s observations is being carried out.  Also real time transmission of main synoptic message (4 times a day) over GTS is transmitted for use by the weather forecasters all over the world. The recording of the (a) atmospheric total ozone, (b) ground UVB and (c) concentration of SO2 and NO2 and vertical profile of O3 and NO2 in the atmosphere at Antarctica is being continuously recorded using Brewer spectrophotometer. 
Geomagnetism
A magnetic observatory is operated at Maitri, for monitoring variation in the Earth’s magnetic field. The underlying objective is to study the storm – substorm relationship, identify global signature in the atmospheric electrical parameters, study the Decline in Total Magnetic Field ‘F’ observed   in southern hemisphere, especially over Antarctic continent. This would help us to monitor the ionospheric Total Electron Count (TEC), scintillation and troposphere water vapor content.
Global Electric Circuit (GEC) Experiment at Maitri
The global electric circuit (GEC) links the electric field, the current flowing in the lower atmosphere, ionosphere and magnetosphere forming a giant spherical condenser. The diurnal variations of GEC potential gradient and atmospheric current density are one of the most interesting features of this experiment. The GEC components show the similar diurnal trend to the worldwide thunderstorm activity, that is, minimum near 0300 UT and maximum near 1900 UT. During the local summer, glacier-fed lakes increase the water vapour content in the local atmosphere which results in significant changes in the GEC components. The plausible reason will be studied for the significant oscillations in conductivity that is observed during some local nights. Contribution of solar and geomagnetic activity to the GEC shall also be studied.
A Digital Fluxgate Magnetometer was installed at Larsemann Hills, to record variations in the three orthogonal components of Earth’s magnetic field. The observations will be used to understand the auroral current systems. The data collected from Maitri, shall provide information on movement of auroral electrojet currents as also throw light on space weather.   The data will be useful for studies like Total Electron Content (TEC), Water Vapor & L Band Scintillation studies to name a few. A new automatic weather station, capable of recording five parameters i.e. Pressure, Temperature, Humidity, Wind Speed and Wind Direction was installed at the Larsemann Hills. 
Earth Science
Geology & Glaciology
During the Antarctic austral summer, the field observations of the different shear zones in the Schirmacher, adjoining Veetaiah Hills and Lanka island were carried to decipher its correlation with the Pan-African orogeny. The studies in Schirmacher oasis were extended from eastern edge to 3 km west of Dakshin Gangotri snout. The Precambrian rocks assemblages of the Schirmacher Hills are represented by medium to high grade metamorphics. Profuse developments of rotational garnet porphyroblasts, SC fabric by mafic and felsic minerals, stretched quartz, feldspars as also other mineral grains. Mylonitisation of the rocks as also various shear sense indicators have been observed. Observations reveal that the foliations are the C-planes of these shear zones. There are lots of exposed dykes of lamprophyres, basaltic, aplites occult around the Maitri station and adjoining areas. 
Geological mapping (in 1:2500 scale) of the Promontory (proposed new station site) of the Larsemann Hills area was undertaken. The rock types of unnamed Promontory are typical of granulitic terrain comprising of various types of metapellites / meta sedimentaries, migmatites, granite gneisses, gneisses with mafic enclaves and granites. The general foliation measured in the area is N60ºE-N70ºE with a variable dip mostly towards SSE. The meta sedimentaries occupies almost the hill tops of the ridge passing through the middle of the islands, flanked by gneisses and few bouldary granitic outcrops.. About fifty numbers of representative rock samples were collected. These samples shall be utilized for petrological and geochemical studies
Temporal and spatial variations of energy balance of different snow and ice media in Antarctica using RRTS (Radio based Remote Telemetry System) data
During summer, the melting process exposes the blue ice regions and causes wide variations in reflectance characteristics. Using Radio Based Remote Telemetry System over the glacier ice in Antarctica, the daily variation of ambient temperature, maximum - minimum temperature, snow/ice surface temperature, incoming radiation, outgoing radiation, wind speed, wind direction, atmospheric pressure and relative humidity were recorded. It also estimated albedo and  its temporal variation. Different energy fluxes over different snow/ice media, a dielectric constant of snow and ice to see its temporal variation with different snow/ice parameters and ground penetrating radar (GPR) survey of continental ice, shelf ice, frozen lake and crevasse near Maitri was also carried out.
Geophysics
State of the art digital seismograph consisting of broad band seismometer (CMG-3T), data acquisition system (Reftek-130) and Global Positioning System (GPS) for time synchronization has been tested. The broadband seismometer was installed on a pier constructed at Maitri after testing. This broadband seismological observatory is working continuously to monitor the seismicity of the region.
Environment and Biology
Palaeoclimatic Study
Sub-surface sediments samples were collected below water depth of modern lakes situated at Maitri and Larsemann Hills area, for better temporal resolution on climatic change of the immediate past. The samples were collected from Schirmacher oasis. This study comprised of scientists from Russia and Poland. Collection of samples for diatom, algal spores, some algal materials from other lakes have also been carried out. 
Environmental Monitoring
Collection of surface water samples from water bodies of Schirmacher Oasis as well as Larsemann Hills area, carried out for its physico-chemical and trace metal analysis. Phytoplankton and zooplankton were also studied to understand their population dynamics. Measurements of physico-chemical properties of surface water including assessment of chloride, nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, iron and ammonia were conducted in the laboratory at Maitri station. Samples of green filamentous algae, littoral benthic algae and periphytic forms from different substrate have been collected for the assessment of their biological diversity.
Diurnal variations in primary productivity and physico-chemical characteristics of Priyadarshani and some other water bodies were are also carried out.

The studies on the influences of ultra violet- b radiation on the survivorship and pigment concentration of the flora over Schirmacher oasis was also carried out. The main aim is to study the growth and physiological responses of solar UV-b radiation in selected plant species growing at Schirmacher Oasis. This would help is to understand the physiological and ecological mechanism of plants through which flora of Schirmacher Oasis Ecosystem, has survived.
The studies on moss-inhabiting invertebrate fauna of Schirmacher Oasis area and monitoring of avian elements during the voyage were carried out. Some behavioral observations on the acoustic communication were also made on the south polar skua.
Land based anthropogenic impact of coarse particles on Antarctic shelf (IPY Project No 129)
High Volume Sampler (HVS) was operated during onward and return journey, at Maitri station  and Larsemann Hills area. This study would help us unravel the physical and chemical properties of the aerosols, suspended particles as also the monitoring the ambient air quality of the region. Sun photometer was operated to study total Ozone column, water vapour column and radiations at various wavelengths. Quartz crystal Microbalance and aerosol spectrometer data was recorded to understand the size distribution of aerosols. 
Medical Sciences
Psychological aspects bring about varied kind of difficulties and reactions from members staying in Antarctica on a short term or long term basis. A structured and longitudinal assessment of all the members of the expedition, is carried out with a view to study changes in their general and psychological health, cognitive functioning, inter personal adjustment, level of motivation, coping and strategy during their stay in Antarctica.   The data obtained will be statistically analyzed using suitable tests in consultation with the Department of Biostatistics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi and results will be published.

