





Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5) First Year Management Report





Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5)
First Year Management Report
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Introduction
The Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 5 by Measure 2, ATCM XXX (New Delhi, 2007). Increasing human activity led the United States to propose the ASMA with the purpose of more effective management and coordination of activities in the Area. The proposal for ASMA designation was made to ensure that the scientific, environmental, and historical values of the Area would be conserved. Activities conducted in the area include diverse scientific research endeavors, operations in support of science, media, arts, education, and tourism. This report summarizes experiences and challenges encountered during the Management Plan’s first year.
Management Activities
The aim of management at South Pole is to coordinate activities in the Area such that the scientific and environmental values of the Area can be sustained indefinitely, and the historical values preserved to the greatest extent practicable. As the operator of Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, the U.S. volunteered to take the lead in coordinating activities in the South Pole ASMA. Management activities undertaken to achieve the goals of the plan focus on advanced planning and coordination of research activities conducted by National Programs working in the area and coordination of visits by tour groups and other non-governmental (NGO) activities. Additionally, both National Programs and NGO groups are to ensure that all participants are aware of the requirements of the management plan.
Restricted and Managed Zones Within the Area
This management plan establishes four types of managed zones within the Area: Operational Zones, Scientific Zones, Historic Zones, and a Hazardous Zone. The objective of this zoning concept is to manage multiple uses of and activities in the Area. The Operational Zones encompass areas where science support and the majority of human activity (including tourism) occurs, the Scientific Zones (divided into sectors to address specific scientific requirements) bound areas where scientific research occurs, the Historic Zones encompass and preserve historical sites, and the Hazardous Zone restricts all human activity for safety reasons. Each zone (and each Scientific Zone sector) has specific guidelines for the conduct of activities. 
Observations on Management of the Scientific Zone
The zoning concept is an important management tool and for the most part, the provisions of the Management Plan were met with no problems during the first year. However, some difficulties were encountered in the implementation of the Management Plan with regard to the Clean Air Sector (CAS) in the Scientific Zone. The CAS is a wedge-shaped area upwind (grid northeast) of the main station complex and extends 150 km NE of the point of the wedge. The CAS ensures a pristine air- and snow-sampling environment for climate systems research. The Earth’s atmosphere near the South Pole is remote from worldwide human influence, and a predominant northerly (grid) wind means that the sector is situated upwind of all other facilities more than ninety percent of the time. These natural conditions allow for nearly continuous measurement of important trace constituents of the atmosphere in a location remote from anthropogenic inputs. The air sampled at the South Pole is representative of the background atmosphere of the planet and is often referred to as the “cleanest air on Earth.” 
The main guidelines of the Clean Air Sector preclude overflights below 2000m and overland transit except for a very limited set of essential purposes or in cases of emergency. The Management Plan includes guidance that all parties intending to conduct research in the Area shall coordinate activities with the National Program(s) operating in the area well ahead of the planned activity and to brief all personnel in their program visiting the Area on the requirements of the Management Plan. Circumstances arose involving the Chilean IPY Traverse and the Norway-U.S. IPY Traverse that resulted in communication from the traverse parties that crossing the CAS was desirable. These discussions arose just as the traverses approached the boundary of the CAS. Emergency high-level discussions were necessary in order to assess the balance between risks to the scientific monitoring program and benefits to the traverse projects. The outcome of discussions was that the traverses did not cross the CAS and thus, the values of the area were protected and the monitoring program was unaffected.
Observations on Management of Non-Governmental Activities
Appendix A of the Management Plan provides guidelines for NGO visits to the South Pole. The intent of this additional guidance was to inform visitors about onsite resources, expectations, and hazards. The guidance includes information on approach to the South Pole, guidance for aircraft, the ideal timeframe for visits, location of a designated camping area for visitors staying overnight in the Area, limitations of visits to station buildings, and the need to be self-sufficient. Volunteer U.S. Antarctic Program participants acted as tour guides in order to provide Management Plan guidance upon arrival and, when possible, provide educational outreach via limited station tours. Most NGOs plan to take photographs at both the ceremonial and geographic South Poles and expectations of additional activities have at times proven more than the U.S. Antarctic Program could provide.
During a 7-week period in the 2007/08 austral season, the South Pole Station received a total of 164 NGO visitors during a total of 38 visits.  Visitors either arrived by NGO aircraft for short visits or arrived via skiing or traverse expeditions with the return usually provided by NGO aircraft operators. A total of 700 hours were spent on station by NGO groups in 2007/08. This was an increase from past years. In the 2006/07 season, there were 133 total visitors, totaling 585 hours. In the 2005/06 season, there were 125 visitors totaling, totally 553 hours. Trends in NGO visits during the past season included larger fly-in groups arriving on two aircraft at a time, increased station access by groups awaiting pick-up, and guides arriving at Pole with one group and camping out to await the arrival of another group. Most of the visitors in the past were supported by one aircraft-supported company, Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions (ALE). In the 2007/08 season, a second aircraft support company, Antarctic Logistics Centre International (ALCI), also supported NGO visits to South Pole. 
The 2007/08 season also included an increasing overlap between National Program and NGO activities. For example, the Chilean IPY Traverse included support provided by the U.S. Antarctic Program but also support by ALE for the NGO aspect of the traverse. ALCI provided support to the Norway-U.S. IPY Traverse; in the same trip, ALCI picked up two NGO skiers who arrived at South Pole with no prior notification. ALE provided support to deliver retrograde cargo from Patriot Hills to South Pole from a U.S. Antarctic Program science group based at Patriot Hills. While full advance information on the joint National Program/NGO projects was available for some activities, the lack of advance information on some of the joint government/NGO activities created some difficulties for the U.S. Antarctic Program.
Discussion and Conclusion
Implementation of the Management Plan for ASMA No. 5 was, for the most part, successful during its first year in place. The increasing human activity which led the United States to propose the ASMA shows no sign of slowing down. Although the Management Plan provides the means for more effective management and coordination of activities in the Area, it will only be effective if all involved in planning and conducting activities within the ASMA are fully aware of the details of the Plan, fully engaged in advanced communication and coordination prior to the field season, and fully committed to the values that underlie the plan. This should be the case for not only the National Program and NGO activities, but especially for the joint National Program/NGO expeditions.
With regard to NGO activities, the increase in number of visitors and events has put a large amount of pressure on Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station personnel and is beginning to show an impact on National Program science support activities. With a number of historic event anniversaries approaching, the U.S. Antarctic Program is already seeing increased interest in South Pole visits. The U.S. Antarctic Program is currently reviewing the Management Plan guidance for NGOs and its ability to engage in the current level of outreach activities. 
The United States will continue to report on experiences regarding implementation of the Management Plan in future years in order to inform discussion and to consider possible modifications of the Plan.

