





Proposed approach for the identification of important marine areas for conservation




Proposed approach for the identification of important          marine areas for conservation
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Agenda Item CEP 7(e)
1. Introduction
Recent discussions by CCAMLR and the CEP have concluded that the issues of where and how to establish a system of marine protected areas for the Southern Ocean should be addressed as a matter of priority. Previous work has addressed theoretical aspects including bioregionalisation analysis (SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11; ATCM XXXI IP 2, Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, Brussels, Belgium, August 2007) and the definition of criteria for selection (ATCM XXX IP53). There is now a need to move forward with the development of practical approaches to implementing protected areas.
In 2007, the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop highlighted ‘systematic conservation planning’ as an appropriate process by which protected areas could be selected and designed (ATCM XXXI IP 2). This process requires the definition of conservation objectives, and uses spatial information on biodiversity patterns, ecosystem processes and human activities to identify the areas that should be included within a protected area system in order to achieve the defined objectives (Margules & Pressey, 2000; Lombard et al., 2007). It was recently used by South Africa to design a marine protected area around the sub-Antarctic Prince Edward Island, which aims to conserve biodiversity patterns and processes within sensible management boundaries, while minimizing conflict with the legal toothfish fishery (Lombard et al., 2007). CCAMLR has endorsed systematic conservation planning as an important approach to be used in the next stages of protected area development, and has called for further work to be undertaken on this topic (SC-CAMLR-XXVI, paragraphs 3.85 and 3.86).
This paper proposes an approach for the identification of important marine areas for conservation based on the systematic conservation planning methodology. It describes the information, tools and processes that could be utilized to identify such areas within the Antarctic Treaty Area. Subsequently, these areas might be considered for designation as protected areas under the provisions of the ATCM and/or CCAMLR. A pilot study using the systematic conservation planning approach and currently available data (for example, the benthic and pelagic maps produced by the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop) would be an important step in testing the utility of this process. 
2. Systematic conservation planning
Systematic conservation planning is an objective and transparent methodology that helps with the process of identifying options for spatial protection of biodiversity and other valuable features (Margules & Pressey, 2000). It is based on the need to conserve a representative sample of a region’s biodiversity within protected areas, and to ensure the persistence of that biodiversity through conservation and management measures (Cowling et al., 2003; Lombard et al., 2007). 
A schematic illustration of the process is provided in Figure 1. It can be summarized into six stages:
    (i) Define the planning region (broad area of interest in which the study will be undertaken) 
    (ii) Compile relevant ecological data relating to the biodiversity of the planning region
    (iii) Set conservation targets
    (iv) Review existing conservation areas within the planning region
    (v) Select additional conservation areas
    (vi) Implement conservation actions
3. Data requirements	
Spatial ecological data relating to biodiversity patterns and processes must be collated, and the region of interest is then subdivided into ‘planning units’ (small, usually uniformly sized cells laid out in a grid-type arrangement with coverage across the entire planning region, e.g. 10 km x 10 km squares). Each planning unit within the planning region is therefore assigned attributes according to the spatial data that have been collated. For example, a single planning unit might have information on its species richness, the occurrence of specific ecosystem processes, or the number of different habitat types it contains.
Surrogates or proxies such as species assemblages, habitat types and ecosystem processes can be used as measures of biodiversity. The benthic and pelagic bioregions defined by the 2007 CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop are valuable data input layers, as they aim to provide information on habitat types based on a range of environmental data.
It is important to capture information on ecosystem processes as well as biodiversity patterns. The Bioregionalisation Workshop reviewed the datasets that would be most useful in capturing spatially-defined ecosystem processes, and generated maps representing features such as penguin foraging ranges and habitat utilization by albatrosses) that would be useful to the systematic conservation planning process (ATCM XXXI IP 2).
4. Setting conservation targets
Conservation targets provide a quantitative definition of the different objectives to be achieved by spatial protection. These might include the amounts or types of particular species, habitats or processes that should be included within areas defined as important for conservation, and the variety of features and habitats that should be represented.   
Conservation targets for Antarctic marine areas could be based on the objectives and criteria already defined by Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the 2005 CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (reviewed in ATCM XXX IP 53). For example, the requirement for representation of major marine ecosystems could be defined in terms of a conservation target specifying that an example of each pelagic bioregion occurring within the planning region should be represented within a protected area system. 
5. Selecting areas important for conservation
Once the relevant datasets have been collated, and the conservation targets defined, the selection of areas important for conservation can be undertaken using reserve selection software such as MARXAN (Game & Grantham, 2008). This software has been widely used in designing networks of marine protected areas worldwide, for example in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and the California Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary. Using data on species, habitats or other relevant biodiversity features, MARXAN aims to identify the reserve system (a combination of planning units) that will meet user-defined biodiversity targets for the minimum cost in terms of size or other constraints.
To select the areas that are most important for conservation, the contribution of each planning unit to the defined conservation targets is calculated. For example, protecting a planning unit that contains 20% of the distribution of a particular benthic habitat type within the region of interest would contribute significantly to achieving the target of protecting 40% of that habitat type. The same planning unit may also contain other features of value, increasing the importance of its protection. There may be many potential combinations for the number and arrangement of planning units to meet a range of conservation targets, and mathematical algorithms can be used to suggest the most efficient and practical solutions.
MARXAN works iteratively towards the best solutions by adding and subtracting planning units to an initial, random selection, retaining any changes that contribute towards meeting the conservation targets. The concept of ‘irreplaceability’ is an important factor in considering the potential contribution of individual planning units to the achievement of defined goals for a region. An area that is considered to be irreplaceable is one which contributes the most to achieving conservation targets  (e.g. a single planning unit that contains the entire population of a particular species, or the only example of a particular habitat type). The contribution of existing protected areas (e.g. ASPAs that have already been designated within the planning region) must also be considered; these areas may be given a high weighting, whereby they are always included in suggested protected area configurations. 
Using this process, the selection of conservation areas can proceed on the basis of currently available information, and with an objective methodology. However, it is important to note that systematic conservation planning cannot provide definitive solutions to the best location for protected areas. Subjective judgment is still required in setting targets and interpreting the results in the context of practical considerations. 
6. Implementing conservation actions
While MARXAN can assist in identifying areas that are important for the achievement of conservation targets, separate decisions must be undertaken to determine the appropriate protection or management actions to be applied to those areas. The implementation of conservation actions may be dependent on practical considerations relating to other activities occurring in the region.  Such actions may range from implementing strict protection (e.g. reserves or highly protected areas such as ASPAs), to the definition of multiple-use areas (e.g. ASMAs), or the spatial management of specific activities (e.g. fisheries management tools).
7. Further work
The United Kingdom plans to undertake further work on this topic for a pilot study region in the South Atlantic sector. In developing this work, the aim is not to propose actual areas for designation as protected or managed sites, but rather to identify the key decisions and datasets that would be required. Similar studies by other Members in other regions would contribute to the development of ‘best practice’ guidance for systematic conservation planning, which could then be employed in the selection and designation of areas to conserve marine biodiversity. 
The systematic conservation planning methodology could also be utilized in the context of terrestrial protected area development, for example using the outcomes of the Environmental Domains Analysis (ATCM XXX WP 12).
It is hoped that the pilot study outcomes will be of interest to CEP and CCAMLR Members in the context of their ongoing efforts to develop a strategic and harmonised approach to the protection of the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System.
References
ATCM XXX. 2007. Criteria for the selection of marine protected areas (MPAs). Information Paper 53. Submitted by the United Kingdom.
ATCM XXX. 2007. Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica: Final progress report on Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic continent. Working Paper 12. Submitted by New Zealand.
Cowling, R.M., Pressey, R.L., Rouget, M. & Lombard, A.T. 2003. A conservation plan for a global biodiversity hotspot - the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa. Biological Conservation 112: 191-216.
Game, E. T. and H. S. Grantham. 2008. Marxan User Manual: For Marxan version 1.8.10. University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia, and Pacific Marine Analysis and Research Association, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Lombard, A.T., Reyers, B., Schonegevel, L.Y., Cooper, J., Smith-Adao, L.B., Nel, D.C., Froneman, P.W., Ansorge, I.J., Bester, M.N., Tosh, C.A., Strauss, T., Akkers, T., Gon, O., Leslie, R.W. & Chown, S.L. 2007. Conserving pattern and process in the Southern Ocean: designing a Marine Protected Area for the Prince Edward Islands. Antarctic Science 19(1): 39-54.
Margules, C.R. & Pressey, R.L. 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405: 243-253.
SC-CAMLR-XXVI. 2007. Report of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee. CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia. 
SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11. 2007. Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean. Executive Summary and Report of the Workshop. 
Figure 1: Schematic diagram illustrating a proposed approach to the selection of important marine areas for conservation (this example uses an imaginary area and data).

