





Romanian scientific activities in polar areas in cooperation with U.S./National Science Foundation and Denmark/Copenhagen University - Greenland 2008






Romanian Scientific Activities in Polar Areas in Cooperation 
with U.S./National Science Foundation and 
Denmark/Copenhagen University – Life Sciences Faculty
Greenland 2008

Investigators:
Astronomical Institute of Romanian Academy (Petre Popescu, Petre Paraschiv)
Romanian Polar Research Institute (Teodor Gh. Negoita, Mihaela Cotarlet, Paul Andrei Iordache)
„Lower Danube”University Galati (Gabriela Bahrim) and Virology Institute of Romanian Academy (Toparceanu F.)

Romanian Greenland Expedition  objectives during 14.03–08.04.2008 were as follows:

        1. Tests on the sky quality in the areals of Kangerlussuaq, 67°00′38″N, 50°42′33″W, Ilulissat, 69°13′N, 51°06′W and Rodebay, 69°21’0”,  51°1’0”W. As the atmospheric conditions were extremely favourable, observations on the boreal Aurora have also been performed in a manner that will enable subsequent interpretations. 

        2. At the research station the Sondrestrom Research Facility - Upper Atmospheric Research, operating under the auspices of U.S./National Science Foundation (NSF), the first data on the installation and erection of the Romanian telescope in this location have been established. Eng. Eggert Gudmundsson, Head of this station, kindly enabled us to get, on the spot, the necessary information on the location conditions and details for our astro-climate module, the conditions being very good during the polar night. Mr. McCready – the Leader of scientific activities representing NSF, expressed his aggreement on a future collaboration with us in view of operating the telescope at the base Sondrestrom Upper Atmospheric Research. The period for the observations start in 2009 summer and other technical specifications have been established. 
      The Romanian equipment will be used to study the atmosphere characteristics in Larsemann Hills, such as: the physical and chemical structure, radiation absorption, atmospheric emissions, atmospheric refraction, diffraction and scattering, turbulence, transparency and the image quality. 
Our observations can be performed at short zenith distances and during a long time. The construction of the astronomic module considers all these aspects by using some highly sensitive detectors. The meteorological observations at the soil level will be also correlated with the space ones. 

        3. Sampling of soils and iceberg ice for the microorganism study in comparison with the data obtained by us in Law-Racovita Station (Australia-Romania), Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. 

        4. Studies on the human organism behaviour under low temperatures, correlated with the covered distances and temperatures.

        5. Research stage at the University Copenhagen, Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Ecology, Genetics and Microbiology section, where the collected samples have been processed, in view of subsequent study of enzyme characteristics. Investigator - Mihaela Scantee Cotarlet, Ph.D. candidate, Romanian Polar Research Institute, that worked with Prof. Dr. Peter Stougaard. Mrs. Mihaela Scantee Cotarlet improved, by this research stage, her Ph.D. thesis under elaboration entitled: Study of Antarctic Microorganisms and their Utilization in Food Processing Biotechnologies.

This research stage included:
    • Microorganism isolation (Streptomyces sp. isolated from Antarctic soils)
    • Tests of pure cultures and enzymes (amylazes, proteazes)
    • Isolation of bacterial DNA as per the respective protocol, measuring the isolated DNA
    • Microwave experiments on isolated DNA; other methods for DNA isolation were tested as the respective cells are cold-adapted and hard to decompose in view of DNA isolation
    • PCR experiment 
    • Experiments of agarose gel electrophoresis
    • Interpretation of UV light analysis results
    • Isolation of pure DNA necessary in the next steps of purification and sequence identification in view of phylogenic classification. 
    • Caracterization of hydrolythic enzymes
    • Result interpretation.

6. Studies of extreme medicine on the Romanian Research Expedition members in Greenland (2008) compared to Antarctica, (2006, 2007/Law-Racovita Station area, Indian Ocean and Antarctic Seas) regarding metabolic, hematological, immune (acute-phase proteins as C-reactive-protein, alpha1-antitrypsin, the 3rd component of complement, ceruloplasmin, transferrin, cytokines IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IFN-gamma, IL-6,  soluble IL-2 receptor, serum immunoglobulins IgM, IgA, IgG), hormone (cortisol), viral (HSV, EBV, CMV), psychological and behavior responses. 
 
References:

1. Popescu P., Negoita, T. Gh., Bot A., Iftimescu D., Iordache P.A. 2007. Equipment for macroclimate studies in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. International Symposium on Polar Scientific Research, Bucharest, Romania, November 15-16 2006, Book of Abstracts, vol. I,  SI-10, ISSN 1843-469X, p.31
2. Popescu P., Paraschiv P., Popescu R., Dumitrescu A., Bocşa G., Badescu O., Bot A., Cosma V., Negoita T.Gh., Cotta M. - Romanian Robotic Telescope Project for Antarctica, IAU GA SPS7 „Astronomy in Antarctica”, Prague, August 14-25, 2006, Abstract Book, p.487
3. Cotarlet, M. Negoita, T. Gh. and Bahrim, G. 2007.  Polar bacteria – enzyme sources for bioremediation. The 2nd International Symposium on Polar Scientific Research, Bucharest, Romania, November 15-16, 2007, Book of Abstracts, vol. II, SIII-2, ISSN 1843-469X.
4. Bahrim, G., Negoita, T. Gh., Cotarlet, M. 2008. Antarctic soils, resources of microorganisms with  biotechnological properties. European Geosciences Union Conference, SSS24 Soil microbial activity. Assessment, monitoring and modeling, Geophysical Research Abstracts,Vol. 10, EGU2008-A-11212, 2008, SRef-ID: 1607-7962.
5.Toparceanu F., Negoita T., Chemgli X., Wei J., Xiang T.H., Bistrov E., Evaluation of Romanian explorer adaptation to isolation ans cold during Antarctic summer 2005-2006 (Evaluación de la adaptación al aislamiento y al frío de personal antártico rumano durante el verano antártico 2005-2006), CSRE601 – RE. 



Inquiries can be addressed to:

Romanian Antarctic Foundation
Romanian Polar Research Institute
1, Libertatii Blvd., Bucharest-4, Romania
email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

