





Environmental Monitoring of the Indian Permanent Station-Maitri In Pursuant to the Article 17 of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty






Environmental Monitoring of the Indian Permanent Station-Maitri In Pursuant to the Article 17 of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 

Each Antarctic Treaty nation is required to report annually about the action taken to implement the Protocol as per the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In accordance with the recommendation XV-5 of the Fifteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting, held in Paris in 1989, there are a series of activities that should be monitored. According to the Protocol on Environmental Protection (article 8 and annex I), Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedure has been developed for activities undertaken in the Antarctica. 
This paper deals with the environmental monitoring and administrative measures taken at Indian permanent station “Maitri” in Antarctica during the austral summer of XXVII Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (ISEA) in 2007-08.
Monitoring programme 
According to the Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica (SCAR, 1996) and also as per Environmental Guidelines (COMNAP 2005) a long term environmental monitoring and environmental impact assessment studies at the existing Indian Scientific Base, Maitri are being conducted. The samples (subsurface sediments, moss layer, algae and water from different lakes) have been collected for pollution study and palaeoclimatic analyses from Schirmacher oasis. The surface water samples from various water bodies of Schirmacher Oasis were collected for physico-chemical, trace metal analysis and biological analysis. The estimation of diurnal variations in primary productivity and of Priyadarshani Lake and few other important lakes have been carried out.
In order to explore the moss-inhabiting invertebrates, samples of moss were collected from various locations. Some behavioural observations on the acoustic communication were also made on the south polar skua. Vocalizations were recorded with the help of Marantz PMD 670 Digital Sound Recorder and Audio-Technica unidirectional microphone.
Waste Management
The Station has the systems to collect and segregate the waste as per nature of the waste i.e. bio degradable and non-biodegradable. The analysis of quantum of biodegradable, non- biodegradable, non-hazardous and hazardous waste materials generated during human activities in and around station were carried out. Samples from oil contaminated sites were also collected for estimation of oil and grease content , flash point, density, viscosity, trace metals pollutant (lead, cadmium, iron etc.), PCBs, PAHs, VOCs, etc. to prepare oil spill contingency planning.
Ambient air quality monitoring (AAQM) around the Maitri station is carried out to observe the effects from exhaust gas emission from various sources like, operation of snow vehicle, power generation, boiler and incinerator operation. AAQM is carried out for CO, SPM, SO2, and NOX. Stack gas emission were collected to estimate PAHs, VOCs, residual pesticides and PCBs in air. Wastewater samples are collected from inlets and outlets of Rotating Biological Contactors for physico-chemical analysis and performance evaluation.
Fire Fighting Drill
To combat the fire in case of emergency, training on fire fighting technique is given in the beginning and fire drill are organized every month during the summer and all the members participate in the training.

List of Permits Issued Under the Antarctic Act 1994 for the 2007 / 2008 Season
No permit has been issued under the Antarctic act 1994 for the 2007 / 2008 season for ASPA 163
Conclusion
The environmental monitoring Programme at the Indian scientific permanent station was started in the year of 1993.Based on the Environmental management Plan (EMP), suggested each year by the group of environmental scientist, necessary tuning at Maitri station is carried out year-to-year basis, which results into improvement in the quality and aesthetics of the station. For the proper conservation and management of the environment, impact assessment programs have been found to be very efficient.  

