





Update on Wildlife Awareness Information for Aircraft Operations in Antarctica





Update on Wildlife Awareness Information for Aircraft Operations in Antarctica
CEP Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction

    1. The UK has continued to develop the Wildlife Awareness Manual launched at ATCM XXIX.  Following the success of the original manual, which has been utilised by national programme and tourism helicopter pilots, the UK has now used the information about the location of wildlife concentrations to develop larger-scale maps.  These maps have been specifically designed to support helicopter operations in Antarctica and assist pilots in planning their routes so that they avoid wildlife concentrations.  

Background

    2. At ATCM XXIX, the UK presented ATCM XXIX/WP3 Wildlife Awareness Information for Aircraft Operations in Antarctica and IP2 Wildlife Awareness Manual for the Antarctica Peninsula, South Shetland and South Orkney Islands.  At this meeting, the UK circulated a comprehensive Wildlife Awareness Manual developed to underpin implementation of Resolution 2(2004), which set out Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica. 

    3. At its 9th meeting in Edinburgh, the Committee for Environmental Protection welcomed the Wildlife Awareness Manual and requested COMNAP to consider:
    • Options for providing readily accessible information about the location of wildlife concentrations for all areas of Antarctica in which aircraft operations may take place;
    • Options for how such information could best be presented to aircrew for both fixed and rotating wing aircraft; and
    • The practicalities of how such a product might best be developed and updated.
(CEP IX Final Report, para 158).  We would very much welcome an update from COMNAP at CEP XI.

New Developments

    4. Since its launch in 2006, the Wildlife Awareness Manual has proved to be an extremely useful practical tool to support the UK’s national programme in Antarctica, enabling pilots to avoid wildlife concentrations and, where proximity is unavoidable for operational reasons, ensure that recommended distances in the guidelines agreed in Resolution 2 (2004) are maintained to the greatest extent possible.

    5. Whilst the manual was designed to be carried in aircraft as a ready reference document, the feedback from the UK users also indicated that they would welcome larger maps, including all the same wildlife and protected areas information, which they could use for flight planning purposes.   In response to this, the UK commissioned a series of larger-scale maps, which we will be happy to present to CEP XI.

    6. The larger-scale maps were piloted in the 2007-08 season and have been well received.  They are used in the daily briefings on board HMS Endurance to plan the helicopter operations, as well as brief the ships’ company on the proximity of wildlife and protected areas to the daily sphere of operation of the ship.

Next Steps

    7. The UK is continuing to collate updated information relating to wildlife concentrations and preferred landing sites for helicopters in the area covered by the original manual. The UK is planning to update the manual and large-scale maps for the 2009-10 season.  We would welcome feedback and additional information, especially from COMNAP, Parties or other stakeholders who have used it, to help ensure that the new edition is as accurate and complete as possible to ensure that it continues to be a valuable resource to underpin compliance with Resolution 2(2004). 



April 2008
 


