





Scientific Research of Peru in the period 2007-2008 (Summer Season)





Scientific Research of Peru in the period 2007-2008 
(Summer Season) 

With the aim of contributing to the exchange of information between the Consultative Parties in agreement to what is stated in the Antarctic Treaty, we present this document regarding the most relevant scientific activities carried out by Peru in Antarctica during the period 2007-2008.

All logistical and scientific activities carried out by the national Antarctic authority are focused at conserving and protecting the resources of the Antarctic ecosystem, as pointed out by the Madrid Protocol.

Among the main activities undertaken during this period the Eighteenth Scientific Expedition ANTAR XVIII ending in late January can be highlighted, including the scientific research conducted within that framework. Furthermore, monitoring of the scientific research conducted during the previous year was undertaken.

1. Eighteenth Scientific Expedition ANTAR XVIII 

1.1. Main objective

To comply with the National Antarctic Policy of the Peruvian State, which has as its main priority "consolidating the presence of Peru on the Antarctic continent", and strengthening its relations with countries that are Consultative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty. 

1.2. Specific objectives
    • To develop and implement the scientific research programmes involving national and foreign institutions.
    • To carry out maintenance and rehabilitation work of the Antarctic Scientific Station Machu Picchu (ECAMP).
    • To continue with the implementation of the ECAMP Environmental Management Plan.
    • To coordinate with the concerned countries the implementation of the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Managed Area ASMA No. 1 in Admiralty Bay. 

The ANTAR XVIII expedition consisted of 25 persons –both scientific and logistic personnel –and lasted 45 days, during which all the objectives where fulfilled.

2. Scientific Projects in ANTAR XVIII

        2.1 Predation, weather, microclimate and choice of nesting site of the colony of Antarctic tern Sterna vittata Gemlin 1789 in Crepin Point, King George Island

This project has been running since the ANTAR XVI Expedition. This time the project was focused on evaluating some biological and physical factors on the reproduction of Antarctic tern during the placing of eggs and incubation. Some reproductive characteristics of the colony of Sterna vittata, such as size and current state of the colony, density of nests, hatching success, duration of parental care in the nest, were considered. These are associated with factors such as predation by skuas, weather during the day and micro-meteorology of the nesting area. Another activity planned was the registration for subsequent analysis of the possible differences between  the microclimate of nesting areas and areas without bird reproduction.


Figure 1: Researchers tracking the behavior of birds in  MacKellar Sound.

Field work in Antarctica will be complemented by similar studies in Peru in order to compare the differences in reproductive events under extreme microclimatic cold conditions (Antarctica) and temperate conditions (Peru).

        2.2 Spectral measurements of solar radiation to quantify the ozone layer, UV index and aerosol optical thickness in the Antarctic atmosphere and its relationship with measurements in Peru 

The project aims at improving the understanding of the land-air irradiative balance (process that quantifies the availability of energy in the earth's surface), the influence of aerosols (particulate matter that promotes the formation of areas where there is massive destruction of the ozone layer during the spring), its effects on the climate of the Antarctic atmosphere and its relationship with the measurements in Peru (Huancayo). In addition, the identification of the different types of aerosols, the elements that conform them and their possible sources of emission are sought. In order to accomplish this, global and net spectral measurements of solar radiation were made (simultaneous determination of the UV index, aerosol optical thickness (ODA) and the irradiative balance sheet).


Figure 2: Researchers conducting atmospheric measurements in  King George Island..

All of the above will be integrated under a standardized methodology with other measurements at various locations in Antarctica, in order to assess the effects on the polar irradiative balance (especially ODA project POL). For this matter, the spatial variability will be analyzed and supplemented with trajectories of air masses, and the seasonal variability with periodic measurements from the ground and/or satellites. 
For its scientific quality and appropriate location, this Peruvian proposal was accepted as part of the international cooperative program "Polar ODA". It is also part of the scientific activities promoted by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), through its action group in Aerosols in the Antarctic Troposphere and its Role in Climate (ATAC). 

        2.3 Developing an environmental energy model in the ecosystem of the Antarctic region  surrounding the Peruvian base

The goal of this project is to carry out a series of measurements of solar radiation and meteorological conditions in order to build a model of energy exchange. The project consisted of evaluating the solar energy and its relationship with the atmospheric environment in the austral summer. It has a period of execution of three years (three stages). In its third stage monitoring of solar radiation and meteorology were carried out for the calibration of the model in its first basic version.


Figure 3: Researchers installing equipment for measuring radiation on King George Island

One of the objectives of the project was assessing the dynamic energy in the ECAMP as a contribution to scientific knowledge about weather systems and processes, through measurements of weather conditions in the ECAMP surface in order to relate the energy balance with the systems and atmospheric processes.

        2.4 Macro benthos marine biodiversity in MacKellar Sound and Admiralty Bay, King George Island - Antarctica 

The project was carried out in MacKellar Sound. The work emphasizes the characterization of biological diversity of marine plankton and benthos in MacKellar Sound, Admiralty Bay. The focus was directed mainly to the inventory of molluscs, crustaceans and polychaetes, echinoderms and macroalgae, parallel to the analysis of the spatial distribution of key plankton and benthic communities.
The project is planned to last five years, being now in its second year.


Figure 4: Collections in  MacKellar Sound during the 2007-2008 summer.
Moreover, it will establish patterns of inter-annual variability in the Antarctic ecosystem and its linkages with the cycle of El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and global climate variability. It will also determine the species structure of the benthos and plankton communities in MacKellar Sound and deep parts of Admiralty Bay and its relationship with nature and the physical chemical characteristics of funds and environmental conditions prevailing.
 
Some Results from Previous Research 
    A. Project COPEPOD II, biology and ecology of the major pelagic communities in Bransfield Strait and around Elephant Island
The objective of this project was to analyze, describe and conceptualize the nictimeral behaviour and distribution of key species in the pelagic community ecosystem of the Antarctic CCAMLR sub-area 48.1 in relation to primary production, presence of predators and the physical and chemical conditions in the water column.
 Although the project structure has changed over the last two years, oceanographic cruises in the Bransfield Strait area started in 1988, and so a fairly consistent amount of data has been accumulated.
The multidisciplinary cruise took place in two phases: the first was a synoptic operation in Bransfield Strait and around Elephant Island between January 17 and 23, with the aim of defining the distribution patterns of major pelagic community species. The second phase consisted of a small-scale experiment between Elephant Island and Clarence, from January 24 to 27, in order to relate biotic and abiotic variables with the predominant species –krill- and its main predators.
In addition a second experiment was conducted in Admiralty Bay, on January 30 and 31, 2007, in order to ascertain the ecology of species in a biologically rich area, due to the income of marine mammals (whales, pinnipeds, etc.), the existence of colonies of seabirds and the abundance of Antarctic krill.
The results indicate that the distribution of krill was characterized by being more superficial compared with cruises made in other years. Furthermore, the estimated biomass was not very high due to an increased presence of younglings during this study. There was a steady distribution of activity between the islands Elephant and Clarence independent of the hour. 
Regarding the biology and ecology of the Antarctic krill, it was found that young individuals were the most representative in the Bransfield Strait and oceanic front unlike the area of the experiment where adults and sub-adults were the most abundant. The largest samples were conformed by pregnant females. The stratification by sisez of Antarctic krill showed some differences depending hours of the day, mainly in deep strata of individuals <37 mm of total length (younglings). Changes in the diet of krill, depending on size, depth layers, and time of capture were not seen. Results are similar to those observed in the austral summer of 2006. 
Finally, the abundance of phytoplankton was much lower than in 2006. Moreover, the number of species was reduced by 25%. However, the distribution pattern was similar, presenting the highest densities near Shetland Islands in the South and around Elephant Island and lower concentrations near the Antarctic Peninsula. The phytoplankton community, as in the Antar XVI, is located in a state of active development, showing low rates of diversity. There is great variability of phytoplankton during the day because during the austral summer, solar radiation is almost uniform. However small differences in light intensity at noon affects the diatoms, which show lower density.



Figure 5 - The distribution chart of krill in the area of study  shows a large geographical extent of this speciesl in almost the entire area.Wwithin the main sites of concentration  two dense areas are located in the south-west of Bransfield Strait near  Deception Island and around Elephant Island.

    B. Atmospheric studies with MST radar developed in agreement with the Geophysical Institute of Peru
 
The objective of this project was to continue the study of the seasonal dependence as well as the variability of the polar mesosphere summer echoes (PMSE) on the ECAMP. Another goal was to study the behaviour of the southern and vertical zone winds at tropospheric, stratospheric mesospheric heights over the ECAMP. This project is led by the Geophysical Institute of Peru since 1993.
The measurements were conducted during the summer 2006-2007, in early December, and a new array of antennas for the MST Radar VHF 50 MHZ, implemented completely on national technology was deployed.
The antenna array consists of three modules (or antennas A, B and C) consisting each of 16 Yagi antennas each of 4 components. Each module consists of 4 square bases with a Yagi antenna (vertical) in every corner of the base, and the four bases in turn form a square.

Figure 6 - Occurrence maps of altitude vs. time of day (upper left) and altitude vs. doppler velocity (bottom right) for 2006-2007. The graphis lines indicate the fraction of observations and the total number of observations.

This system has been sensible enough to capture very weak PMSE (at the time of its emergence in the early hours of the day, around 04:00 local time).
Finally, PMSE were present until the first week of February. Comparing the results of the three expeditions, an inter-annual variability of intensity in the PMSE and the percentage of occurrence can be clearly observed. This variability can be associated with temperature shifts and changes in concentration of water vapour. It is clear that recent results show a change of 3 kms. in height range occurrence (lower than in previous campaigns). 
Comparisons and correlation of these results with information on temperature and water vapour for the same regions at similar times is required in order to understand the seasonal variability reported.


