





Visit by the UN Secretary General to the Antarctic






Visit by the UN Secretary General to the Antarctic
The special aim of the Secretary General's visit was to bolster the global competency of the United Nations to face up to climate change and raise international awareness of the problem of global warming.
In the wake of the Government of Chile's invitation to UN Secretary General Mr. Ban Ki-moon to visit the Antarctic, an official invitation was extended on Friday November 9th 2007 by the President of the Republic Ms. Michelle Bachelet, coinciding with the Ibero-American summit held in Chile that month.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon visited King George Island in the Antarctic. He was accompanied by the Chilean Environment Minister Ms. Lya Uriarte, Albert Van Klaveren, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, the ambassador of Chile to the UN, Mr. Heraldo Muñoz, permanent representative to the UN, the Governor of the XII Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic Region Ms. Eugenia Mancilla, the Director of INACH, Dr. José Retamales, the Director of the Valdivia Centre for Scientific Studies (CECS), Dr. Claudio Bunster and Dr. Gino Cassasa, glaciologist of the CECS, who explained the consequences of global warming on Antarctic ice, especially on glaciers.
The programme began with the Secretary General arriving at the Chilean Air Force's Teniente Marsh Aerodrome. He was shown around the Antarctic President Eduardo Frei M. Air Force Base, visited the Uruguaya Artigas Base, where he boarded an inflatable dinghy that took him to the Korean King Sejong base. Later he flew over the Collins glacier in a Chilean Air force Twin Otter plane. 
The Secretary General published a declaration and chatted to the correspondents at the Chilean President Frei base before returning to Punta Arenas, Chile. During this meeting with the press, he mentioned that he had visited the Antarctic not as a tourist, but as an early messenger of climate change. He also said that it had been “extraordinarily beautiful” and expressed his concern on seeing the melting glaciers, adding that the Antarctic was the world's shared heritage and should be managed in an environmentally sustainable manner.


 

