





Non-native Species Awareness Campaign: “Don’t Pack a Pest” When Traveling to Antarctica 





Non-native Species Awareness Campaign:                              “Don’t Pack a Pest” When Traveling to Antarctica
Background
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) has implemented an awareness program aimed at reducing the risk of introduction of non-native species to Antarctica.  The “Don’t Pack a Pest” awareness campaign features an informational brochure with how-to preventative steps for individuals (Figure 1) and includes a campaign logo sticker to serve as a reminder.  All USAP participants, including scientists and personnel, are briefed on the campaign prior to deployment to Antarctica each season and further campaign materials have been distributed to research stations and vessels.  
The USAP initiated this campaign in the midst of growing concern of the United States and other Treaty parties about the potentially harmful impacts of non-native species on the continent.  The “Don’t Pack a Pest” campaign is one of several steps the USAP and other national programs have initiated to help prevent introduction of non-native species.  
The Awareness Campaign
The “Don’t Pack a Pest” campaign notes that as human activity in Antarctica increases, so does the risk of introduction of non-native species.  The brochure identifies a number of non-native species that already exist on the continent and in the sub-Antarctic islands.  The goal of the campaign is to help prevent further introductions.
To reach this goal, the campaign raises general awareness about non-native species, their potential negative impact on local environments, and mitigating measures that can help prevent introduction of non-native species.  In particular, informational material notes how species could potentially enter Antarctica via clothing, equipment, or personal gear.  The brochure reminds USAP participants to clean gear before leaving for Antarctica, clean gear between site visits, and report the presence of any non-native species if found. 
Further Steps
The “Don’t Pack a Pest” awareness campaign began this past austral summer season and will remain in place for subsequent seasons.  In the future, the USAP looks forward to further additions and updates to its education programs for protection of the pristine Antarctic environment while continuing to support scientific research on the continent.

