





On development of Draft Law “On regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic”





On development of Draft Law “On regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic”
At XXX ATCM the Russian Federation delegation informed international community on the Approval of December 26, 2007 by the Russian Federation Government of the Federal Law Draft concept “On regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic” and on the introduction of the draft law in the plan of lawmaking activity of the Russian Federation Government for 2007. The bill drafting was performed by Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring jointly with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of Agriculture with participation of the Russian Academy of Science. Alterations to the Russian effective legislation were developed simultaneously in connection with this Law adoption.
In accordance with the procedure requirements existing in Russia the Draft Laws ware approved by the concerned Federal governing institutions, including the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Ministry of Natural Resources of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Home Affairs of the Russian Federation, Ministry of Health and Social Development of the Russian Federation, Ministry of Economic Development of the Russian Federation,  Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation, Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation, Federal Service for Technological and Nuclear Supervision, Federal Customs, Federal Agency for Tourism, the Russian Academy of Science, Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, State Committee for Fisheries of the Russian Federation. 
In February 2008 the Draft Laws ware submitted to the Government of the Russian Federation and after examination thereof, they will be submitted for consideration to the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. 
The Draft Law “On regulation of activities of the Russian citizens and legal entities in the Antarctic” consists of seven sections.
Section 1 “General provisions” consists of 5 articles which define general terms, used in the Draft Law text, including such terms as “governmental” and “non-governmental” activities in the Antarctic, “Russian Antarctic Expedition”, “operator”, “observer” and others. The participants, general principles and activity directions are defined.
Section 2 “State regulation of activity in the Antarctic” (6 articles) addresses the question of state participation in activity in the Antarctic. It defines general directions of state regulation of activity in the Antarctic, Federal executive authority power to regulate this activity, order and sources of financing governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. Particularly, the issues of Antarctic activity licensing and the need to obtain a permit for activities in the region are considered. The state guarantees and compensations for the Russian Antarctic Expedition employees are specified.
Section 3 “Organization of activity in the Antarctic” defines the status of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, its departmental affiliation, personnel structure and personnel qualification and health requirements. It defines the infrastructure of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, the rules of conduct in the immediate infrastructure area. It states the order for inbound and outbound transfer of equipment for governmental and non-governmental activities in Antarctica. Particular attention is given to protection of intellectual activity results, obtained in course of activity in the Antarctic.
Section 4 “Safety of activity in the Antarctic” (4 articles) specifies responsibility for safety compliance during carrying out of both, governmental and non-governmental activities. The investigation procedure of incidents occurring in the course of activity in Antarctica, as well as circle of people authorized to investigate them have been established. Persons responsible for search and rescue operations in the Antarctic and for emergency response during performance of governmental and non-governmental activities are designated. Necessity of obligatory preliminary contingency planning of emergency response to incidents including the financing source is defined. The rules of insurance or other financial security of activities in the Antarctic is specified. It is defined that non-governmental activities in the Antarctic is possible if only an operator has got an insurance contract (banking guarantee).
Section 5 “International cooperation in implementing activities in the Antarctic” (3 articles) establishes legal regime for foreign citizens and legal entities participating in activities of the Russian legal entities in the Antarctic.
Section 6 “Liability in implementing activities in the Antarctic” (2 articles) defines types of liability of citizens, responsible and legal entities for infringement of a law governing activities in the Antarctic. Legal rules of liability for harmful impact arising from the activities of the citizens and legal entities are established. Procedure and terms of payment the costs of response action is defined.
Section 7 “Concluding provisions” is related to entry into force of the Draft Law.
At the same time, for the purpose of combined correction approach to the legal regulation of activities in the Antarctic, amendments are being introduced to the Russian effective legislation (tariff legislation, administrative legislation, criminal legislation, licensing law).
In our judgment, adoption of these Draft Laws as a whole should brought into being the system of state control and regulation of  Russian citizens and legal entities activities in the Antarctic; the establishment of legal rules, constituting liability for non-compliance with the activity requirements; the strengthening of the Russian Antarctic Expedition activity management and increasing of  the personnel social security; as well as brought the Russian legislation in conformity with the current principles of international law.

