





Progress with the implementation of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels




Progress with the implementation of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels 
Report to ATCM XXXI & CEP XI 
 
Author: ACAP Interim Secretariat 

The Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) is a multilateral agreement that aims to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels.  The Agreement entered into force on 1 February 2004.  It has been developed under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).
The impetus for the development of ACAP was international recognition that albatrosses and petrels are amongst the most threatened birds in the world, with 83% of the world’s albatross species now considered to be endangered, compared with 11% of bird species overall.  The most significant threat to many species of albatrosses and petrels is mortality resulting from interactions with fishing vessels; but the breeding areas of many species are subject to a number of threats including non-native species (which may predate nests and breeding adults, compete for nesting space or destroy nesting habitat), avian diseases and climate change.
At present, eleven Parties – all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties – have ratified ACAP: Argentina, Australia, Chile, Ecuador, France, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom.  In addition Brazil has signed, but not yet ratified. 
Because of the relatively small number of Parties to the Agreement, the resources available to ACAP are currently modest.  A goal of existing Parties and the Interim Secretariat is to promote ACAP and encourage more Range States, including those which are a Party to the Antarctic Treaty but not yet a Party to ACAP, to accede to the Agreement and further global efforts to conserve albatrosses and petrels.

Priority actions
The Meeting of the Parties to ACAP has developed a work program and placed responsibility for its implementation with the ACAP Advisory Committee.  The work program reflects the areas of the Action Plan (Annex 2 to ACAP) which have been identified as priorities for immediate attention.  These are:
    • fisheries bycatch of albatrosses and petrels; and
    • the management and protection of breeding sites, including in particular any adverse effects of introduced species, habitat loss, climate change or avian diseases.
Recognising that much work has been done or is ongoing in these areas, the Advisory Committee has been tasked with recommending the best way to integrate the work of ACAP with existing initiatives.  The aim is to enhance and advance current initiatives, not to duplicate them.  In particular, in addressing seabird bycatch in fisheries, ACAP is seeking to work closely with Regional Fisheries Management Organisations by sharing information derived from tracking studies on the overlap between ACAP listed species and fisheries activities, and by calling on the considerable expertise that some ACAP Parties have in mitigating bycatch through technical solutions and modifying fishing gear and practices. 
Another key area of work by the Advisory Committee is the review of the population status and trend of all ACAP listed species, which presently include 26 southern hemisphere species (19 species of albatrosses and 7 species of petrels, including the Southern Giant Petrel).  This review, which is ongoing, is being carried out in consultation with other expert organisations, including the SCAR Group of Experts on Birds. 
These comprehensive and contemporary species' assessments will identify and prioritize areas where management action is required.  It is expected that the species assessments will primarily draw on data held by the Advisory Committee's Working Groups, however additional data from Antarctic Treaty Parties would be most welcome.  The assessments, which will be published on the ACAP website (www.acap.aq) to ensure their wide availability, will be updated regularly to ensure that the information they contain remains current.  A relational database has been developed and will be used to update the species assessments as new information becomes available.  A sample draft species assessment is attached for information. 
	
Future meetings
The 4th Meeting of the ACAP Advisory Committee will take place between 22 and 25 August 2008 in Cape Town, South Africa.  This meeting will be preceded by meetings of the Breeding Sites, Seabird Bycatch and Status and Trends Working Groups.  Antarctic Treaty Parties are invited to send representatives to these meetings.
ACAP and the Antarctic Treaty
In pursuing the objective of ACAP, ACAP Parties and the ACAP Secretariat seek to work in an integrated and synergistic manner with other international and national organisations with an interest in the conservation of albatrosses and petrels and the habitats and natural resources on which they depend. 
The significance of the Antarctic Treaty, which applies to an area of importance for nearly all ACAP listed species of albatross and petrel, is recognised in the text of ACAP.  It is also reflected in the invitation of an ACAP representative as an observer to meetings of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and as an expert to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM). 
In working with Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, ACAP Parties continue to:
        ◦ encourage the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol in a way that is mindful of the objective of ACAP to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels, with particular reference to the populations of ACAP species which occur within the Antarctic Treaty Area (see below);
        ◦ encourage Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to take the protective measures necessary to improve the conservation status of ACAP species, including those needed to avoid disturbance of the breeding habitat of ACAP species by national or non-government activities, and to give consideration to ACAP species when preparing environmental impact assessments and conducting environmental impact monitoring;
        ◦ welcome consultation with the Committee for Environmental Protection over matters of relevance to ACAP species and their habitats, in accordance with Article 12.2 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty; and
        ◦ identify opportunities for information exchange – in particular the ongoing reviews of the status and trends of ACAP species and the protection and management status of breeding sites.
ACAP species occurring within the Antarctic Treaty Area
ACAP Annex 1 includes fourteen species which occur regularly within the Antarctic Treaty Area: Black-browed Albatross (Thalassarche melanophrys), Campbell Albatross (Thalassarche impavida), Chatham Albatross (Thalassarche erimita), Grey Petrel (Procellaria cinerea), Grey-headed Albatross (Thalassarche chrysostoma), Light-mantled Sooty Albatross (Phoebetria palpebrata), Northern Giant Petrel (Macronectes halli), Northern Royal Albatross (Diomedea sanfordi), Salvin’s Albatross (Thalassarche salvini), Southern Giant Petrel (Macronectes giganteus), Sooty Albatross (Phoebetria fusca), Southern Royal Albatross (Diomedea epomophora), Wandering Albatross (Diomedea exulans) and White-chinned Petrel (Procellaria aequinoctialis).  The majority of these species do not breed in the area, but have foraging ranges which overlap with Antarctic waters.
The Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus is the single ACAP listed species which breeds within the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The recent workshop conducted by SCAR to review the population status and trends of this species in the Antarctic Treaty area concluded that “the present data and analysis do not support the designation of the Southern Giant Petrel as a Specially Protected Species under Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection”.  ACAP expresses its appreciation to the members of the workshop for undertaking this review.  The ACAP Secretariat will refer the SCAR workshop report to the next meeting of the ACAP Advisory Committee in August 2008 for its consideration, including of the proposed standardised methodology for future counts.  In the interim, the ACAP Secretariat supports the workshop’s recommendations that:
        ◦ additional surveys or censuses of breeding sites and of fledging success be undertaken using a consistent methodology and on a regular basis to enable better estimates to be made of current trends in the Southern Giant Petrel population (north and south of 60°S).  The ACAP Secretariat also notes that this could assist in discerning trends between west and east Antarctic populations;
        ◦ further quantitative modelling work, and the collection of information needed for such modelling, be undertaken; and that
        ◦ sites that have not been censused more than 10 years should be revisited and an updated assessment made.

The ACAP Secretariat also supports the call in the SCAR workshop report for data owners who submitted population data to the workshop to also make those data available to the ACAP Advisory Committee.  The Secretariat notes that, in most cases, these data owners are from countries which are Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and that their data would greatly facilitate the ACAP Advisory Committee's global population assessment of Southern Giant Petrels.  In doing so, the ACAP Secretariat gratefully acknowledges the support provided by SCAR in the provision of data on breeding sites to the ACAP Advisory Committee’s Breeding Sites Working Group.  

Finally, notwithstanding the workshop's advice and any subsequent decision about declaring Specially Protected Special status for Southern Giant Petrels, the ACAP Secretariat notes with concern advice in the workshop report that :
"Although the Southern Giant Petrel varies regionally in its sensitivity to human disturbance, at several breeding sites disturbance by National Operators and by umanaged (sic) tourism/visitation has caused either emigration or breeding failure, and may continue doing so in the absence of any change in current procedures or in the absence of adherence to guidelines for particular areas (e.g. management plans for ASMAs, or extant guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds)human disturbance"

The ACAP Secretariat encourages the CEP and the ATCM to consider whether additional protective measures are needed, including to improve protection of breeding habitat and reduce human disturbance by government and non-government activities.  

