





Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group




Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group

1. Introduction
Deception Island was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). Working Paper XXVIII ATCM/ WP 20 and Information Papers XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63, XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48 submitted to the CEP summarise the extensive consultation amongst those Parties with major interests in Deception Island, and the process that lead to its adoption as an ASMA.
Following the formal adoption of ASMA No. 4, XXIX ATCM/IP19 reported on the establishment of a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the plan, and on the success of the Deception Island management group in its first year to effectively resolve the previously reported conflicts between science and tourism. At XXX ATCM, IP 108 gave an overview of the activities undertaken on Deception Island during the 2006/07 austral summer, reported on two cruise ship incidents which occurred within the ASMA, and informed the Meeting of the planned intersessional work that the Management Group were considering in light of their concerns about these incidents.
This paper is a summary of the intersessional activities undertaken by the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group and the planned work over  the next intersessional period, and reports on the scientific and management measures put in place in order to fulfil the objectives and principles of ASMA No. 4 Management Plan. 

2.  Overview of Activities at Deception Island in 2007/08
2.1 Science & logistics
Deception Island is an area of outstanding scientific interest, in particular for studies in geological and biological sciences. Volcanic events offer the rare opportunity to study the effects of environmental change on a recently formed ecosystem, and the dynamics of ecosystems as they recover from natural perturbations. Long term seismological and biological data-sets have been collected at Decepciόn Station (Argentina) and Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain). 
Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain) was open from November 22nd 2007 to March 10th 2008. A successful programme of science was undertaken during this present austral summer season, which included the following scientific projects: 1) Geodesic, geophysics and tele-detection studies at Deception island and its surroundings (Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands); 2) Seismic-volcanic monitoring, superficial structure and cortical model of Deception Island; 3) Evolution of the active permafrost layer at Deception Island; 4) Modelling and thermal monitoring of active layer and permafrost at Livingston and Deception islands ; 5) Parasite-hosted interaction and immune response in three Antarctic penguin species: Effects to global change; 6) Control of the chemical contamination in Antarctic waters; 7) Crustal structure of the South Shetland area using receiver function analyses on permanent, broadband seismic stations; and 8) Nature and development of continental margin and initial stages of oceanic gateways opening in the NE Antarctic Peninsula (Bransfield Strait and Drake Passage). 
Geophysical and geodetic instruments to record volcanic activity on Deception Island and its surroundings were maintained. A full list of scientific instruments with indication of their geographical location was circulated to members of the ASMA Management Group. 
At Gabriel de Castilla Station, logistic activities were undertaken to improve the quality of services provided to researchers and technicians at the station.  These included: 
    • Station’s indoor lodging capabilities were updated and enhanced. 
    • A number of bulk fuel facilities were provided with adequate bunding, as a secondary containment in case of oil spills. 
    • A 1500 Watt wind turbine was installed to test performance of renewable energies at the station. 
    • A system to allow remote medical treatment has operated throughout the season. 
    • Zodiac drivers’ life suits with GPS transmitters were tested in situ this season
Other management activities with scientific and logistical support undertaken at Gabriel de Castilla included the elaboration of a full report on the new landforms created after the opening of ‘Escondido Lake’, so as to incorporate it during the revision of the ASMA Management Plan; and the in situ testing of evacuation routes in case of a volcanic emergency, in order to update those already included in the Management Plan. 
Decepción Station (Argentina) was open from January 15th until February 27th, 2008. At Decepción, scientific activities focused on Geology and Geophysics. These included vulcanological monitoring activities -coupled with the Spanish National Antarctic Program-, elaboration of stratigraphic profiles, detailed geomorphological cartography (including monitoring of natural processes leading to degradation of volcanic landforms), permafrost mapping and behaviour (through in situ and regional measurements), and other geophysical studies. Due to current logistic constraints, some planned activities at Decepción station, such as remaining clean-up activities and relocation of the existing sewage discharge outlet, were rescheduled. 
During this period Chile also developed a scientific project (Antarctica, source of microbiological resources), which aimed to study the island’s microbiology, mainly that associated to extreme conditions, such as high temperature. 

2.2 Tourist Activities
According to a list circulated to the Deception Island Management Group prior to the season a total of 261 tourist ship visits were planned to Deception Island between 22nd October 2007 to 29th March 2008, .Many of these visits involved landings by a single vessel at more than one location on the island. This figure excludes yacht visits and includes only some non-IAATO vessels. The exact number of IAATO ship visits and passengers landed ashore will be reported by IAATO through the post-visit reporting system.

3. Work of the Deception Island Management Group

3.1. Activities in past inter-sessional period (2007-08)
During the previous intersessional period the Deception Island Management Group conducted extensive discussions related to management of Deception Island in the aftermath of the two shipping incidents involving tourist vessels during the 2006/07 austral summer in Port Foster. The issues raised during discussions are complex and wide reaching and needs further consideration. In light of the discussions the Deception Island Management Group has concluded that it will initiate the review process for the ASMA Nr. 4 Management Plan, due in 2010, this year (see below). 
On behalf of the Parties involved in the Deception Island Management Group, a set of Site Guidelines for Whalers Bay were presented to the XXXI ATCM as Working Paper No. 56, for consideration. The Management Group particularly thank Norway, the UK and IAATO, who worked on the modification of the Whalers Bay Visitor Code, as included in the ASMA Management Plan, into ATCM Site Guidelines during the intersessional period. These Draft Site Guidelines were considered by all members of the Group, who provided useful comments which were included in the final version.  

3.2. Planned inter-sessional work (2008-09)
The aim of the Deception Island Management Plan is to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of Deception Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, logistics, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values.  
The Deception Island Management Group will meet in the margins of the XXXI ATCM to set the framework to initiate the review of the ASMA No. 4 Management Plan (see above).
Discussions will be held within the context of the objectives of the ASMA Management Plan, which are to: 
    • assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities in the Area, encourage co-operation between Antarctic Treaty Parties and other stakeholders, and manage potential or actual conflicts of interest between different activities, including science, logistics and tourism;
    • avoid unnecessary degradation, by human disturbance, to the unique natural values of the Area;
    • minimise the possibility of non-native species being introduced through human activities;
    • prevent unnecessary disturbance, destruction or removal of historic buildings, structures and artefacts;
    • safeguard those working in or near to, or visiting, the Area from the significant volcanic risk;
    • provide an opportunity for visitors to experience this unique island, and promote an awareness, through education, of its significance. 

Based on these discussions the Group will, over the intersessional period, consider different alternatives to reduce the risk of accidents at Deception Island, from the perspective of safety, environment and research. These may include management options related to issues such as navigational hazards, anchorage and the evaluation of adequate ship characteristics, and will be approached within the framework of the ongoing ATCM discussions about passenger vessel safety, whilst recognising the site-site specific nature of the Deception Island Management Group. 
The agenda for the intersessional period will also cover issues related to the need for providing appropriate protection to the benthic communities of Port Foster and other sensitive areas, monitoring cumulative impacts, and the need to continue reformatting Visitor Code of Conducts included in the ASMA Management Plan into ATCM Site Guidelines. 

The Group will provide a report to CEP XII with the progress made on the above.

4. Conclusions
Based on the assumption that the growth and diversification of human activities on Deception Island may lead to an increase in the risk of environmental impacts and/or shipping accidents, the Management Group has decided to initiate a review of the ASMA No. 4 Management Plan, originally due in 2010. The Group will consider different alternatives to underpin the comprehensive protection of the unique and scientifically important environment of Deception Island and Port Foster, and to monitor and mitigate the cumulative impacts of
