





Australia’s Antarctic Air Service 2007/08





Australia’s Antarctic Air Service 2007/08
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia’s Antarctic Air Service commenced regular flights between Australia and Antarctica during the 2007/08 Austral summer.
Objective of the Australian Antarctic Air Service
The Australian Antarctic Division commenced regular flights between Australia and Antarctica during the 2007/08 Austral summer using a commercial twin-engine jet.  The introduction of the air service is a key element of the Australian Antarctic Division’s strategic direction to continue to develop a modern, flexible and cost‑efficient Australian Antarctic program. 
The air service enhances Australia’s ability to support scientific research in Antarctica by reducing reliance on ship‑based transport for passenger movement and enhancing operational flexibility.  The air service also allows the further internationalisation of the Australian Antarctic program and provides the ability to access Antarctica rapidly to respond to emergencies.
Implementation
The Australia‑Antarctica air link operates during the summer months between Hobart, in Tasmania and Wilkins Runway, near Casey station.
Wilkins Runway is a 3,600 m ice runway, capable of supporting the operation of conventional wheeled aircraft.  The Australian Civil Aviation Safety Authority certified the runway in December 2007. 
The aircraft used for the service is an Airbus A319LR, operated by Skytraders Pty Ltd.  The aircraft is capable of transporting up to 28 passengers and 4,000 kg of cargo.  The aircraft can also be reconfigured to carry additional passengers, should the need arise.
The aircraft is fitted with advanced polar navigational equipment and additional fuel tanks to enable a return flight without the need to refuel in Antarctica.  The flight time between Hobart and Wilkins Runway is approximately 4.5 hours.
During the first season of operations, eight flights were conducted to Wilkins Runway and two flights to the McMurdo sea ice runway. An estimated ten to 20 flights are planned for future seasons. 
The inter‑continental air service complements the existing use of ski‑equipped CASA‑212 aircraft within Antarctica.
The air service meets all of Australia’s domestic legal obligations and Antarctic Treaty requirements.  The environmental impacts associated with the air service are monitored through an environmental monitoring plan.
Ships will continue to be used for marine science, station bulk cargo resupply and passenger movement.


