





Survey on existing procedures concerning introduction of non native species in Antarctica





Survey on existing procedures concerning 
introduction of non native species in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by COMNAP under 
agenda item 8.a “Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna / Quarantine and Non-native Species”

Introduction
1.  During COMNAP XVIII (Hobart, Australia, 2006), the topic of Introduction of Non Native Species was discussed at length within the meeting of the Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON). In particular, members discussed what practical efforts the Network could undertake to assist COMNAP and, ultimately CEP discussions, on this emerging topic. 
2.  Although many National Programs did have a range of relevant procedures in place, a more global view of what was in place around the continent was considered necessary.  After consultation with the COMNAP Environmental Coordinating Group (ECG) it was decided that AEON undertake a survey of its members on existing procedures concerning the minimisation of risk of introduction of non native species. 
3.  Such a survey would contribute to analysing what procedures National Antarctic Programs already had in place concerning introduction of non native species - this included prevention, surveillance and response measures. The survey was conducted in May 2007 and findings were reported to COMNAP XIX Meeting, held in Washington D.C. (USA), in July 2007. A summary of its results are presented in this Information Paper to CEP XI. 
The AEON Survey 
4.  The AEON survey sought information on existing procedures within National Antarctic Programs to minimise introduction on alien species, based on three main topics: 
    • awareness programs;  
    • operational procedures; and 
    • monitoring/surveillance programs. 
5.  Fifteen participants (almost 90% of the AEON membership) contributed with responses to this survey. These represented National Antarctic Programs that together run almost 70% of all Antarctic stations. The results of this survey are therefore deemed to provide a realistic picture of the current efforts made by the Antarctic Parties as a whole to minimise introduction of alien species into the continent. 
General Results
6.  The results of this survey demonstrate that National Antarctic Programs (hereinafter referred to as NAPs) are currently tackling, to a greater or lesser extent depending on the case, the issue of introduction of alien species into Antarctica. Thirteen NAPs had systems in place specifically designed to minimise such introduction and another NAP was addressing most aspects associated to this matter through implementing national procedures including awareness, operational and monitoring programs. 
7.  In general terms, procedures related to awareness programs – the first, basic procedures contributing to minimising introductions - are the most widespread (86.66% of NAPs surveyed implement these programs, see graphs below) followed by monitoring programs (53.33%) and operational procedures (38.33%) (see Graph 1). 




Graph 1: Outline survey results concerning the measures put in place by National Antarctic Programs (see details in the text)

8.  Monitoring programs are best implemented among those NAPs whose institutional structures allow easy articulation between policy and research agencies. 
9.  Guidelines and recommendations related to the issue of alien species developed by either SCAR or COMNAP (or both together) are widely used by NAPs. This included 
    • the SCAR “Code of Conduct for Field Work: Transfer of alien species to Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands and between location transfer of species” developed by SCAR's Program on Regional Sensitivity to Climate Change in Antarctic Terrestrial and Limnetic Ecosystems (RiSCC); and 
    • the “COMNAP Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica (January 2005)”. 
10.  The positive effect of scientific projects such as the IPY “Aliens in Antarctica” project also demonstrates how relevant research projects can promote the implementation of additional practical measures aimed at minimising introductions. 
11.  Regarding operational procedures, simple, inexpensive methods are the most extensively used among NAPs. Implementations of cleaning and inspection procedures were reported by slightly over half the participants. More expensive, or difficult to implement, procedures (e.g. those requiring the use of particular chemical agents and/or protocols) were less used. For instance, only 35% of respondents implemented disinfection procedures, and only 9%  implemented more exhaustive “quarantine” type procedures  – that is procedures involving isolation of certain items before transit to Antarctica.  
12.  It also seems that national programs subject to domestic legislation requiring the implementation of measures to minimise introductions to areas outside Antarctica are more likely to implement such measures in Antarctica.

Specific Results
1. Awareness programs
13.  Awareness programs are, in general terms, reasonably well covered by NAPs. Out of 15 NAPs, 13 carry out some sort of program/course/briefing which includes topics aimed at creating awareness on the need to avoid/minimise introduction of alien species, before departure to Antarctica. For more than half of these NAPs, these are part of broader environmental training programs/courses. Two NAPs were planning an increase in awareness programs during the 2007-2008 austral summer season. 
14.  The duration of these programs ranges between 0.5 and 4 hours. In all cases they are mandatory, but in only four cases (26.66%) they require evaluation after their completion. The validity period of the awareness program/course/briefing, when applicable, varies between 1 and 4 years, but some refer to only one season     (one year or less).  
15.  All these awareness programs/courses/briefings specifically refer to the effects of alien species on the Antarctic environment, and the likely ways to minimise introductions. Six NAPs (40%) include also the issue of the influence of global warming on the success of alien species, and five of these NAPs include, among other topics, known examples of introductions, practical demonstrations on how to minimise them and links to applied scientific research on this issue. 
16.  Two thirds of the fifteen NAPs carrying out some sort of program/course/briefing rely on some reference material prepared to support them - in the form of handbooks, guidelines, or similar. Out of these, only three NAPs (20%) have posted such reference material on their public web site.
2. Operational procedures
17.  Results for operational procedures for air and ship cargo show similar patterns, with some 40% of NAPs implementing some kind of procedures. Nearly 70% of these procedures were associated with basic schemes of cleaning and visual inspection. Not as widely implemented are quarantine, disinfection and other more elaborate procedures - dedicated removal and eradication programs, specific requirements for suppliers and issuing of certificates, among others. Reasons why some of these more elaborate procedures are implemented are sometimes associated with domestic or international (export-related) legislation or sometimes with an actual discovery of alien species, which acted as a triggering event. 
18.  When dealing with expeditioners' personal effects, the level of implementation of operational procedures falls down to 30%. This may imply that NAPs rely on expeditioners’ self compliance of those provisions included in the awareness programs. 
3. Monitoring/surveillance programs
19.  Slightly over half of respondents indicated they were undertaking research on the issue of aliens' introductions. These studies are aimed at different scientific objectives but they all contribute to the identification of species’ introductions into the Antarctic. 
20.  Organisms found through these research programs include all kind of species’ groups, mostly invertebrates, but also plants, small vertebrates, fungi and microbes. These discoveries reveal different status of survival of the species considered: 
    • “transient” - species that have survived in small populations for a short period, but which have either died out naturally or have been removed by human intervention; 
    • “persistent” - species that have survived, established and reproduced for many years in a restricted locality, but which have not expanded their range from a specific location); and
    • “invasive” - species whose introduction and/or spread threaten biological diversity.
21.  Importantly, the results of these research studies have prompted implementation of new, additional measures in more than 60% of the NAPs surveyed. These new measures included procedures such as requirements for certificates, closer cargo inspections, introduction of new technologies, dedicated eradication programs, further monitoring studies, increase in awareness programs, and elaboration of more stringent protocols/guidelines. Some NAPs indicated that these new measures proved successful.
Observations and Suggestions
22.  Awareness programs are well covered by NAPs. An awareness program is the first step to take when dealing with a “new” issue, particularly with repeat expeditioners and crew, who are less enthusiastic than first-timers to incorporate new issues and practices. Specific courses on the aliens' problem cannot ensure an immediate response, but they surely reinforce the understanding that new, high standards of prevention need to be adhered to. Requiring for evaluation after completion of an awareness program can also contribute to further stress the importance of applying such new, higher standards of prevention. 
23.  In particular for NAPs undertaking activities in the Peninsula Area, awareness programs should include a link with the issue of Global Warming. Reference material is a useful complementary aid, especially if available to NAP expeditioners through the Internet. Wide distribution of reference material would also favour standardisation. This would become particularly relevant when international cooperation is involved. Current work undertaken by COMNAP through its Training Officers Network (TRAINET) should help fill a number of gaps and facilitate exchange of reference material between NAPs. 
24.  Monitoring/surveillance programs are also reasonably well covered by NAPs, and have already proved useful triggers to the implementation of additional operational procedures. Implementation of monitoring/surveillance programs would be facilitated by improved exchange of information with relevant SCAR groups. Useful documents elaborated by SCAR, COMNAP or both together, such as the “Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica” (1996) and the “Practical Guidelines for Developing and designing Environmental Monitoring Programs in Antarctica” (2004) should be updated regularly and widely distributed among NAPs. 
25.  More could be done on operational procedures. These procedures are mostly related to cargo – a recognised vector of introduced species.  More extensive use of basic techniques/procedures (such as cleaning, disinfection,visual inspection) would help minimise introductions, particularly of: 
    • mesofauna (small macroscopic invertebrates such as collembola, insects, enchytreids, nematodes...); 
    • microfauna (microscopic invertebrates such as mites, rotifers, small nematodes...), and
    • plant propagules (seeds…). 
26.  The threat of introduction of non-native species into the Antarctic has emerged recently in the discussions of the CEP, in particular in response to new information on climate change, and has received a high priority in its 5-year work plan. This COMNAP survey has shown that the issue was already addressed by most National Antarctic Programs through awareness programs, and that a significant number of Programs also  implemented  a range of operational procedures aimed at minimising the risk of introduction of non native species. Lessons learned from this survey will be useful to National Antarctic Programs to continue improve their procedures. It is hoped this work can also be useful to future CEP discussions on this issue. 


