





Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica





Update on the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Introduction
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research circulated draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) approved and endorsed by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, on 29 December 2006 to all concerned parties and the chair of CEP-X. The written comments on the draft CEE, were received from, Australia, Germany, United Kingdom and New Zealand. Full text of draft CEE was submitted to XXX-ATCM as an attachment to IP-007. Non technical summary was submitted as WP-004. In summer 2006-07 additional baseline data was collected and submitted as IP-139 to XXX-ATCM. During the presentation of draft CEE, comments were also made from various parties.
The CEP concluded that the draft CEE met the requirement of Article 3 Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty. The information provided in draft CEE as well as additional information collected later and submitted to ATCM, supported the document for its structure and quality. It was recommended by CEP to ATCM for endorsement.
Progress after XXX-ATCM
Preliminary design of the station was prepared by IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany (winner of global competition). Design conceptualized the containerised modules and Combined Heat and Power for maximum utilization of the energy to help to reduce the air emissions.  The design has the flexibility for extension, easy to build and removal after useful life of the station. India is working closely with consultants to improve the station design to reduce further environmental impact. In this connection, two meetings were held with consultants, first on 3 September 2007 at NCAOR, Goa and another on 29th March, 2008 at New Delhi. Few augmentations, such as inclusion of wind energy turbine in power production, wastewater treatment system, generators, structural strength and safety have been further considered to make improvements in the final design of the station. 
During summer 2007-08 scientific studies were carried out at Larsemann Hills including collection of further baseline data and close contour survey of the area. Automatic Weather Station (AWS) was also installed at the site. Findings of the scientific studies carried out in the filed of Geomagnetism, Geology, Biology, Environment and Glaciology, shall be incorporated in final design of the station
It is expected that the primary site preparation for the station such as landing site and platform shall be started in summer 2008-09. New station construction shall commence in summer 2009-10 and the station shall be commissioned by year 2010-11.
Final CEE
The final CEE shall include comprehensive study, detailed description and technical specification of final design of station, all the valuable suggestions received from the parties, cumulative impacts and its mitigation measures. India shall circulate the final CEE to all parties at least sixty days before commencing the activity related to construction of the station. The final CEE shall also be available on www.ncaor.gov.in

