





Education website for schools: www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk





Education website for schools: www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
    1. At ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh the UK presented a new interactive web-based resource “Discovering Antarctica” (ATCM XXIX/IP041).  The website, www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk was designed as an educational resource for 11-16 year olds and formed part of the UK’s contribution to IPY.  The ATCM warmly welcomed the website and this paper provides an update on recent developments.
Background
    2. The original aim of www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk was to bring together information about Antarctica into a single resource, making it fun and interactive for young people, but also to be helpful to teachers in lesson planning.  The website contains background information and facts about the Antarctic and describes the environment, climate change, wildlife, science and the Antarctic Treaty.  
    3. Discovering Antarctica has proved to be extremely popular with both students and teachers – there have been over 2 million “hits” since its launch in 2006 with a strong annual increase.   The website was nominated for a UK Children’s BAFTA (British Academy of Film and Television Awards) and ‘Webby’ Award (International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences).  As noted at ATCM XXX (Final Report para 242), the text of the website has also been translated into Spanish.
New Developments
    4. Within the UK, there continues to be strong educational outreach and enhanced links to the national education curriculum relating to Antarctica and ‘Polar Extremes’.  Discovering Antarctica has proved to be a crucial resource in delivering to the needs of both pupils and teachers.
    5. In order to keep the website relevant and interesting, and to extend its audience, it has been regularly updated since its launch in 2006.  As indicated last year, the website has now been further developed to include new material on IPY, which has been incorporated into a new section titled “Pole to Pole”.
Next Steps
    6. We will continue to update and refresh the website to ensure it remains a valuable tool to facilitate education and outreach particularly to underpin the relevant objectives of the International Polar Year 2007/08. We would welcome feedback especially from Treaty Parties and other stakeholders who may have used the Discovering Antarctica website.  

April 2008

