





Example of US IPY Education Project: Online Magazine for Polar Science in Schools





Example of US IPY Education Project: Online Magazine for Polar Science in Schools 

Summary
As part of the International Polar Year (IPY), the United States has developed a number of education and outreach projects.  The audience of these projects ranges from kindergarten and elementary students to graduate students to the general public.  Projects include joint presentations by polar researchers, television and radio programs, online forums such as blogs and wikis, classroom lesson plans, group discussions, films, and interactive science projects among many other things.  With such a wide variety of projects, the US looks forward to a continued strong IPY presence in schools and with the public.  
More information about US IPY education projects can be found at www.ipy.gov.  This paper highlights just one of the many IPY education projects, which is entitled “Beyond Penguins and Polar Bears” – http://beyondpenguins.nsdl.org – an online magazine resource for polar education targeting classroom teachers and elementary students.  
Project Details
“Beyond Penguins and Polar Bears” is an online magazine that provides teachers with polar curriculum resources, a discussion blog about polar topics and education, and professional development.  The magazine focuses on teaching materials for elementary school students (ages 5 to 11 years old) but can also be applied to other ages.  The project was funded by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) in which both the Office of Polar Programs and the Education Directorate provided support for the project.  The magazine was developed by the College of Education and Human Ecology and the Byrd Polar Research Center, both at the Ohio State University. 
“Beyond Penguins and Polar Bears” is a monthly magazine and went live in March with its first issue, “A Sense of Place,” which introduced comparisons between the Arctic and Antarctic.  In total, 20 issues are planned.  Each issue has a central theme and includes five sections: “In the Field: Scientists at Work”; “Professional Learning”; “Science and Literacy”; “Across the Curriculum”; and “Polar News and Notes.”  In addition to providing engaging science activities, compelling images, and rich text, the web format of the magazine also allows for multimedia resources such as podcasts and videos for both students and teachers.
The web magazine provides teachers with inquiry-based teaching materials in which students ask questions and design experiments.  These materials incorporate science topics that are part of the required curriculum in school districts in the US and put these topics in a polar context.  For instance, teachers can find information and teaching materials on geography, fossils, seasons, weather, and ecosystems, all placed in the polar setting.  In addition, the magazine highlights polar science as a means to teach other disciplines in new and engaging ways, particularly mathematics, art, and reading.  An “In the Field” section of the magazine highlights the work of individual researchers and their research teams in the field, often combining several concepts for students to see how different disciplines combine to solve a problem.  
As a web-based resource, the magazine is free and provides easy access to all materials as well as updates when new material is added.  Through the National Science Teachers Association and the National Science Digital Library, the magazine offers online seminars for learning about how to use the resources it provides and how these resources can be integrated into the curriculum.
Future
The US looks forward to future issues of “Beyond Penguins and Polar Bears” as IPY continues.  The web magazine is an important resource for teachers to integrate polar science into the classroom in engaging ways while meeting curriculum needs.  In addition, as data from IPY science projects will be analyzed for many years beyond the official end of IPY, education programs like “Beyond Penguins and Polar Bears” will continue to sustain interest and provide valuable education and outreach for IPY science and polar science in years to come.  

