





Australia’s Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Science




Australia’s Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Science
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
Australia has a long history of conducting research on Antarctica’s role in the global climate system.  Formerly, most research was conducted into the physical basis for climate change, but more recently a strong focus has developed on the effects of change on the biota of the continent and the Southern Ocean1.  In terms of management opportunities Australia’s view is that the terrestrial and marine environments are not isolated and management options for the future must be based on research conducted on both.
Introduction
Australia’s systematic program of scientific research in Antarctica began in 1954, when the Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition was inaugurated.  The earliest research at Mawson station (67°36’S; 62°52’E) focused on glaciology and cosmic ray physics and several datasets extend back to the 1950s.  Research at Davis station (68°35’S; 77°58’E) followed in 1957 and at Wilkes station (66°15’S; 110°32’E) in 1959.  Following the closure of Wilkes in 1969, research was continued at Casey station two kilometres away.  Australia’s current program of research into climate change is greatly assisted by the occurrence of datasets begun over half a century ago at these locations.  This research, which focuses on east Antarctica and the adjacent Southern Ocean, contributes directly to the global climate change research programs of the World Climate Research Program, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research; Australia’s national climate change research agenda; and, ultimately, to the governments of the world through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Ice sheet studies
Australia has studied Antarctica’s ice sheet mass balance since the International Geophysical Year (1957/58) and has collected detailed data on ice flow, ice thickness and other ice sheet characteristics ever since during over-snow traverses deep into the interior of East Antarctica, and along more than 5,000 km of the coastal perimeter.  While these observations alone are insufficient to accurately estimate the state of balance of the ice sheet, they provide essential information to calibrate and validate new satellite measurements of the ice sheet and to develop numerical models that are used to project its response to change.  A major focus of Australian ice sheet studies has been in the Lambert Glacier basin, the largest drainage basin in east Antarctica, where it has been estimated that the ice sheet is close to being in balance.  In the Amery Ice Shelf, where the Lambert Glacier flows out to sea, studies are underway to understand the thermodynamics of the interaction between the ice and the underlying ocean.
Sea Ice
It has long been recognised that representation of sea ice in coupled ocean-atmosphere models is essential for numerical weather prediction and for climate projection.  In the southern hemisphere knowledge of sea ice characteristics and of the processes that determine these, and the interaction of sea ice with the atmosphere and ocean are not well known.  Australia’s sea ice research over the last two decades has greatly improved understanding of Antarctic sea ice processes, particularly through sophisticated, multi-disciplinary in situ measurements of its extent, thickness, concentration, drift and the thickness of snow that accumulates on it in campaigns from research ice breakers operating within the ice at most times of the year.
Observations from the Australian sea ice research campaign Antarctic Remote Ice Sensing Experiment (ARISE) in 2003 are being directly applied to the validation and development of NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) satellite algorithms.  The future development of satellite instruments for monitoring the Antarctic rely heavily on high quality field data to ‘ground‑truth’ the data from prototype sensors deployed in the field and satellites.  The results of satellite-validation studies from the ARISE program have made a significant contribution to improving satellite-derived estimates of sea ice concentration and temperature, surface albedo and skin-surface temperature, snow thickness and the distribution of thin ice – all key elements required for future climate predictions.
More than two decades of ship-based data on sea ice thickness have resulted in the publication of a circumpolar climatology of sea ice thickness that not only establishes a baseline against which to measure future change, but also provides a data set against which climate models can be assessed or initialised.
A number of Australian studies using proxy data for sea ice extent suggest there has been a significant decline in Antarctic sea ice extent between 1950 and 1970, before satellite observations commenced.  These studies have been based on historical whaling data and on the concentration of methanesulphonic acid (a by-product of sea ice algae respiration) in a coastal ice core at Law Dome near Casey station.2, 3  They point to the possibility of abrupt recent changes in sea ice extent, and raise questions on a range of climate variables. 
Ice cores
Australia’s early work on ice cores from the late 1960s was aimed primarily at understanding the dynamics of the ice sheet by measuring properties, such as temperature and crystal size and orientation.  Through the 1980s, an increased interest in palaeoclimate prompted by the realisation of recent climate change led to accelerated international interest in retrieval of ice cores for climate studies.  Australia’s contribution to palaeoclimatology has focussed on an ice core from the high snowfall areas in the coastal region of East Antarctica, mainly at Law Dome.  In 1993, a major project culminated in the recovery of a 1,200 m long surface-to-bedrock ice core from near the Dome summit providing a record extending back some 90,000 years, with higher time‑resolution for recent millennia than any other Antarctic ice core.  From the Law Dome ice core has come clear recognition of the rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide since the start of the industrial revolution.4
As the mechanisms underlying the climate links and the proxies measured in the ice are better understood, there is considerable potential to shed light on observed climate changes in Australia, as well as Antarctica and the southern hemisphere generally.
Southern Ocean oceanography
Ocean water from the polar regions is changing more rapidly than those elsewhere.  Through repeated samples taken along standard ocean transects (in particular World Ocean Circulation Experiment transects I9 and SR3) Australian researchers have revealed changes in the Southern Ocean, documenting global-scale changes in ocean properties that are consistent with the pattern of global warming in climate model projections.  This work has included new analytical approaches that help guide the physical interpretation of changes in the ocean, approaches that have been widely adopted by other researchers in the field.  Australian research in the Southern Ocean has made a direct contribution to improving projections of future climate change through new models explaining the mixing of water bodies, such as eddies, and their effect on surface warming.  The rate at which water is transferred from the sea surface to the deep ocean determines how much heat and carbon dioxide the ocean can store, and therefore regulates the rate and magnitude of climate change.  The Adélie Land coast of Antarctica has been shown to be a primary source of Antarctic Bottom Water (along with the Ross and Weddell Seas) contributing about 25 per cent of Antarctica’s total.
One of the most important ways in which the Southern Ocean influences global climate is by absorbing and storing carbon dioxide.  About half of all the carbon dioxide ever released by human activities is now found in the ocean and about 34 per cent of it has been taken up in the Southern Ocean.  The overturning circulation transports much of this carbon north and stores it in the sub-Antarctic region.  Australian research has obtained a multi-year record of the amount of carbon sinking as particles in the Southern Ocean and determined that this carbon export occurs more effectively in the sub-Antarctic than Antarctic waters.  This work contributes strongly to an understanding of the consequences of increased levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere on Antarctic and sub-Antarctic marine ecosystems, and, in particular, on the depth at which the saturation concentration of aragonite (which many organisms need for their shells and skeletons) goes into negative balance.  Ocean acidification, as this process is called, is emerging as a most significant environmental threat that will become more apparent in the high latitude, cold waters of the Earth before its effects are seen in the more temperate regions, and Australia will continue to monitor levels of dissolved carbon.
Biological work
Australia started dedicated research into changes in the plankton communities of the Southern Ocean in 1991 through the deployment of continuous plankton recorders on annual ocean transects.  The program has spread to involve seven countries and already there is evidence of a southerly occurrence of species which, at the start of the work, were found at the northern end of the transects.5  These findings parallel the changes found in ocean water quality.  SCAR has elevated recently the importance of the Southern Ocean Continuous Plankton Recording to the status of Action Group.  As a major contribution to Antarctic IPY research, Australia coordinated the Census of Antarctic Marine Life in which about 20 nations have participated and are still participating.  Not only is the project providing an inventory or benchmark of biodiversity in the high-latitude Southern Ocean but also it is monitoring the depth at which aragonite-seeking organisms occur.6  It is also a SCAR-approved Action Group. 
Terrestrial research into plant phenology is showing changes in the dates of flowering and seed setting of sub-Antarctic species, and a significant IPY project undertaken in the 2007/08 Antarctic season, Aliens in Antarctica, will reveal the possible threat of Antarctic invasions through the unwitting introduction of propagules in cargo and on clothing worn by tourists and government program staff.7
Conclusion
Australia has been collecting climate-related data in Antarctica and the Southern ocean for over four decades.  Today its physical science research has a strong focus on ice sheet, sea ice, ice shelf and oceanographic research in a fully-integrated program.  It intends to continue the regular WOCE transect surveys to track changes in deep waters, to develop its ice core research to include an examination of atmospheric composition prior to one million years ago when the climate cycle changed from 41,000 years to a 100,000 years periodicity, and to better understand the dynamics and extent of sea ice and how these interact with the thermo-dynamics of the Southern Ocean.  Opportunities are being developed to work with remotely sensed data to better understand the dynamics of the ice sheet and its possible effects on future sea level rise.
Australia has a shorter record of systematic biological monitoring of the consequences of environmental change than it has of the physical environment.  Australia recognises, however, that protection of the terrestrial environment cannot be undertaken in isolation to the marine environment.  The two systems are inextricably linked and much of Antarctica’s biological values have their bases in the marine ecosystem.  To this end, Australia’s climate related research in Antarctica links marine observations (such as increasing ocean acidification; krill population dynamics; biodiversity monitoring) to the abundance and long-term health of populations of penguins, flighted seabirds, and marine mammals.  Through Australia’s Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre8 there is a strong emphasis on understanding the connections between changes in the physical environment of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and the sustainability and ecological change in Southern Ocean ecosystems.  It views future research into climate issues as being best conducted through joint, collaborative studies pursued by terrestrial and marine scientists working together.

