





Report of Main Engine Failure of FV Argos Georgia in the Ross Sea on 24 December 2007




Report of Main Engine Failure of FV Argos Georgia in the Ross Sea on 24 December 2007
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
    1. This paper provides a brief summary of the actions taken by the operators of the FV Argos Georgia after the vessel suffered a main engine failure in the Ross Sea on 24 December 2007.  The paper also highlights some of the lessons learnt, which may be of interest for wider discussions relating to the safety of vessels operating in remote areas of the Southern Ocean.
Background
    2. On the 24th December 2007, the British flagged FV Argos Georgia suffered a serious engine failure whilst exiting CCAMLR Statistical Subarea 88.1 SSRU (C) in the Ross Sea and negotiating the heavy sea ice heading South into the Ross Sea at position 67 35 S, 176 23 W. Major damage was caused to one of the main engine cylinder assemblies and it was not possible to repair with the normal operational spares carried onboard the vessel. The vessel was left drifting in the ice without propulsion – bow movements only. The two onboard engineers estimated that it would take in the region of twelve to eighteen hours to repair the vessel once the spare parts were available.

    3. Initial contact with other vessels in the immediate area proved negative with regards to the availability of the spares. There were several other vessels operating in the Ross Sea, including the FV Argos Helena and the FV Argos Froyanes, but they were too far away, or inaccessible because of ice cover, to be of immediate assistance. 
Contingency Plans
    4. As a contingency, while other options were considered, the tourist vessel MV Spirit of Enderby (also know as MV Professor Khromov) agreed to carry the necessary spares.  This vessel left New Zealand on 2 January 2008, but would have taken 12 days to arrive at the location of the FV Argos Georgia. This would have meant that FV Argos Georgia would have been adrift for 22 days in a variance of ice cover between 80 – 95%.  On 29 December, however, the Argentine flagged FV Antarctic III met up with the FV Argos Georgia and subsequently remained with her until the vessel received the necessary spares.

Options for Airdrop
    5. In order to expedite the delivery of the required spare parts, options for an airdrop were considered.  The drifting vessel was not in an emergency situation, but it maintained regular contact with the New Zealand Maritime Rescue and Co-ordination Centre, lest the situation worsened.  There were two potential options for an airdrop, however, after consulting with several States, the necessary authorisations were finally secured for a C-17 from the United States Airforce to carry out the airdrop on Sunday 6 January 2008.  
Planning and Execution
    6. The planning and execution of the drop went exactly to plan; the delivery and recovery of the spares enabled repairs to be effected within 16 hours. Over the next 48 hours the Argos Georgia started to move slowly allowing for the new mechanical parts to embed before full power was restored. The vessel was subsequently able to continue with the rest of the fishing season in the Ross Sea after a rendezvous with the MV Spirit of Enderby to transfer the additional set of spares.


Lessons Learnt / Contingency Planning
    7. This ‘incident’ has reinforced the need for all operators to maintain robust contingency plans.  This includes consideration of the need to carry a set of mechanical spares and an excessive amount of provisions to account for an extended stay in the Southern Ocean. (At the time of the incident, the FV Argos Georgia had fuel, food and other supplies for a further 3 months.)  It has been noted that this incident could have happened at any time during the fishing season.

    8. The operator had 3 vessels in the Ross Sea during last season.  There wer also other fishing vessels in the vicinity (and the crew of the FV Argos Georgia found it extremely comforting to have the FV Antarctic III nearby). Whilst it may not always possible for all operators to ‘pair’ or ‘buddy’ their fishing vessels, operators need to undertake a detailed risk assessment of operating a vessel on its own, particularly in heavy sea ice conditions.  In such circumstances, appropriate alternative contingency plans must be in place.

    9. The UK would like to thank everyone who provided advice and assistance to the operators of the FV Argos Georgia during the breakdown. This support was a significant help when it came to ensuring the safety of the vessel and its crew. 



May 2008

