





Report Submitted to the XXXI ATCM by IUCN. The International Union for Conservation of Nature






Report Submitted to the XXXI ATCM by IUCN
The International Union for Conservation of Nature

IUCN extends its formal thanks to the Government of the Ukraine for hosting this 31st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
With its long standing interest in Antarctic conservation, IUCN welcomes the opportunity to assist Parties in their deliberations at this meeting.  In this submission, IUCN focuses on a few areas of importance with respect to the conservation of the Antarctic environment.
(1)  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas
IUCN again welcomes steps taken at recent meetings under the Antarctic Treaty System with respect to protected areas in general and Marine Protected Areas in particular. IUCN especially welcomes the progress made by CCAMLR and the CEP towards development of a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection through the process of bioregionalization.  Indeed, we believe that, Bioregionalisation will also assist Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty to fulfil their obligation under Annex V, Article 3 of the Protocol.
The Workshop on Bioregionalization of the Southern Ocean held in Brussels, Belgium from 13 to 17 August 2007, hosted by the Belgium government, was a very important step in this process and we are pleased to see that CCAMLR-XXVI and the Scientific Committee have endorsed the results of the workshop. As observed by the Scientific Committee, the results from the Workshop are a primary foundation for understanding the biological and physical heterogeneity in the Southern Ocean, which can be used by CCAMLR and the CEP to inform spatial management. 
IUCN welcomes the constructive input and support provided by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee last year to the management plan of the proposed ASMA for Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin, as this is a valuable example of the important cooperation between CCAMLR and the ATCM/CEP. IUCN further urges close and continued cooperation between ATCM-related and CCAMLR-related authorities to use the outcomes of the 2007 Bioregionalisation Workshop in developing protected areas and to achieve the conservation objectives of both CCAMLR and the ATCM/CEP.
At the same time, ATCM/CEP can and should continue to consider its own requirements and priorities for developing a scientific approach to the protection of the environment. Parties need to broaden the area of focus to address other areas of priority interest under the Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Under Article 3.2 of Annex V, Parties are to seek to identify a range of areas as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) within a systematic environmental-geographic framework. These are to include:  
    • areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
    • representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
    • areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
    • the type locality or only known habitat of any species;
    • areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research;
    • examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;
    • areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;
    • sites or monuments or recognised historic value; and
    • such other areas as may be appropriate to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values.
The Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom (IP3) describes a very practical approach for identifying important marine areas for conservation, an approach based on a systematic conservation planning methodology. ATCM would benefit from endorsing this approach, welcoming the pilot study the United Kingdom plans to test this methodology. Other Members could conduct similar studies to contribute to the development of best practice guidance through identifying key decisions and datasets that would be required. 
In addition to development of this methodology, there is also a need to continue actual identification and designation of sites where scientific information already exists or precaution dictates that action be taken to protect the important values identified in Article 3.2 of Annex V. The impacts of climate change are likely to increase the vulnerabilities of species, and make imperative in the interest of science the need for areas kept inviolate from human activities to enable future comparisons between direct human activities and those of climate change.  Also, as fisheries, tourism, shipping, research and bioprospecting increase in area or effort, it is important to identify in advance areas of importance to ongoing scientific research, areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, unique or rare habitats, as well as areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness values. These areas may be extremely vulnerable to human impacts, and unlike representative areas, are neither replaceable nor substitutable.  
At a global level, the IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) continues to work on promoting the establishment and effective management of worldwide, representative networks of marine protected areas. The WCPA-Marine program provides strategic advice to policy makers, and works to strengthen capacity and investment in protected areas. Regional networks within WCPA-Marine include a network for Antarctica, which aims to build communications between members worldwide, and to share knowledge on tools and information for protected area management. Further information on the work of WCPA-Marine can be found at: http://www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/biome/marine/marineprogramme.html
The development of MPAs as a management and conservation tool in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean would enable the next step towards true ecosystem management of one of the earth’s last relatively pristine large marine ecosystems.  This would promote the ATCM’s role in preserving Antarctica for peace and science and could serve as perhaps the best model for other areas of the world’s oceans.  
 (2) Climate Change
Climate change is now one of the major drivers of change in Antarctica and its surrounding marine ecosystems. IUCN welcomes the adoption of ATCM XXIX Resolution 3 (2007) on Long-term Scientific Monitoring and Sustained Environmental Observation in Antarctica which should help to increase the capacity to detect, understand and forecast the impacts of climate change. 

Given the scale, intensity and rapidity of changes currently underway, and bearing in mind that some of the reports before us indicate that climate-induced changes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are occurring at a higher rate than one might expect from IPCC projections, IUCN urges that Parties act now to adopt an extremely precautionary approach to the management of human activities, to reduce their own carbon footprints with respect of their Antarctic activities and also to begin to reflect on how it may be possible to speed up response times so that  new information about the impacts of climate change can be rapidly incorporated into ATCM decisions on the management of Antarctic and its surrounding marine environment. IUCN suggests that as part of the process of self evaluation, the ATCM consider how it may best respond to these challenges. 

It is important to note that with regard to climate change, actions to conserve the terrestrial environment should not be taken in isolation to the marine environment. Antarctic Climate monitoring should attempt to improve our understanding of the connections between changes in the physical environment of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.  
(3)  Shipping
IUCN welcomes the decision of IMO MEPC to ask the Bulk Liquids and Gases (BLG) Subcommittee to prepare amendments to MARPOL Annex I with respect of heavy grade oil on ships in the Antarctic Special Area with a target for completion of work by 2010.  IUCN invites governments to support this work and take steps themselves to require that expeditions organized in or proceeding from their territory avoid the use of heavy grade oil fuels within the Antarctic Treaty area.
IUCN notes however, that the decision regarding heavy grade oil is but one of a range of measures sought to address the increasing number of environmental and safety issues raised by growing maritime traffic in the region. It is time for Antarctic Treaty Parties to consider strengthening the restrictions on the discharge of sewage, graywater, discharges of oily substances and other wastes found in Annex IV of the Protocol and to work within IMO to establish additional mandatory rules for vessels operating in the Southern Ocean, including ice-strengthening standards, hull fouling; and establishment of vessel traffic monitoring and information system for Antarctic vessels. These issues are well laid out in the information paper on Southern Ocean Vessel Issues (MEPC 57/INF.19) submitted by Friends of the Earth to the 57th session of MEPC in 2008. 
In addition, IUCN remains of the view that it is time to review again the Code of Arctic Shipping and to draw from it elements that also apply to the Antarctic to further develop a Code of Antarctic Shipping that would be approved through the International Maritime Organization.  Though the existing Code for the Arctic is voluntary, Parties could adopt through a Measure a Code for the Antarctic.  Again, it would be important to give careful consideration to ice classification requirements and the need to require suitably ice-strengthened hulls for passenger vessels travelling in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  
(4)  Tourism
The number of visits by tourists has continued to grow substantially in recent years, with the number of tourists landing almost tripling since the beginning of the decade.  It is past time to review the impacts of tourism.  Whereas the impacts of small numbers of tourists may have been minor or transitory, the overall increase and growing diversity of tourism may have impacts that are more than minor or transitory at certain sites or through certain activities. It is time to develop additional measures so that such impacts can be avoided or minimised and monitored. 
Two areas may require priority consideration: 1) the construction or use of buildings or other permanent infrastructure for tourism in Antarctica 2) the impacts of large cruise ships and other large vessels. 
The construction of any building or permanent infrastructure in Antarctica is by definition likely to have an impact that is more than minor or transitory and thus would require a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation.  While such impacts may be justified to advance peace or science – the core values supported by the Antarctic Treaty – such would not necessarily be the case in support of tourism activities. The conversion of science facilities into tourism facilities is another cause of concern.
As with all vessels, but especially with respect to cruise ships, it is vital that each Party notifies “all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory” as required under Article VII(5)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Following on that obligation, Parties should ensure that all vessels so subject to notification are fully able to conform with obligations under the Protocol and the Treaty.  If vessels do not have the capacity to comply with these obligations, both tour operators and flag states, as appropriate, should ensure that such vessels do not travel to Antarctica. 
As noted previously, any review of the impact of such vessels would necessarily reflect the obligations of Parties under Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Parties should undertake a review of the requirements incorporated in Annex IV in order to ensure themselves that they are sufficient to protect Antarctica, including its dependent and associated ecosystems.  The review should inter alia examine whether the impacts of discharge of sewage, garbage and other substances is harmful even beyond 12 nautical miles from land or ice shelves and whether vessels travelling to Antarctica should discharge into the sea any food wastes whatsoever within the Antarctic Treaty Area.. Also due to safety and emergency response consideration, IUCN again stresses the need to consider further steps to restrict the activities of large vessels in Antarctica in order also to protect human life, to safeguard the unique environment of Antarctica, to protect national programmes from having to divert resources from science to support visitors and to promote the values of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
(5)  Bioprospecting
IUCN welcomes the discussions of the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to examine the issue of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Areas. However, we regret that the ICG was not able to reach consensus on suggesting a way forward. Parties will need to agree on a working definition of the term “biological prospecting” as this has implications to where bioprospecting stops and on impacts that the bioprospecting activities might have, especially for marine organisms other than microbes. This is of particular importance given that 56% of the records in the Antarctic Biological Prospecting Database relate to organisms collected from the marine environment.
The issue of bioprospecting should rightly remain on the agenda of the ATCM. ATCM should adopt the ICG recommendation “to conduct a review of the existing Antarctic Treaty System, including CCAMLR, to see whether it already provides an adequate framework for managing biological prospecting activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.” 
In the interest of informing the ATCM of discussions on the issue of bioprospecting in marine areas beyond national jurisdiction at the United Nations General Assembly Ad Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (“Working Group”), New York, New York, 28 April - 2 May, 2008, IUCN provides some extracts from the draft Joint Statement by the Co-Chairpersons below. Despite diverging views on the relevant legal regime for marine genetic resources beyond areas of national jurisdiction
…some delegations were of the view that an elaborated regime was needed within the framework of UNCLOS in relation to marine genetic resources beyond areas of national jurisdiction. Other delegations stated that a new international regime may impede scientific research and innovation, and would be difficult to monitor and enforce. Several delegations highlighted the need for further consideration of intellectual property rights relating to marine genetic resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction. 
In that context, some delegations proposed focusing on practical short-term measures to enhance conservation and sustainable use of marine genetic resources. It was proposed that practical measures could address, amount others, options for benefit sharing. In this regards,, several delegates expressed interest in considering a proposal to use the Multilateral System developed under the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, as a possible reference point for discussions. While open to considering practical measures, others underlined the importance of also continuing the discussions on the legal regime of marine genetic resources beyond areas of national jurisdiction [draft Joint Statement by the Co-Chairpersons 2 May 2008, para. 37-38]
There was agreement that the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity is essential, and that research needs to be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of UNCLOS, and on the basis of the precautionary approach, in particular to ensure that extraction activities are undertaken in a sustainable manner.
IUCN reiterates that in the Antarctic-context, bioprospecting, as with any other activity, is subject to the obligations that Parties have accepted under the Treaty and related instruments, including the Protocol on Environmental Protection.  Thus, advance notification is required, as provided for under Article VII of the Treaty.  Flowing from this, an environmental impact assessment procedure must be undertaken, in accordance with Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I.  In accordance with Article III of the Treaty scientific observations and results from Antarctica should be exchanged and made freely available to the greatest extent feasible and practicable.  IUCN remains of the view that a desire for commercialization does not overcome this obligation to make the observations and results freely available as it does not affect feasibility or practicability.  Furthermore, as bioprospecting involves the collection of living samples, this should be done consistent with obligations under Annex II of the Protocol to Conserve Antarctic Fauna and Flora, as appropriate.  In keeping with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and related instruments, Parties should adopt a Measure to ensure the protection of all native biota, including microbes, such that any collection would not be in such quantities to affect significantly their local distribution or abundance.  Finally, Parties may wish to consider ways to ensure fair rules for a sharing of benefits resulting from the commercialization of products derived from Antarctic biota.
(6)  Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases
While we look forward to the results of the International Polar Year project on non-native species which will increase knowledge on pathways and potential species introductions into Antarctic terrestrial environments and enhance the opportunity for preventive measures to be put into place, we remain concerned that the consideration of invasive species in the Treaty System has overlooked the marine side.
The main barrier to introductions of non-indigenous species in the Southern Ocean is the physical dissimilarity between donor ports and high latitude recipient environments. The likelihood of transport of invasive species into the Southern Ocean is increasing as a consequence of the growth of tourism, fisheries and scientific activities in the region. It is predicted that climate change impacts on the oceans may increase the rate of successful establishment by reducing differences in environmental conditions between donor and recipient regions. Furthermore, if invasions do occur, a positive feedback mechanism may be triggered whereby established invaders increase the ability of other non-indigenous species to establish in an ecosystem. 
To date, several recent studies document species introductions into Antarctic and Southern Ocean waters. Marine debris and shipping (mainly through hull fouling) are the two major vectors for marine species introductions into the Southern Ocean and deserve an increasing attention and regulation. A thorough consideration of this issue is urgently needed within the framework of the Treaty to prevent species introductions, particularly in the marine environment. In order to conserve the integrity of the unique Antarctic system, Parties need to take effective measures to reduce such risks by effectively managing the main introduction vectors and pathways: fouling of vessel hulls, and ballast water, including from fishing activities.
IUCN would like to inform the Treaty Parties that in July 2007, the Marine Environment Protection Committee of IMO adopted guidelines providing common guidance for vessels undertaking ballast water exchange in Antarctic waters. The guidelines call for ballast that will be discharged in Antarctic waters to first be exchanged before arrival in Antarctic waters (preferably north of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone or 60 degrees S, whichever is the farthest north) and at least 200 nm from the nearest land in water at least 200 m deep. If this is not operationally possible, such exchange should be undertaken in waters at least 50 nm from land in water at least 200 m deep. 
States should apply these Guidelines as soon as possible, as an interim measure for all ships entering the Antarctic Treaty area before the Ballast Water Management Convention comes into force. Parties to the Antarctic Treaty are further encouraged to exchange information on introduced and invasive marine species and consider undertaking risk assessment of species introductions through ballast water and hull fouling into the Treaty area.
IUCN Background:
Created in 1948, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) brings together 83 States, 110 government agencies, 800 plus NGOs, and some 10,000 scientists and experts from 181 countries in a unique worldwide partnership.  The Union’s mission is to “influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable”.  The Union is the world's largest environmental knowledge network and has helped over 75 countries to prepare and implement national conservation and biodiversity strategies. The Union is a multicultural, multilingual organization with 1,000 staff located in 62 countries.  Its headquarters are in Gland, Switzerland.

