





Initial Environmental Evaluation for Installation of Wind Energy Generators (WEG) at Maitri, Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica





Initial Environmental Evaluation for Installation of Wind Energy Generators (WEG) at Maitri, Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica
Introduction
The second Indian Antarctic research station “Maitri (70o45’52”S: 11o44’03”E) was established in 1989, when the first permanent Indian Antarctic base “Dakshin Gangotri” (70O 5’ 37”S: 12O E) had to be decommissioned, due to excessive snow accumulation. All the activities thereafter shifted to Schirmacher Oasis, where an ice free, rocky foundation was selected to build a permanent station. 
Antarctica is known for harsh climatic conditions and prevailing katabatic winds. Maitri station is situated on Schirmacher Oasis, around 80 km away from the iceshelf edge. The long-term data collected on wind speed indicates the potential of harnessing wind energy to convert into electrical energy. The wind can be harnessed to meet the power requirement of the station. At the initial stage two Wind Energy Generators (WEG) each of 6KW output (maximum), made of Proven Energy (UK) are proposed to be installed. The type of WEG to be installed is selected based on Remote Area Power Supply (RAPS) concept. Installation of the WEG is planned in the winter of 2008-09.
This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) report for installation of WEG, at Maitri station in Antarctica has been prepared in agreement with Article 2 of annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Considering the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) guideline for Environmental Impact Assessment, the probable impact due to construction and operation of the systems, is carried out. This has concluded that the adverse impact from installation of WEG is of very low category. The gains through electricity generation by wind will reduce the sustained impact on the environment and the IEE is sufficient to address the issue. 
Scientific Studies at Maitri
Ever since 1988-89, the Indian endeavors in and around Maitri in Schirmacher Oasis, have continued uninterrupted and annual scientific expeditions to Antarctica have remained one of the high priority scientific activities of the country.  These expeditions have provided an avenue for over 1800 scientists and logistics personnel from more than 60 national laboratories, universities, and research institutes to conduct experiments/studies in some of the frontier areas of polar sciences.  The studies have contributed to a better understanding of the state of the Antarctic environment in general and of the Central Dronning Maud land in particular. Many of the scientific studies have continued uninterruptedly since 1985 and have produced important results and a substantial database. The broad scientific fields of studies are:
    • Earth Science
    • Upper Atmosphere and Astronomy 
    • Meteorology
    • Geomagnetism
    • Environmental Science and Biology
Need of Activity and Purpose
The total electrical load of the station is around 120 KW during summer and 80 KW during winter season. It is estimated to share around 40-50% of the total load by WEG in phased manner over the years. At present electrical power for the station is being produced through fuel feed generators, which runs on Jet A-1 fuel. Burning the fuel leads to air emission, though in small quantities, this may affect the area in long term. It is therefore being proposed by the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), which is responsible for managing and coordinating Indian scientific and logistics activities in Antarctica, to switch to green technology for electricity generation in a phased manner. This has resulted into plans of installation of WEG at Maitri station.
Alternatives for the Location
It has been decided to install the WEG nearby Maitri station and the control system inside the building, to reduce the transmission loss. Some locations around Maitri station opted for the installation. The first location situated in front of Maitri station has the rocky terrain suitable for rock and bolt foundation of WEG but being close to helipad will obstruct the flying and landing operation of helicopters. 
Second location is short listed at eastern side of the station, would have been a good site in terms of the foundation and nearness to Maitri but owing to the prevailing wind direction and possibility of snow accumulation during high blizzard, which may affect the station structure, so this option is also ruled out. The third option was south of Maitri station is also not suitable in terms of foundation. The fourth location on the western side of station is most ideal place in terms of foundation and safety and helicopter operation (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Maitri Station and Probable Locations for Installation of WEGs
Description of Area
Location
The Schirmacher oasis, with a maximum width of 3.5 km and a length of about 17 km, is considered one of the smallest Oasis near the shore in East Antarctica. It is oriented approximately in an east-west direction confined within the coordinates 700 46′ 04″ - 700 44′ 21″ S and 110 49′ 54″ - 110 26′ 03″ E. The elevation of oasis ranges between few meters to 228 m above mean sea level, with an average of 100 m. The Maitri station is situated in the eastern part of the Schirmacher, between the margin of the continental ice and one of the biggest fresh water lakes of the area, called “Zub” or “Priyadarshini Lake”. 
The Station building is reinforced with iron bars to withstand high wind speed (upto 320 km/hr) and the walls are thermally insulated for protection against low temperature. The energy to the station is supplied by fuel operated generators. The station is kept warm (~ 25 C) by circulating hot water from the boilers. There are also several insulated huts for the summer team, which are used as laboratory during the winter period.
Geology
The predominant rock types of Schirmacher Oasis are represented by charnockites, garnet-sillimanite- gneisses, and garnet-biotite gneisses, quartzofeldspathic augen gneisses with some foliated lamprophyres, amphibolites, dolerite, metagabbro and metabasalt. Three phases of deformation are distinct in the rock types. Two sets of faults trending NE-SW are quite prominent. 
Climate
Since 1990 the meteorological observations such as pressure, temperature, and wind speed and wind direction, total global solar radiation, ozone concentration etc., are being recorded at Maitri (WMO station index No.89514). The mean and extreme temperature data for Maitri, based on the 16 years record (1990 to 2005), is shown in Figure – 2. The lowest mean temperature and extreme daily minimum temperature are recorded in July and August while highest mean temperatures are observed in January & December. The lowest temperature of –35.3 OC was recorded on 21st July 2005. 







Figure 2: Average Air Temperature Variations at Maitri
The surface wind regime at Maitri is characterized by alternating spells of strong wind and light wind or calm. The duration of these spells varies considerably from few hours to several days. The mean daily wind speed varies between 5 and 10 m s –1 (~10 and 20 knots). Wind maxima recorded in each month varies between 28 and 45 m s –1 (~55 and 90 knots). Wind speed exceeding 100 knots has been recorded during winter months (Figure 3).
The blizzards touch a speed of 90 to 95 knots where as the mean annual wind speed is 18 knots. The dominant wind direction is E-SE. Snowfall is quite frequent during the winter months, but gale force winds scrub the rocky surfaces clean and snow deposition is widespread on the leeward side of the hillocks.








Figure 3: Average Wind Speed at Maitri

Flora and Fauna
Schirmacher Oasis has been studied in detail for the faunal diversity and ecology of the terrestrial invertebrate fauna. The Oases has also been studied for the algal and cyanobacterial diversity. Terrestrial mosses are quite widespread and colonise a range of habitats. The bryophytes, because of their poikilohydric nature and alternative strategy of adoption, are one of the very few plant groups which grow in Antarctica. 
Other groups of plant reported from the area are lichens, fungi, and bacteria. Distribution of algae and cyanobacterial flora of fresh water streams of the Oasis, in the area adjoining the designated area, has been established. Examination of algae and cyanobacteria, in the glacier-melt water stream, have also been studied  with some of the  species reported being  G.magma, Chaemosiphon subglobosus, Oscillatoria limosa, O.limnetica, P. frigidum, P. autumnale, Nostoc commune, N.punctiforme, Calothrix gracilis, C.brevissima, Uronema sp., and Cosmarium sp.. Studies on polar Skuas have also been conducted at Schirmacher Oasis and their nesting and breeding pattern are reported around 2-3 km from Maitri on the western side of the station.
Description of Activity
Salient features of the WEG are listed below;
    • 6 kW maximum output , battery charging inverter system
    • Low temperature material
    • 9 m guyed tower
    • Generator – Brushless (without gearbox)
    • Rock bolt foundation
    • Blade diameter – 5.5 meter


Two sets of WEG were transported from UK to Cape Town, South Africa, and further transshipped to India Bay, Antarctica on board Academic Federov. It is proposed to carry out the installation and commissioning of the systems during the winter of 2008-09. After testing for a year, the station shall be augmented with additional WEGs. Weight of two sets of WEG is estimated around 5 tons, which will be transported from Indian Bay to Maitri by Piston Bully. 
Installation
Low temperature steel would be used in all tower sections, castings, and structural components. The height of the tower is proposed to be kept 9 m due to the high winds and flying restrictions. The foundation of the platform is designed to be anchored to the rock rather than using concrete. A few meters from the WEG foundation, gin pole will be erected and bolted to the rock by drilling. Using the gin pole and winch, a WEG tower shall be lifted and placed in position.
All the control systems and flooded lead acid type batteries shall be placed inside Maitri station to maintain room temperature of 15O C, for the systems. Sealed batteries shall be maintenance free in nature to avoid any spillage of the electrolyte.
Cumulative Impact Evaluation
Impact identification and evaluation, carried out for the proposed activity as well as the mitigation measures pertaining to activities are presented in Table 1, and 2.
Table 1: Activity Potential on Environment

Activity
Effect in Environment

Air Environment
Water Environment
Solid Waste Environment
Noise Environment
Land and Flora and Fauna
Heat
Tranportation of material from ship to site through Piston bully
Fuel burning emission
None
None
Engine noise
If water channel are not completely frozen accidentally material may immersed into water and contaminate
Engine heat - very limited radiation not assessable
Foundation preparation for gin pole and WEG
Air borne dust if excavation for concrete foundation is done
Dust may mix with lake water situated lee-ward side
Excavated material and concrete material may be left at site
Hammering onto anchor rods almost negligible
Area will be occupied 
None
Battery Charging system Operation
Overcharging may lead to emission of gases
If spilled out in case of kept outside, electrolyte may mix with snow and water and join lake system
Used batteries may be left at side and may cause hazard 
None
Spilled electrolyte may contaminate the soil
Negligible radiation while charging
Turbine Blades
None
None
None
May cause noise during operation and high wind
Bird hit may occur if situated in migration route
None

Table 2: Impact Evaluation

Environ-mental Parameters/
Indicator
Description of Potential Impact from Activities
Evaluation of Impact
Value
Mitigation Measures
Air
Emission is expected from piston bully: Exhaust shall have potential to mix with the air i.e. SO2, NOx and SPM. 


Airborne dust emission due to drilling operation
Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
Low
Only two containers shall carry net weight around 5 tons shall be transported by two piston bully. This shall be part of regular convoy only Jet A-1 fuel shall be used to reduce the emission, Jet A-1 fuel have minimum emission of SO2 and SPM. 
 No concrete is being used for foundation, it shall be only drilling and bolting over the rock, will reduce the probability of generating air borne dust 
Water
Spillage of electrolyte as well as excavated material may mix with snow and water which ultimately may join to lake system
Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Low
Low
Batteries shall be maintenance free and sealed type. Shall be kept inside the room and regular observation shall be carried out.

Noise
Piston bully operation, drilling for foundation and blade circulation during operation will produce noise.
Extent:       Low
Duration:   medium
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
Low
Transportation of the material shall be through piston bully, covering 80 km distance, it shall not stop at place and engine shall be kept shut during idle condition.
Low noise drilling machine shall be used. Place shall be covered with wooden sheets to absorb and reduce the propagation of sound
WEG shall produce 45-70 dBA in 5-12 m/s wind speed. All the moving part shall be properly maintain to avoid resistance
Land
Emissions from exhaust is likely to deposit on the open land from crane operation in relation with prevailing wind direction though will have low intensity but may alter the soil characteristics of very limited area
Solid waste produce during drilling may disperse in high wind if kept in open place. Used may be left at site.

An area of 18 square meter shall be occupied 
Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Low
Very Low
Crane operation shall be for limited hours around two hours

Drilling shall be executed in enclosed wooden sheet. Used batteries shall bring back to India for recycling
Area required for base foundation is very low
Flora and  Fauna
Bird hit by moving blades of WEG may occur
.


Alien species may be introduced from human clothing etc
Extent:      Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
Very Low
It is observed there is no migration route of birds noticed at the site. Tower height shall be kept low .However studies reported generally bird change the flying route 100-200 meter before WEG, so the probably of bird hit is very low.
Cleaning and inspection of clothing items and material before sending to Antarctica shall reduce the probability of introduction of alien species
Wilder-ness and Aesthetic values
Two WEG installation may affect the aesthetic value of the area

Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
Very Low
Low tower height is selected to avoid the visual interference. Installation site being in low altitude then surroundings site can not be seen from long distance.
HSM,ASPA, ASMA
One, ASPA (No 163) present in western side around 3 km away from the site. 
Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
Very Low
No direct impact on the area however The ASPA guidelines shall be followed. Proposed activity shall not affect ASPA. 

Supporting Bibliography
Asthana, R., Gaur, M.P. and Chaturvedi, A. (1996): Notes on Pattern of Snow Accumulation/ablation on ice shelf and Secular Movement of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier Snout in Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. In: scientific Report of the Twelfth Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 10 D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp.111-122
Beg, M.J., Prasad, A.V.K. and Chaturvedi, A. (2000): Interim Report on Glaciological Studies in the Austral Summer of 19th Indian Antarctic Expedition. In: Scientific Report of Nineteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 17, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 121-126. 
Bejarniya, B.R., Ravikant, V. and Kundu, A., (2000): Glaciological Studies in Schirmacher Hill and on Ice Shelf during XIV Antarctica Expedition. In: Scientific Report of Sixteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 14, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 121-126.
Chaturvedi, A., Singh, A., Gaur, M.P., Krishnamurthy, K.V., and Beg, M.J., (1999): A confirmation of Polar Glacial Recession by Monitoring the Snout of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier in Schirmacher Range. In: Scientific Report of Fifteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 13, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 321-336. 
D'souza, M.J. and Kundu, A., (2000): Glaciological studies during the Seventeenth Antarctic Expedition. In: Scientific Report of Seventeenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 15, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp.67-72
GSI, (1991): Geology of Schirmacher and Wolthat Region, Central Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica (Scale 1: 250,000), Government of India
GSI, (1999): Geology of Schirmacher Oasis, Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica (Scale 1:25,000), Government of India
GSI, (2006a): Geological Map of Orvinfjella Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica (Scale 1: 50,000), Government of India
GSI, (2006b): Geomorphological Map of Schirmacher Oasis, Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica (Scale 1:25,000), Government of India
Hazra, A.K. (1990): Terrestrial invertebrate fauna of Antarctica, Taxonomy in Environment and Biology (ed. Director, ZSI), pp 229-242.

Hazra, A.K. (1994): A study on the population ecology of soil nematode fauna in relation to some edaphic factors in Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica, In: Scientific Report of Indian Expedition to Antarctica Tech Pub No 6, Department of Ocean Development, pp 65-90

Kashyap, A.K. (1988.): Studies on Algal flora of Schirmacher Oasis, Dronning Maud land, Antarctica. In: proceedings of Workshop on Antarctic Studies, D.O.D., CSIR, Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp.435-439
Kaul, M.K., Chakraborty, S.K. and Raina, V.K. (1985): A Note on the snout of the Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Antarctica. In: Scientific Report of Second Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 2, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 91-93.
Kaul, M.K., Singh, R.K., Srivastava, D., Mukerji, S. and Jayaram, S. (1998): Observations on the Changes in the Snout of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Antarctica. In: Scientific Report of the Fifth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 5, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 205-209.
Mukerji, S., Ravikant, V., Bejarniya, B.R., Oberoi, L.K. and Nautiyal, S.C. (1995): A Note on the Glaciological Studies carried out during Eleventh Indian Expedition to Antarctica. In: Scientific Report of Eleventh Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 9, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 153-162.
Nayaka, S. and Upreti, D.K (2005): Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica, a lichenologically interesting region, Current Science, VOL. 89, NO. 7, pp 1069-1071
Pandey, K.D. and Kashyap, A.K. (1995): Diversity of Algal Flora in Six Fresh Water Streams of Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica. In: Scientific Report of Tenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 8, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 218-229.
Ravikumar, N and Malaimani, E.C. (2000):  Recent Results of The Strain Accumulation between Antarctica and Southern Indian Peninsula by GPS-Geodesy, http://www.tu-dresden.de/ipg/polenet/program/004.kumar.rn.pdf
Ravindra, R. (2001): Geomorphology of Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica. Proc. Symp. On Snow, Ice and Glaciers, Geological Survey of India Spl. Pub. No. 53, pp. 379-390.
Ravindra, R., Chaturvedi, and Beg, M.J. (2001): Melt Water Lakes of Schirmacher Oasis - Their Genetic Aspects and Classification. In: Advances in Marine and Antarctic Science, Ed. Sahu, DB and Pandey, PC, Dariyaganj, New Delhi, pp. 301-313.
Ravindra, R., Srivastava, V.K., Sharma, B.L., Dey, A. and Bedi, A.K. (1994): Monitoring of Icebergs in Antarctic Waters and a Note on the Secular Movement of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier. In: Scientific Report of Ninth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 6, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 239-250.
Sanyal, A.K. (2004): Diversity of Invertebrate Fauna of Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica, Nineteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Scientific Report, Department of Ocean Development, Technical Publication No. 17, pp 173-187
Singh, D.K., and Semwal, R.C. (2000): Bryoflora of Schirmacher Oasis, East Antarctica: A Preliminary Study. In: Scientific Report of Sixteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 14, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp.173-186
Upreti, D. K. and Pant, G.( 1995): (In) Scientific Report,   Eleventh Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Department of Ocean Development, New Delhi, pp. 229–241.

Venkataraman, K. (1998): Studies on Phylum Tardigrada and Other Associated Fauna, South Polar Skua and Bird and Mammal Lagging during 1994-1995 Expedition. In: Scientific Report of Fourteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Tech. Pub. No. 12, D.O.D., Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp.220-243


