





Annual Report Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 2007-2008






Annual Report Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
2007-2008

This report is presented in compliance with article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which requires each Party to report annually on the steps taken to implement the Protocol in domestic law, including laws, regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures contemplated by article 13 of the Protocol.


A. Introduction

1.  Italy ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and became a Consultative Party in 1987 following the launching and development of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA). In 1990-91 Italy took a very active part in the negotiations and drafting of the Madrid Protocol.

2. After the signature of the Protocol in Oct. 1991 in Madrid, the President of ENEA (National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment) which had been given the task of implementing the Antarctic Research programme, ordered the Madrid Protocol to be provisionally applied by ENEA-ANTAR, the ENEA unit in charge of the implementation of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme (PNRA), pending its ratification and the adoption of national legislation in the matter. In 2003, the PNRA was replaced by the Consortium for the National Programme of Scientific Researches in Antarctica that involves four of the main Italian research bodies (ENEA, CNR, INGV, OGS).  

3.  Italy ratified the Madrid Protocol by Law n. 54 of 15 February 1995, which authorised the President of the Republic to express the consent to be bound in accordance with art. 80 of the Constitution. The same law introduced the Madrid Protocol into the Italian legal system. Now the Madrid Protocol forms an integral part of Italian law and must be applied by any public authority and can be invoked by private parties as a source of rights and obligations.

4. Section B of this report spells out the actions taken by the Consortium for the effective application of the Madrid Protocol. This is without prejudice to the future adoption of measures implementing the Madrid Protocol (See Section C).

B. Provisional Application of the Madrid Protocol

Environmental Impact Assessment
5. At the beginning of the Italian research activities in Antarctica in 1985/86 no EIA was prepared. Neither the Italian legislation at the time, nor the Antarctic Treaty 	required it. At the XXI ATCM in Christchurch the Italian Delegation presented 	a paper entitled “An Environmental Overview of the Italian Terra Nova 	Station”. This paper was not a formal EIA but was prepared following closely 	Annex I of the Protocol and its aim was to present the efforts made by the Italian 	Programme in the implementation of the Protocol.
Two formal CEE for the Concordia Project, a joint Italian-French project, were presented at the XIX ATCM in Seoul in 1995, during the first meeting of the TEWG, the predecessor of the CEP. These CEE were jointly presented by the French and Italian delegations.
One IEE on Talos Dome Ice Core Project for recovering a deep ice core is reported at XXVIII ATCM in Stockholm. 
A formal CEE for Edmonson Point new Protected Area was presented at  XXIX ATCM in Edinburgh and one IEE on Construction of Enigma Runway for light aircrafts.
Two IEE on Construction of Nansen Runway for heavy aircrafts near MZS and one IEE on Restructuring works of the pier at MZS will be reported at the XXX ATCM in New Delhi. A five years review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (ASPA) n° 161 will be reported at XXXI ATCM in Kyiv for approval.
		    	     
Emergency Response Action 

6. The main Italian research station, Terra Nova Bay, and the camp at Dome C where the construction of the CONCORDIA station and the EPICA deep ice drilling are being performed have a contingency plan. There are also fire protection plans and station personnel receive specific training for dealing with emergencies. Italy is also working with the USA and New Zealand for the development of a contingency plan for the Ross Sea Region. Also the vessel used by the PNRA as a cargo and oceanographic ship has her own oil pollution prevention and control plan.
No draft or final, Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations have been prepared for Antarctic Activities in Antarctica during the last year.


Co-operation with other Parties

7.   Art 6  of  the  Protocol  asks  Parties  to  co-operate in  the  planning  and conduct of Antarctic activities,  also in order to reduce impacts on the environment.  Italy has a very wide range of International  co-operations both in scientific activities and in logistics.  In  the  latter  area, Italy is part of a logistic pool with the USA and with New Zealand, which has contributed  to  a rationalisation   of  the  use  of aircraft   and  has  shown  its  great   value   in  cases of  medical emergencies and rescue.

Waste management

8. 	A Waste Management plan as a formal document was prepared since 1991 in accordance with annex III, Article 8 and 9(1) of the protocol. It includes the regulation of training given to expedition members on waste management prior to leaving for Antarctica and while in Antarctica.
The basic objectives are those expressed in the Annex III to the Protocol. The basic policy has been that all waste from the Italian Antarctic Programme is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. Main objective in the waste management planning is the Waste Separation (Burnable material, Recyclable and Non-recyclable material) and Waste Disposal (Disposal of Burnables, Disposal of Recyclable and Non Recyclable Waste, Disposal of Domestic Liquids). Specific waste disposal procedures are carried out inside and outside the station, into laboratories, and in every field activities.
A Comprehensive Waste Management Handbook was prepared on 2006 in accordance with annex III of the Protocol.

9.   Mario Zucchelli station is also equipped with a sewage treatment chemical-physical system, in operation since the second campaign in 1986/87. This plant produces a clean effluent which is discharged in the sea while sludges from the plan are transported back to Italy. The sewage treatment plant has been upgraded to deal with increased personnel load and both the plant and its effluent are monitored daily.
Many parameters (COD, Al, Surfactants, Faecal Coliform, Ammonium) are analysed daily and others (BOD5, Nitrate, Nitrite, Phosfate) weekly, and sometimes heavy metals.
During the campaign 2004-05 a new incinerator has been installed at Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS): The modern incinerator is appropriate to answer at the increasing environmental standards. It is operative since the 2006/07 antarctic season. 

        Environmental Monitoring

10.  The monitoring programme was planned from the first campaign and was started in the 
       second one, during the construction of the base in 1986/87.
       
	The main parameters that are considered are:

a) hydrocarbons (mainly from fuel transport and consumption)
b) Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH), mainly from combustion sources.
c) surfactants and related compounds (from sewage)
d) Nutrients
e) metals and their compounds (combustion sources and various Base activities)

11. The data from the monitoring are used for feedback on operations. This is particularly true for the monitoring of the treated effluent of the sewage treatment plant. At present a significant data base which goes back for sixteen years of the results obtained in the analyses of samples from different environmental compartments (air, water, sediments, biota) is available. The effluent of the sewage treatment plant is regularly monitored during operation of the plant.

Fuel Storage

12. Fuel is stored in three cylindrical steel tanks, with all welds checked by radiography and with double skin. This ensures a very high level of safety to the fuel storage, coupled with the contingency plan and the good training of the station personnel.

Training of personnel

13. All personnel going to Antarctica receives training on the environmental aspects of their activities there, in particular on the Protocol and its Annexes. This training is going to be widened to the Italian relevant legislation as soon as it will be available.

Permits

Numbers and nature of permits issued under annex II, article 6(2) of the Protocol

14. Permits for access and sampling into protected areas, permits to sample flora, fauna and other living organisms are given on the authority of the Italian Foreign Ministry through an agency or an expert person in the environmental issues. 

15. In the 2005-2006 campaign 10 permits for sampling, 5 permits for entering in Specially Protected Areas were granted. Each permit is released upon an environmental evaluation of the activity.

C. Implementation

16. Although the Madrid Protocol is fully operative and binding in Italian law, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs decided to establish a committee of legal experts aimed at setting up most precise operational regulations. The committee submitted a draft regulation to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in July 2002. The draft regulation was submitted for examination to the Ministry of the Environment. Following this examination, an inter-ministerial meeting was established in order to define the final text of the draft regulation. The inter-ministerial meeting submitted its final draft regulation in February 2007.

17. This draft regulation is divided in a general part and an annex where Madrid Protocol’s Annexes are implemented in details. The first part provides for the identification of two State agencies. These agencies are inter-ministerial organs. An agency is a political organ; the other a specialized body relating to Antarctic issues. The specialized agency is competent to issue any permit required by the Madrid Protocol; to monitor compliance with such permit; and to adopt sanctions in cases of non-compliance. This body is also competent to make proposal concerning the designation of specially protected or managed areas.
 
18. The draft regulation also provides that the control of Antarctic scientific activities shall be carried out by a separate body. This distinction between different organs seems to be justified by the different nature of scientific research with respect to the other activities that are carried out in Antarctica.

19. This regulation establishes the duty of notification for any operator, who intends to carry out activities in Antarctica. It also establishes the essential elements that the act of notification must contain.

20. Moreover, it defines the concepts of Initial Impact Assessment and Comprehensive Impact Assessment by listing some examples of activities that can require such assessment. This list is not exhaustive.

21. Finally, the inter-ministerial meeting’s draft regulation makes effective within the Italian legal order and implements Annex VI to the Madrid Protocol concerning liability arising from environmental emergencies. It provides for the duty to exchange information and the obligation of compensation for any damage arising from the activities carried out in Antarctica by operators acting within the scope of the Madrid Protocol. In particular, this part of the regulation will establish the competent organs and procedures to punish non-compliance with the obligation of prompt and effective response action as required by Annex VI to the Madrid Protocol.

22. After the exam of the Italian Council of Ministers, this regulation will become the content of a bill to be put before the Parliament. 



