





International Polar Year - Census of Antarctic Marine Life (IPY CAML) New Zealand Ross Sea Marine Research Voyage




International Polar Year - Census of Antarctic Marine Life (IPY‑CAML)
New Zealand Ross Sea Marine Research Voyage 
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand
Executive Summary
On 31 January 2008 New Zealand commenced one of the largest ever marine research voyages into the Ross Sea region in support of the International Polar Year Census of Antarctic Marine Life (IPY-CAML) and the New Zealand Government’s ocean survey mapping programme – Ocean Survey 20/20 (OS20/20). The fifty day voyage included an extensive survey of marine organisms in a variety of depths and habitat types across the Ross Sea shelf, continental slope and on the abyssal plains and seamounts in the outer reaches of the Ross Sea.  In total, over 30,000 specimen lots from thirty-nine independent research sites were collected, alongside comprehensive data on the abundance of micro-organisms, plankton, mesopelagic fish, demersal fish, benthos and squid, as well as data on water chemistry and experiments on the effects of acidification on micro-organisms.  
New Zealand’s IPY-CAML voyage will contribute to new scientific understanding about the biodiversity and functioning of the Ross Sea ecosystem and its potential response to changes in atmospheric and ocean temperatures, and advance scientific understanding of marine ecology across latitudinal gradients in the Ross Sea.  Information gathered will also assist the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) manage the Ross Sea toothfish fishery; provide greater understanding of the impacts and causes of climate change in Antarctica; help identify potential ecosystem indicators that should be monitored; contribute to work being carried out on bioregionalisation in the Southern Ocean and assist with the development of spatial management mechanisms to protect the wildlife and biodiversity there.  A preliminary examination of the data collected suggests that several species new to science have also been discovered and that information collected may challenge previously held thinking about trophic sources on seamounts.  
1. Introduction
The International Polar Year (IPY) Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) project is a multinational marine research project, consisting of at least 11 coordinated voyages spread around the Antarctic continent and involving science participants from approximately 23 countries.  

In May 2007, the New Zealand Government announced new funding for a New Zealand IPY-CAML voyage as part of its overall contribution to IPY, including $3.6m for science and technical support on the research vessel, Tangaroa, to undertake a fifty day voyage into the Ross Sea region (phase 1) and a further $3.0m over three years to analyse the data collected (phase 2). Existing funding of $3m from the OS20/20 programme was also made available by the New Zealand Government for the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd’s (NIWA) research vessel Tangaroa.  New Zealand’s Ross Sea region voyage was one of the largest voyages carried out by an IPY-CAML participant country and was the only voyage to focus on the Ross Sea region, providing scientists the unique opportunity to compare fauna and ecosystems from the two most significant shelf areas in Antarctica; the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea.  

Governance of New Zealand’s IPY-CAML project was provided by Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) in collaboration with the lead agency for the project, the New Zealand Ministry of Fisheries (MFish), and NIWA, Antarctica New Zealand (AntNZ) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT).  The project builds on other research carried out by the New Zealand Government in order to better understand the Ross Sea ecosystem and its biodiversity.  The voyage was led by NIWA, and involved 26 marine scientists and researchers with the support of 18 crew members and included researchers and post graduate students from other agencies and universities, as well as scientists from the United States and Italy.   
  
2. Overview of IPY-CAML

The international CAML Programme aims to investigate the biodiversity and evolutionary history of Antarctic waters, including genetic sampling of selected fauna at sea, as well as obtain relevant baseline physical and biological data that will contribute to high profile environmental issues – particularly climate change and its effects on the Southern Ocean.  Integration of IPY-CAML results from both the Arctic and the Antarctic will also allow different datasets from around the world to be compared and contrasted, and for global trends such as the impact of climate change on the two regions to be observed.

New Zealand’s seven-week IPY-CAML voyage into the Ross Sea region will contribute to a wide range of national and international initiatives that are linked to the international CAML programme1 and to other New Zealand research efforts in the Ross Sea region.  The IPY-CAML project will provide ecosystem data that are important to the future management of the Ross Sea toothfish fishery under the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and marine protection initiatives throughout the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), including bioregionalisation.  

It also builds on previous data collections and scientific knowledge of the Ross Sea region by sampling locations and depths that have not previously been sampled and by adopting an inter-disciplinary approach to survey design.  A range of newly developed and updated equipment was used by scientists in order to sample the widest range of marine organisms in the widest range of environments and geographic gradients possible, some of which were sampled for the first time.  

3. Project Objectives
Two sets of objectives were developed for New Zealand’s IPY-CAML project. The strategic objectives reflect the high level rationale for the project and were agreed by New Zealand agencies in June 2007 following the funding announcement.  Overall science objectives and specific voyage objectives directly address the scientific rationale for the project and the requirements of both the voyage and the post voyage analyses. 

3.1 Strategic Objectives

Specific IPY-CAML Project Agency Objectives: 

    1) To determine the abundance, diversity and distribution of biota in the Ross Sea Region across a range of marine habitats and geographical gradients (latitude, longitude, depth, topography, degree of ice-scour, degree of seasonal ice cover, water mass).

    2) To quantify key functional and structural components of the Ross Sea ecosystem that will further develop New Zealand’s Ross Sea ecosystem modelling.

    3) To quantify the abundance and distribution of species associated with and dependent upon toothfish in the Ross Sea.

    4) To identify robust ecosystem indicators in the Ross Sea that can be used to measure the effects of climate change and other anthropogenic impacts beyond the range of natural variation.

    5) To obtain further data to support marine bioregionalisation research and New Zealand objectives for the development of a network of Marine Protected Areas in the Ross Sea region.

    6) To incorporate as broadly as possible the NZ Antarctic marine science community within the project and to incorporate international participation in the project.


3.2 Overall Science Objectives:


    1) To measure and describe the relationships between patterns of species (or appropriate taxon level) of viruses, bacteria, archaea, phytoplankton, zooplankton, nekton, benthic fauna, cephalopods, fish, and top predators; their distribution, abundance (density or biomass) and biodiversity (endemism, richness, complexity, taxonomic distinctness, genetic diversity) and environmental variables (e.g., latitude, bottom depth, substrate type, bottom topography/rugosity, primary productivity and ice-berg scour) in key habitats (water column, benthic shelf, slope, seamounts and abyssal plain) between longitudes ~170°E and ~175°W, and depths down to ~3500-4000m in the Ross Sea region. 

    2) To assess the trophic interrelationships and functional roles of the major groups (viruses, bacteria, archaea, phytoplankton, zooplankton, nekton, benthic fauna, cephalopods, fish, and top predators) in the Ross Sea and regional ecosystem, with particular reference to improving inputs to ecosystem modelling. 

    3) To obtain baseline measures of the marine environment and identify a suite of ecosystem or environmental indicators that could potentially be used to monitor change in response to environmental or anthropogenic forcing (e.g., climate change, fishery impacts) within the context of the extreme Antarctic environment. 

Specific Voyage Objectives:

    1) Measure seabed depth and rugosity using the multibeam system (whenever possible) to identify topographic features such as bottom type, iceberg scouring, seamounts, and to determine areas for targeted benthic faunal sampling.

    2) To undertake opportunistic photographic observations and records of marine mammal and seabird species. 

    3) To undertake Continuous Plankton Recorder sampling to determine the spatial distribution, diversity and abundance of phytoplankton, and zooplankton near the surface in the Ross Sea region and during the transit to the Ross Sea. 

    4) To collect underway automated water sampling and temperature and chlorophyll a data, and surface samples for chlorophyll a and particle analysis to allow validation of satellite data (e.g. surface seawater temperature, and chlorophyll concentration). 

    5) To measure physical/chemical variables (e.g., salinity, temperature, nutrients etc.), micro-organisms (e.g., viral, bacterial, phytoplankton and microzooplankton species etc.), and particulate matter throughout the water column using Niskin, CTD, fluorescence and beam transmisometry.

    6) To carry out a mid-water survey of the distribution, abundance (biomass), diversity, and size structure of epipelagic, mesopelagic (and possibly bathypelagic) species using acoustics and associated midwater net sampling techniques at different depths.

    7) To collect samples of mesozooplankton and small macrozooplankton to identify taxonomic composition and measure biomass, diversity, distribution, and densities using MOCNESS & mesopelagic trawl.

    8) To carry out a survey of the distribution, abundance (biomass), and size structure of shelf and slope demersal fish species and associated invertebrate species using the bottom trawl and deepwater camera system.

    9) To carry out a benthic survey of distribution and abundance of benthic assemblages across a body size spectrum from megafauna to bacteria, for shelf, slope, seamount and abyssal sites in the Ross Sea region using sleds, beam trawl, DTIS and multicorer. 

    10) To collect tissue samples (for stable isotope analysis, biomarkers etc), and where possible, gut contents for trophic studies for as many pelagic and benthic species as practical. 

    11) To collect samples that will allow DNA barcoding for all fish and multi-cellular invertebrate species by sequencing reference specimens in conjunction with Canadian Barcoding Centre, for specimen identification in gut content, plankton, and in taxonomic and population genetic projects.

    12) To contribute to a comprehensive educational outreach programme during the voyage.

    13) To prepare communications material (e.g., press releases, video clips, news updates, press conference) in conjunction with MFish and LINZ before and during the voyage as required.

    14) To facilitate the development of a documentary by allowing the designated film maker to interview and film scientific and ship activities relating to the voyage whilst on board.
4. Study Areas
The New Zealand IPY-CAML project divided the Ross Sea region into three study areas, each of which was stratified by depth, with a different balance of core and additional stations to reflect the multiple objectives of the project.  The core stations were placed to allow broad-scale comparisons within areas and between areas on a regional scale.  

Northern Abyssal and Seamounts Area

The study area for the abyssal plains encompassed the area between approximately 175ºE and 180ºE and 68ºS to 70ºS.  The bottom depth in this area is moderately uniform and core stations were sampled in the depth range 3000–3500 m.  Within the northern area there are several seamounts – the largest of which, the Scott Seamount, extends above sea level as Scott Island.  Proposed sampling targeted mainly benthos at up to four seamount stations – two at each of the Admiralty and Scott Seamounts. Sampling at each seamount was depth stratified from near the summit to a 2000m depth.  The sampling programme in the northern area was restricted to equipment that could be satisfactorily deployed to the depths encountered.  The intention was to compare abyssal plain samples with those from the foot of the continental slope and to compare seamount fauna on the Admiralty and Scott Seamounts with that of the Balleny Islands sampled in 2004 and 2006. 

Central Slope Area

This study area included slope and abyssal depths between Cape Adare, around the Iselin Bank and extending south to the south-eastern Ross Sea and comprised mostly slope-depth stations (Figure 1). Subject to ice cover, the area extended between depths of 500 m and 3000 m, longitudes 175ºE and 165ºW, and latitudes 70ºS and 76ºS. (Ice cover did in fact severely restrict sampling in this area). This topographically complex area supports most of the catches of toothfish and bycatch species from the toothfish fishery. The survey in this area included core stations as well as additional demersal stations within pre-defined strata.  

Southern Shelf Area

This study area encompassed the western and southern Ross Sea between latitudes 73ºS and 77ºS from the coast out to about 175ºW (Figure 1). The depth covered extended from 200 m to 1200 m, but was mostly in the range 400–800 m. This study area included a southwards extension of sampling of the 2004 BioRoss Survey and an eastwards extension of sampling from the Latitudinal Gradient Programme.  Sampling the deeper water on the shelf will allow distinction between the effects of latitude and depth on species distribution and abundance and on biodiversity in post-voyage analyses. This study area is also believed to encompass much of the geographic range of the semi-pelagic Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum), the key prey species for most land, ice, and sea based predators in the Ross Sea.  The survey in this area included core stations as well as additional demersal and mesopelagic stations within pre-defined depth strata.  

5. Sampling Methods

There were three components to the biological survey design.  They were:

    1) A ‘biodiversity’ survey, to allow measures of biodiversity to be estimated across a range of spatial scales and environments surveyed.  In addition, it will be possible to calculate density estimates (e.g. “wet weight per m2” or similar) of all species collected in the pelagic and benthic habitats at these core stations.

    2) A ‘demersal’ survey, to determine the spatial distribution and abundance of key demersal fish, squid, and large macro-invertebrates within the central and southern study areas.

    3) A ‘mesopelagic’ survey, to determine the spatial distribution and abundance of the key mid-trophic level mesopelagic species assemblages (in particular krill and Antarctic silverfish) using a quantitative acoustic survey with targeted mark identification using midwater trawls within the shelf and slope study areas.

Water chemistry (Niskin rosette CTD sampling) and bottom sediments (multicorer) were collected at all core stations.  In addition, an under-way sampling programme which incorporated water sampling, environmental measurements and the deployment of a Continuous Plankton Recorder systematically throughout the voyage took place.
6. Preliminary results
Data were successfully collected for all voyage objectives except Objective 8.  A survey of demersal fish, particularly bycatch species in the toothfish fishery could not be completed because of the ice cover over most of the slope region.  Instead, more stations were sampled on seamounts rising from the abyssal plain in the Scott Seamount complex and the Admiralty Seamount chain. The voyage track and sampling locations are shown in Figure 2. The survey:
    1) Sampled a very wide range of habitats – sea-bed sediments, sea-bed surfaces, the water column to a maximum depth of about 3,500 metres and the water surface, across the Ross Ice Shelf, the continental slope, seamounts and abyss of the Ross Sea region.
    2) Deployed many pieces of specialised sampling and data gathering equipment. Few of these environments and biological communities have been sampled in such a comprehensive, cohesive, multifaceted way before.
    3) Found many unusual organisms with special adaptations or traits associated with polar or deep-sea environments - including gigantism (e.g. very large starfish, sea spiders, amphipods, hydroids, jellyfish, tunicates, sea cucumbers); fish adapted to catch prey in the dark at sparsely-populated depths where the next meal could be hours or days away (pearleye, daggertooth, stareater); icefish with no swim bladders or haemoglobin.
    4) Recorded at least 69 fish species, including four possibly new to science.
    5) Recorded invertebrate species that have not been seen in the area before by the scientists onboard. Identification by taxonomists over the next three years will likely confirm many species new to science. The invertebrate samples included unusual cephalopod species, including several juvenile colossal squid.
    6) Gathered a wealth of new biological and environmental data that will, through further analysis, reveal new information about the Ross Sea ecosystem and will underpin studies of climate change and management of the toothfish fishery.
    7) Deployed a high-tech camera system in the region to reveal new information about species and communities of organisms living on the seafloor.
    8) Conducted an abundance survey of the Antarctic silverfish, which underpins the food-web in the Ross Sea.
    9) Conducted experiments on microbial responses to ocean acidity, as it is predicted that oceans may become more acidic with ongoing climate change.
    10) Sampled the Admiralty Seamount for the first time.
    11) Sampled the Scott Island Seamount Complex – most of which had never been sampled before. 
7. Education and Outreach
An extensive twice weekly science report was sent from the vessel to the Science Hub website and incorporated several themes as well as providing updates on progress during the voyage. Reports were variously posted onto the following websites:

    • http://www.fish.govt.nz/Environmental/Habitat Protection & Research/IPY-CAML
    • http://www.niwascience.co.nz/rc/antarctica/ipy-caml/
    • http://www.cousteau.org/caml
    • http://www.caml.aq/voyages/tangaroa-2007-2008/index.html
    • http://www.caml.aq/voyages/tracks.php
    • http://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/ipyvoyage
Figure 1 –Study areas planned for the NZ IPY-CAML Survey in the Ross Sea region, Feb-Mar 2008


Figure 2: Vessel track of the NZ IPY-CAML voyage showing the main sampling stations. C, core stations where the full range of sampling gear was deployed; D, demersal stations where the camera system and rough bottom trawl were deployed; M, stations where the midwater trawl was deployed for target identification



