





Neumayer Station III progress during the first season of construction 2007/2008






Neumayer Station III progress 
during the first season of construction 2007/2008
1. Introduction
For the second time in 28 years the German Antarctic research station Neumayer needs a new station building. This is due to the limited life time of sub-ground structures set up on Ekström Ice Shelf at the north-eastern edge of the Weddell Sea in Dronning Maud Land near Atka Bay. Here the ice shelf is 240 m thick and moves at a rate of about 170 m/a towards the breaking edge some 20 km away in the north. Temperatures range between -10° C summer mean and -26° C winter mean, with extremes at +4° C and -45° C. There is snow drift 60 percent of the time, characteristic to the place. The annual snow accumulation amounts to 80 cm. Winds are predominantly east. Neumayer was maintained right from the start by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) in Bremerhaven, Germany. 
Research priorities are in the fields of meteorology, geophysics, and air chemistry. In the respective observatories programmes have been carried out continuously since March 1981. In 2003 a fourth observatory, comprising an infrasound array, has been installed as part of the international monitoring system of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation. All observatory programmes are integrated in quite a number of international monitoring networks. The scientific and monitoring operations are highly acknowledged all over the world. Very valuable and partly unique time series were obtained at the station's observatories druing the past decades. 
Over the years, Neumayer Station has furthermore developed into a logistic centre serving scientific expeditions and flight operations in the area of Dronning Maud Land and beyond during summer season. The population at the base varies strongly, with 9 to 11 persons overwintering and often more than 40 persons at a time during summer. A considerable fleet of tracked vehicles, mobile cranes, generating plant and fuel tanks plus about 30 heavy cargo sledges is stationed and maintained at Neumayer. A 1,000 m long and 60 m wide snow runway is maintained north-westerly of the Station in summer, usable by small aircraft with STOL capacity. Weather forecasting and flight weather consultation for a wider area is provided as an important service contribution to the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (Dromlan). 
Neumayer Station is relieved by ship in summer. Early in the season ships moor at the edges of the ice shelf in the north or at the fast ice edge. Later in the season lower ice shelf landing places, especially at Atka Bay, become accessible. Transports between ship and base are carried out with tracked vehicles and sledges. Neumayer is also the starting point for all traffic to Kohnen Station. 
The continuation of the observatory programmes at the same location and the continued provision of logistic support is therefore of great importance and justifies the considerable effort of the station rebuild.
A new concept has been developed for a replacement station. The design comprises the basic features with a combination of an underground garage and a six metres elevated platform of about 68 by 24 metres in one building. The whole structure is mounted on 16 hydraulic bipod cylinders that it can be jacked up as a unit, in order to compensate yearly snow accumulation and keeping all structures in line with the growing snow surface. The station building will thus remain operational for a prolonged life time of 25 to 30 years.
All manufacturing works, briefing of construction team, allocation of equipment for constructions works were completed by the end of October 2007. Likewise the international coordination of ship and air transport has been established in parallel for the first season of construction in Antarctica. 
2. Progress during the season 2007/08
2.1 	Transports
AWI chartered the 1A ice-classed Danish MV Naja Arctica (Royal Arctic Line A/S, Nuuk, Greenland), a ship which is employed in the Denmark-Greenland trade during most of the year, for transport of the station and of the contractor's plant and equipment from Bremerhaven to Atka Iceport in the Antarctic. The ship left Bremerhaven with 3,494 tons resp. 16,680 m3 (incl. 258 TEU containers) of cargo on 17 November 2007. 
At Cape Town the ship bunkered and switched from HFO to MGO (Diesel) fuel for the leg to Atka Bay and back, following a Comnap recommendation on AWI's request in order to minimize impact by harmful emissions in Antarctica. To the knowledge of AWI this was the first time that a cargo vessel in Antarctic waters has burned ship's diesel instead of heavy fuel oil.
Unfortunately the Naja Arctica encountered ‑ as soon emerged on 18 December 2007 ‑ the worst sea and pack ice conditions of the past 30 years in the vicinity of Ekström Ice Shelf and Atka Bay (see ENVISAT-ASAR satellite image 070108). Even the ice breaking RV Polarstern, which escorted the navigation, could not break through the 1.4 nm wide ridge of pack ice at that time. This situation lasted for some weeks and delayed the unloading operation. On the other hand  most of the construction team, which was flown to Antarctica via Novolazarevskaya as planned on the Dromlan schedule to meet the earliest possible start of works, had to be preliminarily accommodated in a waiting position to varying lengths of time at the stations SANAE IV and Neumayer II, and on board of the South African supply ship SA Agulhas.
Since the ice conditions remained until the beginning of January 2008 RV Polarstrern was tasked for further assistance to deviate from her scientific voyage. The ice breaking operation started on 9 January. After 7 days of heavy ice ramming an about 300 m wide access channel was broken through the 2 to 5 m thick pack ice (see photo Atka Bay taken on 160108 by Ulrich Bathmann). This time and fuel consuming operation was necessary to avoid further delay and to eventually reach the unloading site at the 15 m high margin at the northern edge of the Ekström Ice Shelf. 
After an accumulated delay of about four weeks unloading began immediately and continued around the clock the following days. The heaviest pieces to be discharged were the basic machine parts of two  crawler cranes, weighing 39 tons apiece. As an ice edge height above the water level of up to 17 metres as well as a safe distance to the ice edge for the offloading on to the ice had to be considered, the required crane capacity of the ship had been one of the decisive factors for choosing MS Naja Arctica. The ship left on 3 February 2008 for Cape Town after finishing the cargo operations and after a few interruptions caused by bad weather, ice and swell, and later returned safely to Europe. 
2.2 	Trench evacuation, transports on ice and erection works
At the site about six kilometres south of Neumayer Station II the trench for the garage part of the building had been cut to fit the planned arrival of the ship, involving the removal and distribution of about 14,000 m3 of snow. Due to the delay this work had to be done twice as drift snow filled the trench quickly with every storm.
The two big crawler cranes (195 kW/22 m*13 tons, with 41 m boom), too heavy and large to be transported and loaded in one piece, were self assembled right next to the ship on the ice shelf, and crawled thereafter to the site with the pulling assistance of a station vehicle.
Apart from self driving plant all transports to the 21 km distant site were on heavy cargo sledges, pulled by the AWI's tracked vehicles (Pistenbullies) over the ice. The enormous amount of cargo made this a major task, carried out in two ten-hour-shifts per day with up to eight Pistenbullies and involving 174 man-shifts, plus 79 lost man-shifts caused by bad weather. 
Once the site camp, housing altogether 47 persons of construction team and AWI supervising personnel, was set up, the construction works were carried out in the planned manner. Since it was impossible to catch up some 32 days in the 55 days left of the season, a new break-up point between works of the two seasons had to be found. Instead of finishing all steel erection works, the installation of the hydraulic pumping and steering system, and the cladding of the platform, now the sealing of the garage roof and the installation of the ramp cover were defined as new targets. 
It was also essential that all parts and materials not yet safely installed were stored on the snow in a way which will allow not only to get to them easily in the following season but also to find them under the drifted snow. Parts sensible to cold were brought to Neumayer II for storage. 
A new plan was set up for the monitoring of settlements and strain of the garage building as the automatic measuring devices could not put into operation. The technical staffs of the overwintering team at Neumayer II were instructed to carry out the necessary measurements and observations. So far no dangerous deformation of any sort has been noticed, but the bipod cylinders can be worked by help of a small hydraulic pump should the need arise. 
2.3 	Outlook on works in the following season 2008/2009
Independent now of any further shipment the construction works will be continued in the beginning of November 2008. All personnel will be flown in the frame of Dromlan flights. As soon as construction works progress accordingly the changeover move from Neumayer II and installation of scientific facilities at Neumayer III will start in January 2009. Ship transport of construction equipment and construction camp back to Bremerhaven has been arranged in cooperation with the Dromship partners of Belgium, Germany and Norway. The MV Ivan Papanin (Murmansk Shipping, Russia), has been contractually obligated for supply service of the stations Troll, Princess Elisabeth, Neumayer III during coming season 2008/2009. She is scheduled to call for Atka Bay in February 2009.
All works depending on tolerable weather conditions are calculated with a 30 percent time allowance. With a little bit of luck weather there is a reasonable chance to make good the time lost in last season as to heavy ice conditions. The official opening of the new station is scheduled to the period between 15 and 23 February 2009. Until beginning of March 2009 all preparations should be finished for the first wintering, and remaining summer personnel will return via Dromlan.
3. Further information on Internet web-sites
3.1 	Information on Neumayer Station III
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica
www.awi.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Infrastructure/Stations/Neumayer_Station_III/hydraulic.avi
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica/aerodynamic
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station_iii/new_architecture_in_the_antarctica/energy_supply
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/
www.awi.de/NM_WebCam/
www.realnature.tv/neumayer_station_III_start.html
www.realnature.tv/neumayer_station_III_textberichte.html&date=2008-01-08
3.2 	Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
www.umweltbundesamt.de/antarktis/archiv/NMIII-UVS.pdf
www.awi.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Infrastructure/Stations/Neumayer_Station_III/Page52-63.pdf
www.awi.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Infrastructure/Stations/Neumayer_Station_III/Page117-end.pdf
3.2 	Transport ship MV NAJA ARCTICA
www.ral.gl/ral/udvikling/ralcm.nsf/folders/najaarctica?opendocument
3.2 	Neumayer weather information
www.awi.de/en/infrastructure/stations/neumayer_station/observatories/meteorological_observatory/synoptic_observations_iframe/#c8362

