





Recent operational developments within the South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP)




Recent operational developments within the South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP)

    1.       New Office Facilities and Permanent berthing facility for mv SA Agulhas

The SANAP took occupation of their new centralised facilities in April 1997. Whereas, previously the administration office and storage warehouse were located in two different parts of the city and similarly, SANAP’s research and supply vessel the SA Agulhas never had its own permanent berth in Cape Town Harbour, the inconvenience of this arrangement is now fortunately a thing of the past. The Administration Block, Store and Permanent Berth are now all centrally located at the East Pier of the Victoria and Alfred Waterfront in Cape Town Harbour. Our new facilities make provision for assistance to other national programs using Cape Town as a Gateway to Antarctica, as far as temporary office, meeting and storage space is concerned with at least three national operators having already made use of these facilities.

Should you require any further information in this regard please contact the Director of SANAP, Mr. Henry Valentine at:

Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Directorate: Antarctica and Islands
P O Box 52126
Victoria & Alfred Waterfront
Cape Town
8002

Tel: +27 21 4059404
E-mail: hvalentine@deat.gov.za

Figure 1 – The SA Agulhas (foreground) in her permanent berth at East Pier in the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront, directly adjacent to SANAP’s new Office and Storage facilities (background).








2.	Replacement of the mv SA Agulhas

Plans to replace the S.A.Agulhas with a new multipurpose vessel have commenced following the recent approval to replace the vessel was given by National Treasury. The first capital funds will become available on 1 April 2009. Thus 2008 will be spent finalising the user requirements and calling for pre qualifying tenders through a Request for Information. The document will be published internationally. From the responses received, four to six potential bidders will be selected and invited to submit formal Bids, based on a detailed Performance Specification. The Invitation to Bid will be sent out in October 2008 with Bids closing in January 2009. The new vessel will, most likely, be slightly larger than S.A.Agulhas and will most certainly have more power.  It will be ice strengthened and designed to Green Ship principles. The experience gained over the past 30 years with S.A.Agulhas will be heavily drawn upon and the general operating profile will be similar, although it is hoped that the new vessel could sail earlier in the summer and return a bit later in the autumn so as to create a larger operating window for ship board research and logistic support for other organisations. In addition to the 100 passengers (including scientists), the vessel will carry break bulk and containerised cargo and up to 950,000 litres of polar diesel and helicopter fuel. There will be hangar and landing facilities for two large helicopters and a wide variety of specialised laboratories, some of which will be containerised.  Supporting the research will be a wide array of scientific winches and overboard handling facilities. Research activities will include chemical, physical and biological sampling to depths of up to 5000 metres, deep dredging and coring, and towed seismic arrays.

3.	 New Satellite Communications System

During the past few months SANAP completed the first and second phases of the upgrade of its satellite communications system. SANAP utilized the existing satellite dishes and installed new systems comprising Vocality satellite router/multiplexers, Comtech satellite modems and TerraSat amplifiers at its Cape Town facility and Antarctic research station during the past Antarctic summer season and during April 2008 on Marion Island. The final phase of installation at our Gough Island station will be undertaken during September/October later this year. The new systems offer improved data bandwidth which will facilitate real-time data exchange for the scientific programmes.  There is also an increase in the number and quality of the voice lines to the remote bases.  The eventual bandwidth for each base would be at least:

	SANAE	512k 
	Marion Island	256k 
	Gough Island	128k

SANAP now also subscribes to the primary academic service provider on the subdomain name of ac.za, because "it provides direct, specialised support for higher education and/or scholarly research, as a primary purpose or core activity;" and subsequently our website will be moved to www.sanap.ac.za from July 2008.  

The telephone numbers have changed to:

	SANAE	+27 21 405 9428	fax: 	+27 21 405 9432
	Marion Island	+27 21 405 9444	fax: 	+27 21 405 9448

New E-mail addresses:

	SANAE general (Base commander & Comms Room)	sanae@sanap.ac.za
	SANAE Weather Services		saws@sanae.sanap.ac.za

New E-mail addresses:

	MARION general (Base commander & Comms Room)	marion@sanap.ac.za
	MARION Weather Services		saws@marion.sanap.ac.za

