





Completion of a Four-year Campaign to Clean Up the Syowa Station Area




Completion of a Four-year Campaign to Clean Up the Syowa Station Area

1. Introduction
The Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty entered into force in 1998. Since then, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) has been conducting removal and cleanup of old waste left by earlier expeditions in the Syowa Station (69°00' S, 39°35' E) area. Large waste items such as scrapped snow vehicles were left in the station area, and small items were found scattered on the land. Therefore, JARE planned a four-year program to clean up the Syowa Station area from 2005 to 2008. The cleanup program consisted of three major activities: cleaning up large old waste items like snow vehicles, an intensive cleanup campaign, and starting sewage treatment for the Summer Lodge building at Syowa. Here we report briefly on the project.

2. Implementation of the Cleanup Program
  The first activity, to remove the large old waste items such as scrapped snow vehicles, broken sledges, materials from scrapped buildings, etc. was prepared mainly in the over-wintering period, and the large items were removed completely during the four-year campaign. The total amount of waste was estimated at 731 tons, and shipping was planned to move over 200 tons every year, including the regular shipping volume for each year. Some of the larger items, old snow vehicles, are shown in Figure 1. A total of 876 tons of waste was removed and brought back to Japan during the campaign. The weight of the waste brought back to Japan each year is shown in Figure 2.


Figure 1 - Scrapped old snow vehicles employed during early JAREs.



Figure 2 - Total weight of waste brought back to Japan each year.

The second activity was the intensive cleanup campaign. Every summer season, JARE personnel and crewmembers of the Shirase participated in the campaign for two to three days between late January and early February to clean up waste around the area of East Ongul Island where Syowa Station is located. The number of participants totaled about 80 every season. They collected many kinds of waste, such as empty fuel drums and wooden panels blown away in strong winds (See Figure 3). The waste collected, which totaled 6 to 8 tons every summer, was packed and stored immediately in waste storage and brought back to Japan in the next season. This was a good opportunity for education and training of the expedition personnel on handling waste during their stay in the Antarctic.
The third action was to start sewage treatment for the Summer Lodge, which is open only for the summer season. It accommodates 48 personnel and has a kitchen, bathroom, and toilets. A sewage treatment system was installed in 2007 and started operation in January 2008. All sewage from Syowa Station is now treated and discharged into the sea after processing. This treatment system was shut down after the Shirase left Syowa Station for Japan and will be reopened for the next summer season.



Figure 3 - Intensive cleanup campaign in the Syowa Station area.

