





Background to the pollution incident caused by the sinking of the MS Explorer





Background to the pollution incident caused by the 
sinking of the MS Explorer



    1. Effort deployed

The accident of the MS Explorer in the Antarctic on November 23rd 2007 involved a significant effort for Chile, both in rescuing shipwrecked people and cleaning up the resulting pollution.

As an illustration, more than 18,000 man hours were spent on all the activities associated with this accident, with the resulting cost of an operation of this scale.
 

    2. Environmental effects.

Owing to the weather conditions and the recommendation not to use chemical dispersants, the only measure taken to mitigate the effects of the pollution was mechanical dispersion of the oil slick by sailing over it, which helped to speed up the evaporation of the diesel fuel. This work was carried out by the Icebreaker Viel from the day the ship went down until December 1st.

As regards the measures adopted by Chile, on November 24th 2007, three environmental experts from different organisations from the country set out for the Antarctic on board a Chilean Air force Hercules. The aim was to gather more information concerning the slick and the possible effects on the environment. The incident occurred on Friday November 23rd after a warning that the MS Explorer had collided with an ice floe and later sunk in the Bransfield Strait, 47 miles east of Fildes Bay, King George Island.

According to statements by the ship's captain, there were 185 m3 of diesel oil on board, as well as 24 m3 of lubricant and 500 litres of gasoline; 210 m3 of fuel oils in total.

During the afternoon of the November 25th, the Chilean environmental experts boarded the Icebreaker Viel to visit the area in which the accident occurred to see the pollution and any possible environmental damage in the area. 

They reached the affected area at around 9 pm on that day and then flew over the site, where they observed an oil slick measuring approximately 847,290 m2 (2.5 x 0.1 nautical miles), which was considerably larger than that observed in a photograph taken on Friday 23rd November by the Chilean Navy. That photo had shown a slick measuring approximately 180 x 60 m (10,800 m2). 

The area contained a large number of sea ice and ice floes. Penguins and other flying birds were observed on two of these ice floes. The total population of the area was estimated at 2,500 birds, mainly penguins.  

After the aerial inspection, the team went out in a Zodiac craft and noted oil floating to the surface at nearly the exact the spot in which the MS Explorer had sunk. Samples of polluted sea water were taken and sent to the Hydrographical and Oceanographic Service of the Chilean Navy. 

A further inspection was conducted with a Zodiac at 3.30 am on Monday November 26th, and it was observed that although the affected area was smaller (approximately 1,500 x 100 m2 (150,000 m2), oil was still rising to the surface.

It was not possible to use the normal containment techniques due to weather conditions (winds of over 40 knots) and the presence of a great deal of ice which would make it difficult to contain the slick. It was therefore only possible to disperse the oil slick mechanically, as mentioned above, and monitor the spread. 

Regarding the fauna present in the affected area, it was very difficult to capture specimens of Antarctic sea birds on the open sea to take samples for assessing the possible effect of hydrocarbons on them. For that reason, only specimens on land near the accident site were examined (mainly on the north coast of the Antarctic Peninsula and the south coast of the South Shetland Islands), where no fauna were seen to be affected. 

The Icebreaker Viel continued to patrol the area until December 1st, when no new fuel leaks were noted.




