





Highlights from Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions (JARE) in 
2007–2008





Highlights from Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions (JARE) in 2007–2008
1. Introduction
The Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) has been organized by Headquarters established in the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT). This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from scientific programs carried out by JAREs near Syowa Station and other research fields during the 2007–2008 season.
2. Selected Highlights
2.1 	Antarctic ozone hole observations in IPY 2007–2008: A study of the Antarctic ozone hole mechanism using FTIRs and ozone sondes at Syowa Station
The Antarctic ozone hole is still severe in late winter and spring despite regulation of the emission of ozone-depleting substances since the 1990s. Special Antarctic ozone hole observations were carried out from February 2007 to January 2008 at Syowa Station (69°00' S, 39°35' E) by JARE 48 (the 48th Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition), corresponding to the project “Ozone layer and UV radiation in a changing climate evaluated during IPY (ORACLE-O3).” During the Match campaign period from June to October, 40 ozone sondes were launched in addition to the normal weekly launch (Figure 1.1). The Match method quantifies chemical ozone loss in the polar stratosphere. The basic concept involves calculating the forward trajectory of an air parcel that has been probed by ozone measurement and taking a second ozone measurement close to this trajectory. Such an event is called a Match, and nine stations participated in the campaign: Belgrano, Davis, Dome Concordia, Dumont d’Urville, Marambio, McMurdo, Neumayer, South Pole, and Syowa (Figure 1.2). The rate of chemical ozone destruction can be obtained through statistical analysis of several dozen such Match events. In addition, two Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometers (FTIRs) were installed at Syowa Station in February 2007 to measure the total concentrations and vertical profiles of several minor constituents, e.g. HNO3, HCl, ClONO2 (Figure 1.3), and polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs), respectively. Moreover, vertical distributions of aerosol concentrations in PSCs were observed using aerosol sondes.
Some preliminary results were achieved through JARE 48’s ozone hole observations. Ozone depletion over Syowa Station started in the second half of July, and ozone concentrations at 15–20 km in altitude were nearly zero in early October, according to the Match ozone sonde observations of 2007. Also from the Match campaign, ozone loss rates were deduced during September (von der Garten et al., 2008). PSCs often appeared from early July over Syowa Station and ozone destruction started at PSC altitudes in late July. Different types of PSC were observed, and concentrations of each minor constituent were different in some types of PSC. Details of the ozone depletion mechanism will be elucidated from analysis of these data and will contribute to improving model predictions of ozone concentration in future.


Figure 1.1 - Thirty-two vertical profiles of ozone partial pressure over Syowa Station from June to 4 October 2007. They show that ozone in the 15–20 km layer was almost completely depleted on 3 and 4 October.


Figure 1.2 - Illustration of a trajectory of an air parcel starting from Neumayer Station in a Match campaign for ozone sonde observations with nine participating Stations in the Antarctic.


Figure 1.3 - Absorption spectra of FTIR at Syowa Station on 25 March 2007. Column amounts and vertical profiles of minor constituents will be deduced from these spectra.

2.2 	Japanese-Swedish Antarctic Expedition (JASE) 2007–2008
The Japanese-Swedish Antarctic Expedition (JASE) was a joint contribution to the IPY 2007–2008. The expedition, based on tracked vehicles, made use of two starting points, the Japanese Syowa Station (69°00' S, 39°35' E) and the Swedish Wasa Station (73°03' S, 13°25' E). The JASE traverse investigated the inland environment of the ice sheet along the line connecting four Antarctic stations: Syowa, Dome Fuji (77°19' S, 39°42' E), Kohnen (75°00' S, 0°07' E), and Wasa (Figure 2.1). The expedition started in November 2007 and aimed at a meeting point on the Polar Plateau in late December for joint scientific efforts and the exchange of a few expedition members (Figure 2.2). The total length of the traverse line was more than 2,800 km, and the traverse was successful. 


Figure 2.1 - The traverse path of the Japanese-Swedish Antarctic Expedition (JASE) from November 2007 to February 2008.

The scientific objective was to explore the environments of the vast ice sheet around and beyond Dome Fuji, in particular the spatial distribution of the surface environment, the englacial environment, and the subglacial environment. Such information strengthens data signals from deep ice cores. In addition, we can better understand both spatial and temporal variation in substances transported to polar regions. Moreover, we can understand the physics of how such an ice sheet can exist. Observations included sampling of snow and firn from shallow depths of up to 10 m for various purposes, remote sensing of ice such as radar sounding and microwave radiometry, and various glaciological and meteorological investigations. Using radar sounders, indications of the existence of water at the ice-bed boundary were discovered. Also, a large volume of snow samples were transported both to Japan and to Sweden. Finally, this JASE traverse suggested a new model for the inland traverse of Antarctica. Joint operations among nations could make our observation area much wider than could be taken on by one team or one nation. Such joint efforts are certainly a future direction for the inland expedition.

Figure 2.2 - The JASE expedition teams rendezvoused at the meeting point on the polar plateau on 27 December 2007 and exchanged two scientists on each team to conduct scientific observations on the way back.

2.3 	Geological Survey in the Sør Rondane Mountains
A geological survey was carried out in the Sør Rondane Mountains from late November 2007 to early February 2008. The field project aimed to reveal the evolution and dispersion of the supercontinents and mantle processes, especially the formation of the Gondwana supercontinent. The Sør Rondane Mountains are situated in the area of the east and west Gondwana collision zone. This 2007–2008 season is the first year of the three-year field project, and seven expedition members—six geologists and one field assistant—flew in to the Sør Rondane Mountains from Cape Town via Novolazarevskaya Station using the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) on 23 November 2007. The field team established a main base camp (71°49' S, 24°32' E) at the moraine field north of Brattnipane (Figure 3.1) in the central part of the Sør Rondane Mountains as well as four additional advance camps in the mountain area. They traveled with snowmobiles and sledges without snow vehicles and covered an area of 60 x 80 km2 (Figure 3.2). Geological survey was actually carried out on foot after gaining access to the mountain range on snowmobiles.
The area surveyed was composed of high-grade metamorphic rocks and some plutonic rocks, and vestiges of the formation process of the supercontinent were sought. Based on detailed investigation of geological structure and lithological features, they collected a total of 1,400 rock specimens with a total weight of about 2,800 kg. After completion of the survey, the field team flew back from the Sør Rondane Mountains to Cape Town via Novolazarevskaya Station on 6 February 2008. On their way back, they made brief visits at Belgium’s Princess Elizabeth Station, the Russian Novolazarevskaya Station, and India’s Maitri Station. The rock samples arrived in Tokyo in April, and laboratory work that will include detailed observations and chemical and isotopic analyses will start soon.


Figure 3.1 - The Brattnipane Base Camp in the Sør Rondane Mountains.


Figure 3.2 - Transportation from the base camp to an advance camp using snowmobiles and sledges.

