





The international collaboration in the urgent action of the winterer substitution at the Station Vernadsky 





The international collaboration in the urgent action of the winterer substitution at the Station Vernadsky

Information Paper submitted by Ukraine (Agenda Item: ATCM 9)


As nowadays Ukraine has not the own research ship, the National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine organizes delivery of the winterers teams and cargo on the Vernadsky  Station from south ports of Argentina or Chile by means of the preliminary freighted ships. Winterers and the scientific equipment are delivered from Ukraine to the indicated ports by airs of commercial airlines by the preliminary selected flights. 

The returning to Ukraine of winterers and specimens for scientific researches is organized by analogy. 

The indicated scheme requires the preliminary preparation and does not allow unfortunately to organize the urgent evacuation from the Station Vernadsky of people in the case of extreme situations even in a summer period. 

It should be noted also the runway absence at the Ukrainian Station that does not enable to organize the people evacuation by airs in a summer period. In a winter period because of ice situation ships can not walk up to the Station, and the using of helicopters for the people evacuation aims is practically impossible. 

In three months after arrival of the new 13th Ukrainian expedition at the Antarctic Station Vernadsky in May 2008 the cook has got a trauma which did not allow him to continue the wintering and has required the urgent evacuation to Ukraine. 

National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ukraine has urgently appealed for help to the Office of Polar Programs of National Science Foundation USA as its freighted ship has been continuing the work in Antarctic Region. Due to the immediately given possibility on the “Lourens M. Gold” ship the traumatized cook was quickly evacuated from the Station Vernadsky to Punta Arenas and then the new cook of the Ukrainian expedition on “Lourens M. Gold” board was delivered from Punta Arenas on the Station Vernadsky. 

The traumatized cook was urgently transported by air in Ukraine where his health state was quickly stabilized.  
 
The indicated case is the good example of the Parties cooperation in the extreme situation in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. 

Also it should be noted the example of collaboration with the Polish colleagues which delivered on their ship at the beginning of 2008 from the Vernadsky Station to Poland the specimens taken by the Ukrainian scientists for researches during seasonal works 2007-2008. The indicated specimens transfer means to Poland turned out the most rational and effective for the Ukrainian scientists taking into account our near neighbourhood.

It is assumed to develop and fill with new facilities this example of the logistic collaboration of our countries in the future.  

