





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica




The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica 
Information Paper Submitted by the People’s Republic of China 
Introduction
The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica has been carried out by Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration（CAA）of State Oceanic Administration (SOA) .The new Station is proposed to be built in the hinterland of East Antarctica at summit region in the central part of the major ice dividing of Dome A ice sheet. Its location will be at 80°22¢00²S and 77°21¢11² E, with an elevation of 4,093 m. The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998).The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005) was also consulted. The Draft CEE has been approved and endorsed by Ministry of Foreign Affairs and State Oceanic Administration of People’s Republic of China.
Circulation of Draft CEE
The Draft CEE was made public available and circulated to all the Contracting Parties through CEP mailing contact list on 31 January 2008. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members. For the discussions, non-technical summary (Annex-A) of the document is being submitted as CEP XI Working Paper to be translated into all four-treaty languages. Full text of the documents may also be downloaded from http://www.chinare.cn/en/. Full text on the Draft CEE of the new Chinese Station at Dome A region, Antarctica shall also be made available through CD form during CEP XI. This information paper contents full draft CEE as an attachment.
Contact Details
CAA welcomes any comments and recommendations on the Draft CEE.
For further information on this Draft CEE and its contents or if you would like to make any comment, please contact:
Ms. CHEN Danhong, Senior Engineer and Environmental Officer
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
No. 1, Fuxingmenwai Ave., Beijing, China 
Web: http://www.chinare.cn/en/
Tel: 0086-10-68036469  Fax: 0086-10-68012776 
E-mail: chinare@263.net.cn
(Attachment: Full text of Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica, in PDF format)

