





Annual Report of China Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty





Annual Report of China Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 2007/2008
1. Notification of measures taken pursuant to Article 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Environmental Protocol
Although there is no domestic legislation enacted to implement the Protocol at the present time, we work fully to follow the Protocol through the whole procedure of organizing the Chinese Antarctic expeditions since China adopted the Protocol in 1994. 
We have been working on a draft Act of a special law on protecting the Antarctic Environment for a couple of years, and we expect that the Law could be brought to the formal constituting procedure. 
2. Contingency Plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration has established several regulations and contingency plans for the Expeditions in Antarctica.
Specific environment management regulations and oil spill contingency plans have been implemented strictly by the expeditioners on the M/V XUELONG and at the Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station. 
3. Circulation of information pursuant to Annex I, Article 6(1) of the Protocol 
3.1 Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures 
All Chinese Antarctic activities must undergo an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) before the programs are carried out in Antarctica. Only those evaluated eligible can be conducted as proposed. The approved programs need to submit post–activity report on request. 
At the present time, the EIAs are conducted directly by the applicants of the program and submitted to the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration, which then seeks experts` advice on the potential environmental impacts of the proposed activities.
Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration makes the final determination as to whether or not an activity should proceed. In the future, a new procedure will be established, which request the applicants to search for experts to work out the EIAs.  The new procedure will produce more reliable and comprehensive EIAs, and can consider the potential accumulative environment impacts in a better way. 
3.2 List of Initial Environmental Evaluations
A list of Initial Environmental Evaluations for the 2007/2008 season prepared in accordance with Annex I, Article 2 of the Protocol is included in Appendix 1.
3.3 Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with Annex I, Articles 2(2) and 5 of the Protocol 
During the 2007/2008 season, no significant information has been obtained from monitoring procedures put in place in accordance with the provisions of Annex I.
3.4 Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (Annex 1, Article 3 (6)) 
A Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of the Chinese Dome A Station in Antarctica is prepared by Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration（CAA）of State Oceanic Administration (SOA).
The Draft CEE had been forwarded to CEP and circulated to each Contracting Party on 31 January 2008. Furthermore, it had been made public available and submitted as an Working Paper as well as an Information Paper to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XXXI and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) XI( 2008, Kiev, Ukraine).
4. Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6 of the Protocol
4.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the 2007/2008 season
During the 2007/2008 season, one permit has been issued under Annex II of the protocol.
4.2. Records and statistics concerning flora and fauna taken in the 2007/2008season 
10 microorganism samples were obtained from Great Wall Station and 110 microorganism samples and 8 zooplankton samples were obtained through investigation in the South Ocean.
5.Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9 of the Protocol
Waste management regulation has been implemented by every expeditioner wherever they are on board M/V Xuelong , or at the two Chinese Antarctic stations and in the field. All the wastes are separated and treated according to the regulation. 
 Waste management regulation for the station:
The solid waste materials are divided into 4 catalogues and treated in different ways at the two stations.
    • Combustible materials are not permitted to store in the station for a long time. They are burned in the incinerator after being recorded. The remains are put in case and will be transported back to China.
    • Metal, plastic and other non-combustible materials are collected and piled to be transported back to China;
    • Glass materials are smashed into pieces and put into boxes to be transported back to China
    • Batteries useless are collected into a box and will be transported back to China.
The daily domestic liquid waste is treated in the sewage treatment system and then discharged into the sea.  The chemical liquid waste is collected. The fuel waste and lubricant are collected separately.
Waste management regulation for the vessel:
All the wastes on the M/V “Xuelong”, including the daily domestic liquid waste and the solid waste, are treated according to the related regulations of the MARPOL73/78.
6. Report pursuant to Annex IV of the Protocol
6.1 Notice of activities undertaken in case of emergency (Article 7 (2))  
There have been no cases of emergency relating to the safety of a ship and those on board or saving life at sea in the 2007/2008 season.
6.2 Implementation of Sovereign Immunity (Art 11(2))
The People’s Republic of China state owned and operated vessels in Antarctic are implemented both MARPOL 73/78 and Annex IV of the Protocol. 
7. Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10 of the Protocol
7.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol during the 2007/2008 Season
None.
7.2 Summary descriptions of activities conducted in any ASMA, ASPA or Historic Site or Monument 
The activities conducted in the Antarctic Specially Managed Area Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica (ASMA No.6) for the 2007/2008 season are listed in the table in Appendix 2.
7.3 Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V
A revised Working Paper of the Management Plan for the Amanda Bay Antarctic Specially Protected Area will be submitted to CEPXI by Australia, China.
A revised Working Paper of the Management Plan for the Mount Harding Antarctic Specially Protected Area will be submitted to CEPXI by China.
Appendix 1: Initial Environmental Evaluations 
 The following Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) for the 2007/2008 season were completed and approved by the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration. 
Short description of the activity
 Location
The Institute which is  responsible for the activity
Garage construction, the construction of the foundation for the oil storing system and removal of the old science buildings
69°22′20″S
76°23′07″E
Polar Research Institute of China
The construction of the unloading pier at the Mandarin Duck Islands and leveling the high frequency radar antenna field
69°22′20″S
76°23′07″E
Polar Research Institute of China
Dome A expedition 
69°22′20″S
76°23′07″E  to 
80°22¢00²S  
77°21¢11² E
Polar Research Institute of China
Stokehold reconstruction for the science building, multifunction center and sewage disposal building; ten oil tanks foundation of 88m3 and outdoor pipelines laying
62°12′59″S,
58°57′52″w
Polar Research Institute of China
Antarctic penguin eggs collecting
Nelson Island and Stranger Point of Antarctic Peninsula
Dalian Hutan Marine Animals Protection & Research Institute

Appendix 2: 
The list of the activities conducted in the area of ASMA No.6 .
Area
Scientific Programme 
Logistic Programme
Zhongshan Station

Wintering
Routine meteorological observation
Repair and maintenance of the power generation and distribution systems


Ozone observation and aerosol sampling
Check-up and maintenance of vehicles and machineries


Upper atmospheric physics observation
Check-up and maintenance of the water and heating system


Routine geomagnetic observation



The year-round tracking by GPS and tidal observation 



Solid tide observation



All-year-round sea-ice observation


Summering
Atmospheric chemical process Observation at the Zhongshan Station
Garage construction, ,the construction of the foundation for the oil storing system and removal of the old science buildings


Study on robot system for application in Polar science activities
The construction of the unloading pier at the Mandarin Duck Islands and leveling the high frequency radar antenna field 


Field observation experiment on the Antarctic downhill wind structure
Surveying and mapping of the digital landform charts at the scale of 1:500


Observation on the sea-ice-air interaction at the Zhongshan Station



Study on ecological environment evolvement at the Zhongshan Station



Geological survey on the east edge of Amery ice-shelf



Impact of different environmental factors on the physiology and psychology of the crew

Zhongshan Station—Dome A section


Summering
Radar Detection of the Dome A area and its inland section and icecap evolvement



Glacial and atmospheric survey on the section between Zhongshan Station and Dome A 



Comprehensive observation of the complicated ice snow environment from the Zhongshan Station to Dome A and observation experiment of the wireless sensor internet installation in the Dome-A area



inland surveying and mapping 



Seismic observation



Dome A astronomical observatory  site selection and observation



Study on human body medical science in low oxygen concentration and severe cold environment



Installation of Dome A automatic record magnetometer


