





South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity (BioMAntar)




South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity(BioMAntar)

Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Brazil


The South American Network on Antarctic Marine Biodiversity (BioMAntar) is a multinational project approved by the Brazilian Council for Research and Technological Development (CNPq) in October 2007, and is intended to last until 2010. This proposal was submitted under the Programa para América do Sul (PROSUL) framework, which is a Brazilian initiative to promote multi-lateral cooperation in science and technology amongst South American countries. The BioMAntar creation was motivated by the activities of the Census of Antarctic Marine Life in South America (LA CAML), which has been promoting the integration of Antarctic scientific activities between Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela since 2006. The objective of BioMAntar is to structure a thematic newtwork on Antarctic marine biodiversity by stimulating the interaction amongst scientists and administrators in order to promote the data acquisition on marine diversity to CAML. 

The BioMAntar is organised into three thematic subprojects: Pelagic Realm (plankton and oceanography), Benthic Realm (microorganisms to megafauna) and Top Predators (cetaceans, pinnipeds and seabirds). Activities in the network include sampling protocols standardisation, data insertion into SCARMarBIN (the information system linked to CAML), interchange of researchers and specialists, elaboration of scientific documents and definition of education and outreach strategies for the South American Antarctic activities. 

A first meeting to detail the BioMAntar activities for 2008/10 occurred during the III Oficina Latinoamericana para el Census of Antarctic Marine Life (III OLA CAML), which was held in May 14-15, 2008, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. This workshop was a joint effort between CAML, PROSUL and the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology, but was also supported by the ICSU-LAC regional office, the Ministry of External Relations, the Ministry of Environment and the Interministerial Secretary for the Sea Resources. The meeting provided an opportunity to discuss how to gather available past and current South American Antarctic Marine Biodiversity data into SCARMarBIN and OBIS. The BioMAntar planned activities for 2008/10 include the elaboration of a series of South American Antarctic synthesis documents on Marine Biodiversity, integrated E&O and scientific activities and also the integrated field season during the 2008/09 austral summer. 


