





Japan’s New Icebreaker, the Shirase: Outline and Performance




Japan’s New Icebreaker, the Shirase: Outline and Performance

1. Introduction
 The current Shirase, icebreaker of the Japanese national antarctic program will retire in August 2008 after 25 years’ operation. The new vessel was launched at the Maizuru Shipyard of the Universal Shipbuilding Corporation on 16 April 2008 (Figure 1). She will enter into service from November 2009 for the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE). The dimensions, power, and icebreaking capability of the new vessel are almost the same as those of the old Shirase. However, she was designed with a focus on environmental protection in the antarctic area. Therefore, some new systems were installed for that purpose.


Figure 1 - Launching of the new icebreaker Shirase in Maizuru on 16 April 2008.

2. The design concept
The design concept of the vessel is as follows: (1) a multipurpose vessel—cargo transport, onboard helicopter operation, and oceanographic observation; (2) protecting the environment against marine pollution—double hull structure, sewage and gray water treatment systems; (3) efficient cargo handling system—12-foot containers, four cranes of 15 tons’ capacity, and two elevators for cargo movement; (4) a new oceanographic survey instrument, the multi-narrow-beam echo sounder; (5) reinforced icebreaking capability—a bow spray-water system, SUS steel cladding of the hull.

3. Outline and performance of the new icebreaker Shirase
The main specifications of the new icebreaker Shirase are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 - Specifications of the new Shirase compared with the old Shirase.
Item
New Shirase
Old Shirase
Standard displacement
12,700 tons
11,600 tons
Dimensions (L, B, D)
138 m, 28 m, 15.9 m
134 m, 28 m, 14.5 m
Cruising speed
15 knots
15 knots
Engine type (propulsion axes)
Diesel electric (2-axis)
4 engines
Diesel electric (3-axis)
6 engines
Propulsion power
29,580 hp
29,580 hp
Icebreaking capability
Continuous 1.5 m ice thickness
Continuous 1.5 m ice thickness
Cargo capacity
1,100 tons
1,000 tons
Environmental protection facilities
Sewage treatment system;
double hull

Helicopters
Two CH-101
Two S-61
Crew and officers
179
170
Expedition members
80
60

3.1 Power and icebreaking performance
The dimensions, power, and icebreaking capability of the vessel are almost the same as those of the old Shirase. The propulsion axes were changed from three to two in the interest of efficiency, and accordingly the number of propulsion engines was also reduced from six to four. The propulsion power for icebreaking is the same as before. Figure 2 shows an exterior view of the new vessel with selected features.

Figure 2 - Exterior view of the new icebreaker Shirase.

To increase lamming performance by melting the snow covering the sea ice, the Shirase has bow water-spray equipment that consists of 20 spray nozzles 250 mm each in diameter, and one large suction pump at the bottom with a capacity of 270 tons/min. SUS steel cladding was adopted for the center of the hull to reduce friction with the snow.

3.2 Environmental protection
The vessel has a double hull structure to prevent oil spills. Sewage will be treated at all times, and treated water will be discharged. The bow wash system and SUS steel cladding will increase icebreaking efficiency and reduce fuel consumption for lamming.

3.3 Cargo handling
The vessel cannot come alongside a wharf at Syowa Station as the station does not have such a facility. Therefore cargo containers have to be transported over sea ice with snow vehicles and sledges. The vessel can carry 56 twelve-foot containers on deck, and the containers will be handled by four 15-ton cranes. At the same time, small containers and fuel drums will be transported by two CH-101 helicopters. Cargo in the aft holds is to be lifted by two large elevators near the helicopter hanger. Heavy vehicles and construction materials will be kept in the fore holds.
 
3.4 Scientific facilities
A new multibeam sounder system was installed on the vessel. The system will take depth measurements down to 6,000 m and will survey geological layers up to 200 m below the seabed. Scientific laboratories for oceanography, atmospheric science, geophysics, and biology are allocated on deck. The CH-101 helicopters will assist scientific field operations as well. A small chartered helicopter for field operations can also be accommodated in the same helicopter hanger.

4. Construction and service schedule
The new Shirase will be delivered to the Maritime Self-Defense Force in May 2009, and the first voyage to the Antarctic will begin in the 2009–2010 season. Figure 3 shows the construction and service schedule of the vessel and its helicopters.


Figure 3 - Construction and service schedule of new vessel and its helicopters.


