





Initial Environmental Evaluation 
“RMM-technology on recycling of solid food wastes at Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station”






Initial Environmental Evaluation

“RMM-technology on recycling of solid food wastes
at Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station”

Informational Paper, submitter by Ukraine
Agenda item – CEP 6(b)

1. Introduction

The development and usage of the technology on recycling of solid food wastes to the full extent conforms to Article 1(2) of Annex III of Environment Protocol “The amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be reduced as far as practicable so as to minimise impact on the Antarctic environment and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty”.
According to Article 9 (4) of Annex III of Environment Protocol “The Parties may exchange information and provide advice on, inter alia, available low waste technologies, reconversion of existing installations, special requirements for effluents, and appropriate disposal and discharge methods” Ukraine submitted the information about development and implementation of the biotechnology (RMM-technologies) on recycling (fermentation) of solid food wastes at Vernadsky station, allowing decreasing the waste mass by 30 – 50 times during 7-12 days.
The first public discussion of the declared activity was performed in the International workshop on the Antarctic competent authorities (November, 2006, Berlin). At the recent Antarctic Treaty Consultative  Meeting (May 2007, New-Deli) Ukraine circulated the information as to the implementation of the new biotechnology at Vernadsky station (items 326-327 of the Report CEP X).
The mentioned activity is determined as that one, which has the effect, less than a minor or transitory impact; thus, it is performed at Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station since 2003 up to the present moment (2008).

2. The description of the suggested activity, its purpose, the place of performance, duration and intensity

The purpose of the implementation of RMM technology at Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station is to observe the requirements of Madrid protocol, according to which it is not admitted to discharge anthropogenic wastes, including food ones, to the Antarctic environment. The aim of RMM technology is ecologically safe fermentation of solid food wastes and dissoluble organic compounds to the final nontoxic products with the decrease of the waste weight by some (30-50) scores.
Unless the implementation of RMM technologies, solid food wastes (SFW) have been discharged into the area of water, adjoining to the station and resolved in the near-bottom area through the sulfate reducing with the constant formation of toxic hydrogen sulphide and mercaptans.
The implementation of the RMM technology permitted in the full extent to liquidate the rough contamination of the environment with the solid food wastes, which are constantly renewed at stay of winterers and seasonal scientific detachments in the station.

Every day at least 10 kg of SFW is formed at the station. So, during a year the total volume of SFW makes up more than 3 tons. It is evident that the accumulation and storage of SFW at the station during a year with the purpose of further removal is impossible, taking into consideration the fact that in summer at the positive temperatures the spontaneous decomposition of SFW with the formation of toxic products (hydrogen sulphide, mercaptans, fatty acids, etc.) is happened.

The description of RMM technology

Neutralization of ecologically dangerous solid food wastes in the biotechnological module (model plant) at the station Academician Vernadsky is based on the usage of such factors:

    1. Usage of aboriginal (Antarctic) natural microbial communities of the sea sludge of the coastal zone, adjoining to the station Academician Vernadsky.
    2. Purposeful, controlled regulation of the direction of microbial metabolism with the help of regulators of microbial metabolism (RMM).
    3. Control of the process of destruction of SFW with the help of indicators of microbial metabolism – nontoxic coloring agents.

Destruction of solid food wastes with the help of RMM technology is performed due to such consequent technological stages.

    1. Preparation of SFW to fermentation. In this stage SFW with the accompanying water phase (WP) that are placed in the plastic dustbin in the dining room of the station, are transferred to the biotechnological wastes.
    2. SFW and WP are loaded into the fermenter, which is a plastic tube of 50 liter capacity. The plastic tube is a hermetic anaerobic fermenter, equipped with the clamp to join the cover to the gas outlet hose. The hose provides with the evacuation of the gaseous products of fermentation (N2 and CO2) to the outside (ie. out of biotechnological module).
    3. With the help of the indicators of microbial metabolism (hereinafter - indicators) the state of the fermenting liquid is determined and, correspondingly, the amount of RMM, which is necessary to be added to the fermenting mixture with the purpose to optimize and speed up the process of the controlled, regulated destruction of SFW.
    4. The fermenter is hermetically closed and incubated during 12 hours at temperature of 25-30 °С.
    5. Twice a day to provide with the efficient destruction of SFW, the standard procedure for regulation of microbial metabolism is performed. With this purpose the fermenter is opened, fermenting liquid is mixed with SFW, the state of metabolism is determined with the help of indicators, and through RMM, which are added to fermenting liquid, the correction of microbial metabolism is performed.
    6. Engineering technological parameters of the destruction of SFW is the duration of the destruction process, decrease of weight and volume of SFW, as well as the intensity of gas formation. Stopping the process of synthesis of gas (main product of SFW destruction) and constant mass of SFW are the criteria for finishing the fermenting cycle.

Statistical data, received during 5 years (2003-2008), testify to the fact that the average weight of SFW is decreased by 30-50 times during 7-12 days.

    7. After finishing the technological cycle of fermenting, solid, not fermented residues of SFW are separated by decantation, and culture liquid is poured off into the coastal area of water. The monitoring, held during 5 years, testifies to the absence of any qualitative and quantitative changes in the state of sea biotope in the zone of discharge.
    8. Not fermented residues of SFW are dried out in the air in the biotechnological module and further are utilized in the compactor (are pressed) together with paper and plastic wastes. 

Until implementation of RMM technology in 2003, during some years food wastes have been discharged into the coastal area of water. Heterotrophic microorganisms in the near-bottom sludge have been adapted to polymeric compositions of food wastes, as a result of which their destruction (hydrolysis) to dissolvable semi products: hydrocarbons, amino acids, alcohols and fatty acids was performed. The negative aspect of SFW destruction in the sea environment is the formation of anoxic (oxygen free) zone and further anaerobic oxidation of the mentioned semi products with accompanying reduction of sulphates in the sea water to hydrogen sulphide.
The regulators of microbial metabolism are nontoxic, harmless for the humans and environment, organic and inorganic compounds, which provide with the manageability of microbic metabolism at dissolution of SFW. The regulators of microbial metabolism (RMM) are such factors that surely provide with the rapid and efficient destruction of SFW according to the safe metabolic pathway with formation of such final nontoxic products as СО2, N2, low-molecular fatty acids and alcohols in decreasing low concentration.
It is a well-known fact that “central metabolites”, which are formed in the environment by the destruction of both natural polymer compounds and synthetic organic compounds, are low molecular fatty acids and alcohols: acetate, propionate, butyrate, ethanol, propanol, etc. By the destruction of SFW in the biotechnological module, the remained concentration of the mentioned final products does not exceed 0,01-0,1%. So, the central metabolites of the destruction of SFW, taking into consideration their decreasing low concentration, are normal, natural and nontoxic for Antarctic environment (sea microbial communities and sea biota in general).
The indicators of microbial metabolism are those compounds that change color, depending on the metabolic state of microorganisms – destructors of SFW. Such indicators at any time allow receiving the immediate information as to the metabolic state of microorganism and in time to perform the necessary correction of the destruction process with the help of the regulators of microbial metabolism.

3. The consideration of the alternatives for the proposed activity and any effect, which it may cause, including the consideration of cumulative effect within the existing and known kinds of activity that are planned

The alternative measures for disposal of solid food wastes are:
- disintegration of SFW to the particles with the size of 1-2 cm, their transportation to the sea to the distance of 10 km from the station and further discharging with small portions that do not exceed 1-2 kg;
- burning of SFW in the special industrial utilizers;
- accumulation of SFW in the containers with further transportation outside the station;
- discharging of SFW into the Antarctic environment.
Discharging of the disintegrated SFW into the sea is not reasonable from the point of view of such reasons: the transportation results in significant expenses of the fuel (motor boat) and not desirable daily (on any, often extreme, meteorological conditions) departure of the personnel (at least two people) to the significant distance from the station. Besides, in winter time, during the long period at the decrease of temperature from – 20...–30о С such procedure is impossible from the point of view of the formation of ice hummocks in the area of water, adjoining to the station.

Burning of SFW in the utilizers results in compulsory pollution of the environment with toxic products of combustions. The organic substances of SFW contain the compositions of phosphor, ammonia and sulfur, which at any mode of burning are oxygenated to the corresponding oxides (NO2, SO3, P2O5). In the environment by the contact with water, the mentioned oxides form the corresponding acids – nitric, sulphuric and phosphoric. The effect to make the pollution of the environment with the volatile oxides impossible, may be achieved due to the usage of sorption filters, however their usage in the extreme conditions of Antarctica is practically impossible from the point of view of large volumes of such filters, necessity of their frequent replacement, high cost and complication of logistic procedure of transportation for the used filters from the station.
The accumulation of SFW in the containers is impossible, taking into consideration the fact that during polar summers (3 months) the average daily temperature is positive. Thus, at spontaneous non controlled fermenting of SFW in the volume of 2-3 tons there will happen the discharge of such toxic volatile compositions as hydrogen sulphide, mercaptans and fatty acids to the territory of the station. Besides, the spontaneous fermenting will result in the inadmissible increase of the wastes volumes, as a consequence of their saturation by the gaseous products of fermenting. Finally, the spontaneous rotting of the concentrated organic compositions results in the self-heating of the fermenting mass that significantly increases the speed of discharge of toxic products.
The discharge of the SFW into the coastal area of water is inadmissible from the point of view of Environment Protocol as to preservation of Antarctic environment.
4. Procedures (monitoring) for assessment and inspection of effect of this activity

According to the State program of the researches in the Antarctica in the area of Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station, the ecological monitoring, covering the most important components of biota with the purpose to detect trends in the changes of water and land environment, assessment of the state of pelagic, terrestrial biocenosis, degree of their transformation due to the climatic changes, assessment of the degree of chemical and radiation pollution of ground precipitations and hydrobionts, is performed.
The pelagic component of the costal ecosystem is characterized by the predominant development of low trophic levels (bacteria-, phyto-and microzooplankton). According to the variety of species, the diatoms absolutely dominate in it. In general during a year it is being observed the similar species composition of planktons at the significant seasonal variability of its quantitative development due to the seasons and years. The background species composition and sufficiency (of fish, sea birds and mammals) in the higher trophic levels remain practically unchangeable during last 10 years.
So, despite the availability of the man-made effect on the environment in the region of the local source, general state of ecosystem in the region of the station Academician Vernadsky is at the present moment in the whole satisfactory and stable. However, it is being kept the necessity of the further performance of the complex long-termed monitoring for the state of the ecosystems in the region of the station with the purpose to detect any possible negative changes.
Taking into consideration the conditions for usage of RMM technology for the neutralization of SFW, the absence of utilization of the microorganisms, alien to Antarctica, non toxicity of the regulators of microbial metabolism and final products of waste destruction, as well as absence of negative changes in the environment, adjoining to Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station, it is evident the conclusion that the suggested activity has less than insignificant effect.
In general RMM technology, which is based on the usage of solid food wastes of aboriginal Antarctic microorganisms and nontoxic regulators of microbial metabolism, adapted to the destruction of organic polymers, alien for the Antarctic environment, is an efficient biotechnological means for provision with the stability of existence of Antarctic biota in the region of Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station.


Conclusion
Taking into consideration the above-mentioned, the activity on recycling (neutralization) of solid food wastes in Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station with the help of RMM technology is deemed as that one that has the effect, less than a minor or transitory impact, thus, it is performed in Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky station since 2003 up to the present moment (2008). The technology may efficiently be used both at the stations with the small quantity of the personnel and at the stations with the quantity of the personnel of 50-100 people.

