





The Fram incident




The Fram incident

Introduction
On 28 December 2007 the M/S Fram, experienced full stop of the engines in conjunction with a landing operation and during black-out the vessel drifted towards and into a glacier. There was damage to starboard lifeboat, but no hull or structural damage. No passengers, crew or staff were injured during the incident. No emissions or discharges occurred as a result of the incident.

Short description of the incident
On 28 December 2007 at 21:35 pm the M/S Fram, operated by Hurtigruten ASA of Norway experienced a power failure resulting in a black-out and full stop of the engines in conjunction with a landing operation at Brown Bluff. The vessel’s main engines were operational again at 22:05 pm. 

Due to bad anchor bottom and strong wind the vessel drifted towards and into a glacier front during the black-out. After regaining propulsion an assessment determined that there was damage to starboard lifeboat. There were no hull or structural damage and the vessel was deemed safe for navigation. No passengers, crew or staff were injured during the incident. No emissions or discharges occurred as a result of the incident.

The remaining life saving appliances on board, such as port and starboard life rafts and port life boat exceeded in capacity the total number of passengers and crew currently on board of the vessel1. The vessel sailed under its own power to Maxwell Bay at King George Island. A further investigation took place while at anchor. Following inspection, and with clearance from the Norwegian Maritime Directorate and Lloyds Register EMEA, the M/S Fram continued to Ushuaia where it arrived on 01 January 2008. The next cruise to Antarctica (scheduled departure 02 January) was cancelled in order for the vessel to undergo further assessments and repairs.

Assistance from other operators
Norway recognizes and extends appreciation to all Parties and Organizations that offered and provided assistance during and after the incident. 

On arrival in Maxwell Bay at King George Island the Chilean and Russian Antarctic programs provided assistance in allowing the passengers to conduct a landing at Maxwell Bay during the inspection of the M/S Fram.

The M/S Fram was despite the incident in good condition, and was able to sail on to Ushuaia under its own power. However, on a suggestion from the ship owner, the Norwegian Maritime Directorate  and Lloyd Register requested the M/S Fram to be convoyed by northbound M/S Akademik Ioffe (Peregrine Shipping) which would be able to provide adequate rescue and accommodation capacity should such be needed.

Due to an onboard medical emergency the M/S Fram, after due consideration of safety issues and after having informed Lloyd Register and ship owner, separated from their escort (which was conducting a landing operation) mid-day December 30, 2007, and continued on to Ushuaia on its own.

Findings
During its stay in Ushuaia (10 days as a consequence of the one cancelled cruise) the vessel underwent thorough investigation in order to find the cause of the engine black-out. Representatives from the ship owner, engine supplier, operational systems supplier as well as a representative from the Lloyds Register partook in the assessment. Extensive troubleshooting assessment was implemented. A weak component (regulator in main engine) was found in the same operational mode as the vessel was in when the black-out situation occurred. The component causing the break-down has subsequently been replaced.

The lifeboat that was damaged was replaced by covered life rafts. Permission for such change in rescue equipment was given by the Norwegian Maritime Directorate.

After the full assessment and replacement of the component, Lloyds Register allowed the M/S Fram to continue operations in Antarctica, and M/S Fram started cruising again on 10 January2. A representative from the engine supplier was on board during the first cruise after the incident. There were no operational disturbances, and none have been observed later.

Notifications to the Antarctic Treaty system
The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) considered the need for circulating a notification about the incident to the Antarctic Treaty Parties based on the requirements of Article 7 (2) of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol on Prevention of Marine Pollution or on general basis. The MFA’s assessment was that the incident did not trigger notification processes under the Protocol and it was not considered necessary to circulate further information besides that which was circulated by IAATO to CEP representatives.
 


