





COMNAP Report to ATCM XXXI





COMNAP Report to ATCM XXXI
Submitted by COMNAP to ATCM XXXI under 
agenda item 4 (Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports by Parties, Observers and Experts) 
and to CEP XI under agenda item 14 (Cooperation with Other Organisations)


Table of Content
1. Introduction 
2. Predominant Focus
3. COMNAP activities relevant to current Antarctic Treaty System work and concerns
Section
Topic
Agenda Items


ATCM XXX
CEP 
X
3.1
Towards better Search and Rescue coordination in the Antarctic
9
11
3.2
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System
9, 16
11
3.3
Automatic Identification System (AIS)
9
11
3.4
Antarctic Flight Information Manual
9, 14, 16
11
3.5
COMNAP Fuel Manual
9, 14
11, 13
3.6
Training material – online library
14, 16

3.7
International collaboration in Antarctica
13, 14

3.8
Procedures concerning introduction of non-native species
14
8a
3.9
Environmental Monitoring Activities
14, 16
9
3.10
Information Exchange
9, 14, 16

3.11
Mapping products
9, 14, 16

3.12
Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
16

3.13
Operational publications
9, 14, 16

3.14
General information publications
16

3.15
Facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of publications
16

3.16
Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008
10
5
4. COMNAP general activities and organisation
5. Conclusion

1. Introduction
(1)  It is traditional in the Antarctic to work together and help each other. In keeping with this tradition, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) brings together the Managers of National Antarctic Programs (MNAPs) and other designated members of their Programs.
(2)  A National Antarctic Program is defined as the entity with national responsibility for managing, coordinating and supporting, and more generally making possible, scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty Area on behalf of its government, and in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. 
(3)  COMNAP provides a forum for development of practical and technical solutions for dissemination among National Antarctic Programs. Effective and efficient support and management of science, safety, increased international collaboration, environmental protection and effective Antarctic governance are among our main concerns.
(4)  While supporting its members is its primary role, COMNAP also takes very seriously the privilege and responsibility of being a formally recognised member of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). It remains committed to contributing actively to the work of the ATS through provision of a range of practical, technical and non-political advice developed using members' pool of expertise. 
(5)  This COMNAP Annual Report to the ATCM and the CEP provides an overview of COMNAP's current activities, with an added focus on their relevance to the ATS. Particular topics may also be complemented by a formal, standalone paper.
2. Predominant focus
2.1 Objectives
(6)  In support of its mission, and the missions of its members – supporting and managing science in the Antarctic - COMNAP’s current predominant focus is on four often inter-related objectives:
    • Safety
    • Efficiency
    • International collaboration
    • Environmental management and protection
2.2 Support Systems
(7)  A significant part of COMNAP’s work includes the development and maintenance of resources and communication infrastructure to support and sustain progress towards these objectives. This includes in particular the following support systems: 
    • Manuals, guidelines and other reference documents
    • Communication systems to support the various COMNAP work groups
    • A web- and email-based “COMNAP Information Exchange” platform to collect, manipulate and record a range of practical, dynamic information and facilitate discovery and exchange of this information
3. COMNAP Activities relevant to current Antarctic Treaty System work and concerns
(8)  This section provides brief status reports on a selection of COMNAP activities relevant to current ATS work and concerns. Whenever possible, references have been included to relevant documents, agenda items or Antarctic Treaty Resolutions, Decisions or Measures. 
(9)  Naturally, each of these activities often contributes to progress towards several of these objectives concurrently and uses a combination of support systems.
3.1 Towards better Search and Rescue (SAR) coordination in the Antarctic 
(10)  The representatives of the very first ATCM in 1961 in Recommendation I-X reaffirm[ed] the traditional Antarctic Principle that expeditions render all assistance feasible in the event of an emergency request for help [...].  Since then, safety has remained a very important focus and priority for the ATCM, National Antarctic Programs and other operators, and there has been a reasonably low occurrence of emergencies and major accidents.   
(11)  The current increase in activity and traffic in the Antarctic, in particular maritime traffic in the Antarctic peninsula region, is potentially pushing existing systems to the limit and is cause for concern. 
(12)  A total of 7 Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) have responsibilities for the coordination of maritime and aeronautical Search and Rescue in the Antarctic under a range of international agreements. These 7 RCCs are based in 5 countries that are all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and all have a National Antarctic Program active in the relevant area - Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa. 
(13)  With the increase in activity and traffic, a need has emerged for more exchange of information and more organised, coordinated and uniform channels of communications between the RCCs and Antarctic operators.  
(14)  COMNAP and the RCCs are working together to review the situation and work towards better search and rescue coordination in the Antarctic region. 
(15)  COMNAP has prepared in collaboration with the RCCs Information Paper ATCM XXXI-IP099 Search and Rescue in the Antarctic Region. The paper answers common questions about arrangements in place, provides practical examples illustrating how current systems work, outlines the work done to continually improve systems and procedures, and outlines a possible vision for the future. 
(16)  An operational workshop will be held in Valparaiso, Chile, 12-14 August 2008, hosted by the Chilean navy in collaboration with COMNAP and titled towards better search and rescue coordination in the Antarctic region. It will bring together RCC authorities and National Programs from Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa and other stakeholders, including representatives from the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). A draft agenda is provided in IP099 at Appendix B. 
(17)  The intention is to continue working towards a uniform, coordinated approach to Search and Rescue coordination and response throughout the Antarctic region, founded on established international agreements and existing infrastructure.    
(18)  The workshop will focus on technical issues. While it will try to identify any regulatory or legal barriers to implementing desirable technical solutions, it will not take any position other than operational on possible solutions to their barriers.  
(19)  Many possible improvements may require, or be facilitated by, guidance and support from the ATCM. This may in particular include any dealings with the IMO regarding access to Long Range Identification and Tracking information from the Antarctic area. 
(20)  Conclusions and recommendations from the workshop will be forwarded to the ATCM and other relevant organisations for consideration. 
For further information: ATCMXXXI-IP099 Search and Rescue in the Antarctic 
3.2 COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System
(21)  The COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) has been operational since 2001. It is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Program ship operations and capabilities. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between National Programs.
(22)  The SPRS cannot, and does not, constitute an operational alert and rescue system on which vessels should count in case of emergency. However it can make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) which cover the Antarctic region, as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. 
(23)  The SPRS has been the subject of a significant overhaul over 2007 and 2008. It now has the capability to collect a wider variety of ship and voyage information. Latest positions and other practical information of all participating vessels is returned to each vessel, and is pushed every 24h to the Antarctic RCCs. It is anticipated that the upcoming workshop  towards better search and rescue coordination in the Antarctic region, will provide useful input in the future evolution of the SPRS with respect to its contribution to safety.
(24)  In parallel, development will continue with respect to the primary purpose of the SPRS – facilitating collaboration between National Programs. It will be extended into a generalised Voyage Information System that will cover all kinds of voyages – sea but also air and land voyages - and include advance information on future schedules. It also will be dynamically linked to information on the capability of relevant vessels, aircraft or tractor trains, include a mapping interface and the capability to create reports.  It will also be able to exchange data as appropriate with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s Electronic Information Exchange Systems (EIES). 
3.3 Automatic Identification System (AIS)
(25)  The Automatic Identification System (AIS) is a standard, international system developed for short range automatic identification of vessels. Information transmitted includes ship name, type, course, speed and other relevant safety information. 
(26)  AIS equipment is very portable, very reasonably priced, and does not have to be limited to ships. It can be easily fitted to various types of transport, from small rubber boats to tracked vehicles to quad bikes, and can also be fitted to mobile camps – tents or shelters. It has potential applications in Antarctica, in particular in areas where several nations operate, for increased safety.
(27)  Uruguay reported at ATCM XXIX in Working Paper ATCMXXIX-WP006 on initial trials by the Uruguayan Antarctic Program of the use of AIS to track crafts and vehicles around its station. COMNAP agreed to work with Uruguay to build upon this work.
(28)  The COMNAP Safety Working Group has been working with Uruguay to analyse the potential, advantages and disadvantages of the system and discuss potential applications. 
(29)  A Canadian company is developing and testing systems to collect AIS information by satellite. This would free AIS from its current short range limitations and give AIS new potential applications for increased safety in the Antarctic.
(30)  Further discussions on the potential of AIS are on the agenda of the upcoming workshop  towards better search and rescue coordination in the Antarctic region.   
3.4 Antarctic Flight Information Manual 
(31)  The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as recommended by ATCM XV (1989) in Recommendation XV-20 “Air safety in Antarctica”.  
(32)  Recommendation XV-20 comprised a number of specific recommendations including:
For the purpose of improving air safety in Antarctica, national Antarctic programmes operating aircraft in Antarctica and their aircrews should be provided with a continuously updated compendium (‘Handbook’) describing ground facilities, aircraft and aircraft operating procedures (including helicopters) and associated communications facilities operated by each national Antarctic programme (out of the use of which questions of liability will not arise) and, therefore, they should:
(a) prepare such a Handbook as a matter of urgency;
(b) facilitate the preparation of such a Handbook by their national Antarctic programme operators by collective action through the medium of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) federated to SCAR;
(c) adopt a loose-leaf format in which information provided by each national operator is kept separate (unless facilities are jointly operated) so as to facilitate updating of information;
(d) request their national Antarctic operators to provide information for the purpose of compiling the Handbook in accordance with Annex 2 to this Recommendation.
(33)  Annex 2 to ATCM Recommendation XV-20 includes one page that briefly outlines the content of this “Antarctic Aeronautical Information Handbook”, noting that information should be provided using Appendix I to Annex 15 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation as a guideline.
(34)  A review of the AFIM is under way. It includes a review of the structure of its information, of the management of its updating process and of its usage by managers and pilots. Implementation of an electronic version of the AFIM is under consideration. This would complement and support, but not replace, the current printed version. 
(35)  It can be noted that a range of information maintained in the AFIM has overlaps with some of the permanent information that Treaty Parties are required to maintain under Resolution 6 (2001). A management of the AFIM through its electronic version could allow exchange of this information (import/export) with the Antarctic Treaty's Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) developed by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat under instructions from the ATCM. This could significantly reduce duplication of efforts and mismatch of data between parallel systems. 
3.5 COMNAP Fuel Manual
(36)  COMNAP developed between 1990 and 1993 a number of guidelines and recommendations related to fuel handling and storage.
(37)  These documents reflected best practice and were promptly circulated to, and used by, National Antarctic Programs and were endorsed by the ATCM. They underwent several routine reviews between 1998 and 2005 with no revision deemed necessary. 
(38)  A more in-depth review was conducted between the end of 2005 and 2007. The text of the guidelines and the practices it described were found to be essentially still adequate. It was agreed that here was a need to rejuvenate the guidelines with graphics, actual examples, associated brochures and posters and give them a higher profile. This would make the guidelines more accessible and hence more effective.  
(39)  It was decided to bring all guidelines and recommendations and associated documents together into a single “Fuel Manual” document. It provides a simple, clear access point to all fuel related material and additional sections can be inserted as required - in particular new sections containing supporting information or links to such information, checklists or pro-formas for internal auditing of installations and procedures.
(40)  The new “COMNAP Fuel Manual” is presented in ATCMXXI-IP091 The COMNAP Fuel Manual, incorporating revised guidelines for fuel handling and storage in Antarctica.
(41)  The format and presentation of this Fuel Manual will also be progressively rejuvenated to facilitate its readability. This will include inserting diagrams, photos or cartoons wherever possible and inserting, linking to or attaching actual examples of good practice. 
(42)  COMNAP will continue to develop and update the Fuel Manual and to promote and facilitate its use by all operators. The original objectives remain as current and important as they were in 1990:
    • preventing oil spills;  
    • responding to a spill should one occur; and 
    • sharing information about spills to help determine if, and where, there was a need to modify or improve fuel handling practices. 
For  further information:  ATCMXXXI-IP091 The COMNAP Fuel Manual, incorporating revised guidelines for fuel handling and storage in Antarctica.
3.6 Training material – online library  
(43)  The COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET) is the COMNAP work group dealing with the training of National Program staff for deployment to Antarctica. 
(44)  TRAINET has developed an online library of training related material used by member Programs - this covers a range of material from course syllabus, standard operating procedures and training regulations and policies, in various languages. 
(45)  This online library will be commissioned at the upcoming COMNAP Annual General Meeting in St Petersburg, Russia. 
(46)  It is anticipated that the availability to all National Programs of this resource will considerably facilitate and increase the transfer of experience, expertise and best practice between Programs. It will support the harmonisation or compatibility of procedures and standards between Programs, and facilitate international collaboration and exchange of personnel.   
(47)  Development of a glossary of terms commonly used in the Antarctic – including, but not only, for the training of Antarctic personnel – is also under way. It will facilitate understanding, use and reuse of training material and facilitate participation of personnel in joint training initiatives.
3.7 International Collaboration in Antarctica
(48)  International collaboration is widespread and a normal part of National Programs' activities.  COMNAP remains committed to facilitating and promoting collaboration between National Programs and joint activities when possible. This is one of COMNAP's main missions. 
(49)  At ATCM XXIX (2006), attention was drawn to the reiteration of CEP's concern about the potential environmental consequences of an excessive concentration of stations in Antarctica. It was noted that these concerns can be addressed, in part, by increased cooperation in Antarctica and that some parties are making efforts to share their facilities and encourage wider participation in their research programmes. Refer ATCM XXIX final report, paragraph 73.
(50)  To provide a broader perspective of such collaboration,  COMNAP conducted a survey in 2007 to assess the extent of international scientific and logistic collaboration amongst National Antarctic Programs at a time when a number of nations are either building new research stations or replacing old ones. 
(51)  Results of the survey are presented to the ATCM in ATCMXXXI-IP092 I International Scientific and Logistic Collaboration in Antarctica. It confirmed a high and increasing level of international collaboration. For example: 
    • 96% of National Antarctic Programs host scientists from other nations (always or sometimes);
    • 60% expect the number of scientists hosted from other nations to increase
    • 96% share ships or aircraft with other nations
    • 78% provide logistic facilities for other nations
    • 35% operate or manage logistic facilities in 'partnership' with other nations – this can for example include joint operation of a station or joint management of support facilities for their stations.
(52)  The high and increasing level of scientific and logistic collaboration amongst National Antarctic Programs is in the finest spirit of the Antarctic Treaty. This excellent situation has been facilitated by COMNAP through the exchange of practical, operational information to help improve the way all National Antarctic Programs can fulfil their various missions, together or independently. That includes mutual support in the design, ongoing improvement and operation of Antarctic facilities and transport infrastructure.   
For  further information: ATCMXXXI-IP092 International Scientific and Logistic Collaboration in Antarctica.
3.8 Procedures concerning introduction of non-native species
(53)  The threat of introduction of non-native species into the Antarctic has emerged recently in the discussions of the CEP, in particular in response to new information on climate change, and has received a high priority in its 5-year work plan. 
(54)  Although many National Programs did have a range of relevant procedures in place, a more global view and analysis of what was in place around the continent was considered necessary.  COMNAP undertook a survey of its members on existing procedures concerning the minimisation of risk of introduction of non native species. Information was sought in three main areas:
    • awareness programs;  
    • operational procedures; and 
    • monitoring/surveillance programs.  
(55)  Responses were received from 15 Programs that together run almost 70% of all Antarctic stations, and are deemed to provide a realistic picture of the current efforts made by the Antarctic Parties as a whole to minimise introduction of alien species into the continent.  
(56)  Results of the survey are presented to the CEP in ATCMXXXI-IP098 Survey on existing procedures concerning introduction of non native species in Antarctica     
(57)  The survey showed that awareness programs are well covered and monitoring/surveillance programs are also reasonably well covered, while more could be done on operational procedures. 
(58)  Lessons learned from this survey will be useful to National Antarctic Programs to continue improve their procedures. It is hoped this work can also be useful to future CEP discussions on this issue.
For  further information: ATCMXXXI-IP098 Survey on existing procedures concerning introduction of non native species in Antarctica
3.9 Environmental Monitoring Activities
(59)  The need to conduct environmental monitoring was clearly expressed in Article 3, 2.e) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: regular and effective monitoring shall take place to facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities carried on both within and outside the Antarctic Treaty area on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
(60)  At CEP X (New Delhi, 2007), the Meeting noted that the issue of environmental monitoring had been the subject of much attention by the CEP over several meetings and Intersessional Contact Groups, though with limited progress.
(61)  At the same Meeting, some Members emphasised the importance of synthesising the significant amount of information that currently existed on the issue in an Antarctic context, including CEP deliberations and work undertaken by COMNAP, including for example COMNAPs’ own survey of monitoring activity and its Practical Guidelines for Developing and Designing Environmental Monitoring Programmes in Antarctica - the use of which was recommended by ATCM XXVIII through Resolution 2 (2005). 
(62)  Although endorsed only on a provisional basis, the CEP five-year work plan has identified Monitoring and State of the Environment Reporting as an issue with Medium to High priority. The CEP is therefore expected to work in the following years on the identification of key indicators of human impacts. 
(63)  In parallel, ATCM Resolution 3 (2007) Long Term Monitoring also underlines the importance of monitoring activities. One of its recommendations is that Antarctic Treaty Parties urge national Antarctic programmes to maintain and extend long-term scientific monitoring and sustained observations of environmental change in the physical, chemical, geological and biological components of the Antarctic environment.
(64)  COMNAP has maintained for several years outline information on Monitoring Activities undertaken by its members. Snapshots of this information have been compiled and published a number of times as Summary of Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica.
(65)  COMNAP agreed at its 2007 annual meeting (Washington, July 2007) to task the COMNAP Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) to:
    • provide information on basic operational monitoring parameters currently measured in Antarctic stations, as part of environmental monitoring programs in place – recognising that COMNAP had already invested a lot in this domain; and
    • reshape COMNAP' Summary of Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica, in order to make it more easily accessible for likely users. 
(66)  A reshaped system of exchange of information on monitoring activities has been designed and will be submitted to COMNAP at its upcoming annual meeting. 
(67)  It would collect additional information on monitoring activities in a simple and structured way that takes into account the latest categorising and priorities agreed by the CEP. It would allow easy aggregation and categorisation of information, for example by region, by type of monitoring (Operational or State of the Environment), by indicator monitored or by parameter measured. 
(68)  The new system should be implemented by the end of 2008 and reports on information collected and maintained in the system should be available for presentation at CEP XII in 2009.   
3.10 Information Exchange
(69)  The re-development of COMNAP's electronic information exchange system continues and will be reviewed by COMNAP at its upcoming annual meeting. 
(70)  It includes a range of dynamic information on National Program capabilities and activities including stations, airfields, ships, medical facilities, monitoring activities, operational contact details or ship position reports. It will also later include voyage schedule and tracking, incident reports and lessons learned, etc.. 
(71)  Importantly, it provides a framework to collect, manage, manipulate and explore this information. The primary objective is to facilitate exchange of relevant information between National Programs with a view to facilitating partnerships, increasing efficiencies and, very importantly, increasing our capability to support new or smaller Programs. 
(72)  An important requirement and characteristics of the COMNAP Information Exchange system is its capability to exchange information with other systems as appropriate. In particular it will allow export to the Antarctic Treaty’s Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) of those portions of information included in Treaty information exchange requirements.  Part of this functionality is already working in demonstration mode for review by COMNAP members and Treaty parties. 
(73)  The objective is that any information entered by a National Program into the COMNAP Information Exchange system will never need to be manually re-entered in the Antarctic Treaty systems or in any other system used by that National Program. 
3.11 Mapping Products
(74)  COMNAP produced in 2006 a large format map of Antarctica showing the main facilities operated by National Antarctic Programs. Work is under way on a simplified, semi-automated process to update the map at regular intervals (for example annually) by loading information maintained by each program on the new COMNAP Information Exchange System. The information is being exported out of the Information Exchange System in a well defined and extensible format that is also compatible with Google Earth. 
(75)  The information exported in this standard format will not be limited to basic information about facilities. It will also cover a range of information that has a geographic dimension – such as environmental monitoring activities. 
(76)  Individual National Programs will be able to use this export functionality by themselves, as and when needed, to use for their own maps or applications.   
(77)  An updated COMNAP map showing the main facilities operated by National Antarctic Programs, as well as a range of important information such as information about Rescue Coordination Centres and Search and Rescue Region boundaries, will be published during 2008. A working draft will be displayed at ATCM XXXI.  
3.12 Collaboration with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
(78)  COMNAP has established through its secretariat a good working relationship with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and a number of ad-hoc meetings and informal workshops have been held between members of the two secretariats in the last four years. 
(79)  COMNAP looks forward to its secretariat maintaining a long-standing, productive relationship with the Treaty Secretariat, when and as appropriate, to better support their respective memberships and the Antarctic Treaty System.
(80)  In particular, collaboration on the design of the two organisations' Information Exchange Systems and their capability to exchange information has the potential to significantly reduce duplication and mismatch between the systems, and make a useful contribution to an efficient and productive exchange of information within the Antarctic Treaty System.
3.13 Operational publications 
(81)  COMNAP publishes a number of operational publications in support of Antarctic operations, in particular in support of safety and best environmental practice. This includes a number of operational guidelines and workshop reports. 
(82)  COMNAP publishes and regularly updates the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per ATCM Recommendation XV-20. It contains exhaustive information on Antarctic airfields and on procedures to contact and access these airfields. A review of the AFIM is under way (see Section 3.4 for more details).
(83)  A COMNAP fuel manual  has just been published, bringing together a range of existing  document, and will be extended (see Section 3.5 for more details).  The creation of other such manuals is under consideration. 
3.14 General information publications
(84)  COMNAP is also publishing some general interest information about COMNAP's activities and National Programs' installations and logistics. It includes a number of mapping products, in both printed and on-line form, and ‘layers’ of information for overlaying on maps and satellite imagery (see Section 3.11 for more details). The commissioning of the new COMNAP Information Exchange platform will allow provision of richer and more dynamic information products. 
3.15 Facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of publications
(85)  COMNAP continues, as reported in previous years, to research and test ways of facilitating and promoting the distribution and use of its publications and information. In particular, it includes considerations of alternative licences such as Creative Commons licences. 
(86)  With a Creative Commons license, you keep your copyright but allow people to copy and distribute your work provided they give you credit — and only on the conditions you specify. This promotes the distribution and re-use of work while protecting the rights of all contributors. See  http://creativecommons.org/license/ for more details.
3.16 Support of the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008
(87)  COMNAP member National Antarctic Programs provide a significant contribution to the support of National and International IPY projects in the Antarctic, in particular through their national IPY committees. The normal processes in place whereby scientists deal with their respective National Program, and National Programs work with each other as appropriate, continue to work well, including for multinational IPY projects. 
(88)  COMNAP is clearly contributing to that success through the provision of a forum in which National Program managers can coordinate their support of international projects as required.
(89)  COMNAP however continues to stand ready to help facilitate support solutions between national operators, when that cannot be achieved through the normal collaboration processes in place. 
4. COMNAP general activities and organisation
4.1 COMNAP Chairmanship 
(90)  Gérard Jugie of the French Antarctic Program ended his three-year term as COMNAP Chair in July 2007, and was succeeded by José Retamales of the Chilean Program. 
4.2 COMNAP meetings and events 
(91)  ‘COMNAP XIX’, the 2007 Annual General Meeting (AGM), was held from Monday 09 to Friday 13 July 2007 in Washington DC, USA. It was hosted by the COMNAP member for USA, the National Science Foundation's Office of Polar Programs and included:
    • one and a half days of plenary sessions;
    • two days of parallel meetings of COMNAP's various work groups - committees, working groups, coordinating groups and networks and open sessions focused on specific topics;
(92)  Five group officers ended their term at the meeting after several years of valuable service to COMNAP:
    • Yeadong  Kim of the Korean National Program and Henry Valentine of the South African Program as members of the COMNAP Executive Committee;
    • Valery Klokov of the Russian Program as Chair of the COMNAP Air Operations Working Group (AIROPS); 
    • Claude Bachelard of the French Program as coordinator of the COMNAP Medical Officers Network (MEDINET); and
    • Patricio Eberhard of the Chilean Program as coordinator of the COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET). 
and were succeeded by: 
    • Rasik Ravindra of the Indian Program and Lou Sanson of the New Zealand Program, elected on the COMNAP Executive Committee;
    • Giuseppe de Rossi of the Italian Program, new Chair of the the COMNAP Air Operations Working Group (AIROPS); 
    • Iain Grant of the UK Program, new coordinator of the COMNAP Medical Officers Network (MEDINET); and
    • Albert Lluberas of the Uruguayan Program, new coordinator of the COMNAP Training Officers Network (TRAINET).
(93)  In addition, Kazuyuki Shiraishi of the Japanese Program was elected next Chair of the COMNAP Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) and will succeed to current Chair John Pye of the UK Program this July 2008. 
(94)  A number of intersessional meetings were held, including
    • a meeting of those COMNAP members attending the 2007 ATCM in Delhi, India, in May 2007; and 
    • a two-day meeting of the COMNAP Executive Committee in Cambridge, UK, in October 2007 to finalise the conclusions and results of the 2007 Annual General Meeting and the work plan for 2007/2008. 
(95)  The 2008 AGM, COMNAP XX, will be held from Sunday 29 June to Friday 04 July 2008 in Washington DC, USA. The meeting will be hosted by the COMNAP member for Russia, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI). It will include:
    • one and a half days of plenary sessions;
    • two days of parallel meetings of the various COMNAP work groups;
    • a number of special sessions on topical issues;
    • a one-day workshop of the COMNAP Energy Management Network (ENMANET); and
    • a one-day workshop of the COMNAP Information Officers Network (INFONET).  
4.3 COMNAP IT support infrastructure 
(96)  COMNAP has continued to progress the re-development of its IT support infrastructure, following the principles and directions outlined in COMNAP's reports to the last ATCMs.
(97)  These have a strong focus on supporting the internal work of COMNAP, supporting safety and facilitating collaboration between National Antarctic Programs. It also aims at reducing duplication by interfacing as appropriate with the Antarctic Treaty's Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).   
4.4 COMNAP Secretariat operation 
(98)  The COMNAP Secretariat operates from an office located in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. It is provided at no charge by the secretariat’s supporting organisation, the Tasmanian State Government through its office of Antarctic affairs ‘Antarctic Tasmania’. This invaluable support has now been provided since 1997 and the current support agreement runs until September 2009. The free support provided by Antarctic Tasmania includes a range of office equipment and administrative support, notably through accounting and auditing services.  Another extremely valuable support provided is the employment of the COMNAP Executive Secretary by the State of Tasmania on a cost recovery basis. While the COMNAP Executive Secretary still reports directly and exclusively to the COMNAP Chair, he his technically an employee of the Tasmanian State Service, with all the additional protection and support it does entail.
(99)  COMNAP is very thankful to the Tasmanian State Government for its continued and increased support which allow its secretariat to operate very efficiently and in a quality, supportive environment.
4.5 Member participation, capacity building and secondments 
(100)  Starting in Sofia, Bulgaria in July 2005 at COMNAP XVII, COMNAP has rolled out a number of procedures to facilitate member participation in meetings and intersessional group work, especially for members that do not routinely use, as one of their working languages, the language used in COMNAP meetings and proceedings (English). COMNAP cannot properly achieve its goals if a number of members cannot adequately participate to the debates and contribute their valuable skills, experience and views. Significant progress has been made and the successful procedures are being fine-tuned and incorporated in updated COMNAP work processes.  
(101)  Capacity building between National Programs is already implicit within COMNAP objectives and terms of reference and is embedded in the structure and procedures of the organisation. Increased member participation as described above will also contribute to improve capacity building, as will the new IT support infrastructure. 
(102)  Another new initiative is the secondment of member Program staff to the COMNAP Secretariat to work on projects beneficial to COMNAP and the National Program community.  The focus is on allowing significant progress on specific COMNAP projects while providing beneficial training and capacity building opportunities to member staff. A successful secondment in late 2007 resulted in the development of an online library of training material (see Section 3.6 for more details) - it is anticipated that the availability to all National Programs of this resource will considerably facilitate and increase the transfer of experience, expertise and best practice between Programs.
5. Conclusion 
(103)  COMNAP remains committed to supporting the Antarctic Treaty System. 
(104)  COMNAP and its members continue to work together and help each other to place all National Antarctic Programs in the best possible position to undertake and support scientific and other work in Antarctica on behalf of their respective national governments – safely, efficiently and in the most environmentally responsible manner. 


________
For more information, please visit COMNAP's web site at www.comnap.aq or email us at info@comnap.aq.

