





Brazilian contribution to the Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area 
(ASMA Nº 1)





Brazilian contribution to the Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1)
Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Brazil

Introduction
In CEP X, Brazil, Ecuador, Peru and Poland presented IP 111 rev.1 on A Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1), reporting on the development of a co-ordinated monitoring programme within the ASMA framework. A list of monitoring indicators was elaborated as a result of several meetings. Monitoring parameters were divided into the two broad categories of environmental monitoring proposed at CEP IX, operational monitoring and state of the environment monitoring. The follow up of such joint initiative was to elaborate a system of long-term monitoring, with detailed information, resources and timetable of activities, and prepare the implementation of the monitoring programme. 
It was a general understanding that not all countries would contribute to monitor all indicators in the selected list, but each would contribute according to national interest or capability. In this way, at present, each country is defining its own work plan, to be combined, in a second phase, to common interests, with a view to finally implement the co-ordinated monitoring programme.
This paper presents the Brazilian contribution to the joint monitoring programme. The initial monitoring approach has been expanded to conform the recommendation on Resolution 3 (2007) on Long-term Scientific Monitoring and Sustained Environmental Observation in Antarctica and to fulfill recent national interests. 
The national programme is entitled Monitoring of Antarctic Climate and Environment and is divided into three main themes:
1. Antarctica and the Climate of South America
2. Impact of Global Change in the Antarctic Environment
3. Impact of Human Activities in the Antarctic Environment 
Monitoring indicators already selected and presented in IP 111 were rearranged into the different themes. Gaps were identified and some indicators were added to the programme.

Theme 1. Antarctica and the Climate of South America
The monitoring of the Antarctic atmosphere and ocean and their influence in South America is being built on consolidated basis as continuous studies have been undertaken by Brazilian researchers in the Antarctic region for decades. The idea is to carry on with such studies, which require long-term series, for a better understanding of global changes, and to use the data in numerical models of climate and weather forecasting making them more trustable. 
Antarctica plays an essential role in the thermal equilibrium of the planet. In relation to South America this is especially relevant. The climate of the Southern hemisphere is essentially controlled by air masses originated from the frozen continent. 
It is well known that the energy which comes from the Sun is not constant and cause variation on the earth climate, on the global meteorology, and on the environment. Recent studies have shown that the solar radiation can alter the physical-chemical properties of the atmosphere and can influence the wind regime and the amount of UV radiation which reaches the earth surface, as well as the cloud coverage and precipitation. 
The understanding of the interaction between the chemistry of the atmosphere and climate change is a new and instigating research area. The connection between atmosphere and solar radiation, especially UV, which triggers the chemical reactions and these, on their turn, depend on the temperature, atmospheric circulation and climate, are now being studied in an integrated and systematic manner.
New questions are arising with the observed changes on the atmospheric temperature profile, especially with the increase on the troposphere (near surface, as a result of the greenhouse gases) and the decrease on the low stratosphere (between 15 and 20 Km, because of the destruction of ozone layer) and on the mesosphere (between 90 and 100 Km, cause attributed to the increase of greenhouse gases). The main questions are: What are the chemical changes which are occurring on the different layers of the atmosphere with increase of UV radiation and changes on temperature? What are the consequences for the dynamic, circulation and equilibrium between the atmospheric layers?  

This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

    • Tunnel of cold fronts and climate behavior 
    • Chemistry of the atmosphere and the climate
        ◦ Sun-Earth Interaction
        ◦ Long term monitoring of the mesosphere temperature
        ◦ Ozone Hole
    • Greenhouse gases and the Antarctic

Theme 2. Impact of Global Change in the Antarctic Environment

As an integral part of the global environment system, the Antarctic region not only export climate signs, affecting the global climate, but also imports such signs, suffering its consequences.  The Antarctic environment and its biodiversity are fragile and vulnerable to global changes. 

Meaningful disturbances have been already observed in the Antarctic region such as: retreat of glaciers; changes on the plant coverage and distribution; change on bird distribution and abundance;  introduction of non-native species; disturbance on phytoplankton by UV radiation, as a consequence of ozone hole; retreat on the ice shelf and ice algae, affecting the abundance of krill, influencing, in this way, the food availability, leading to drastic decline on the population of other organisms, such as penguins (decrease of 62% on the population of Pygoscelis papua). 

The definition of the causing agent is not always linear and can be very complex. The impact caused by global changes might also be associated with pressures by human activities. As an example, changes on bird distribution might be directly linked to environment disturbance by human occupation or indirectly linked to global issues. There are also natural disturbances, like the impact caused by ice. With the increasing knowledge and the long-term monitoring, a dynamic baseline, representing the scope of the environmental natural variability, can be defined, allowing a better understanding of the overall process of change.

This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

    • Retreat of Glacier
    • Retreat of plant coverage and change in the biodiversity of plant communities. 
    • Fluctuation and distribution of bird population

3. Impact of Human Activities in the Antarctic Environment 

The human presence, the establishment of scientific stations, refuges, camping sites, the presence of vessels, aircrafts, and any other logistical support essential for the development of research, are sources of environmental impact.
Antarctica is still the most preserved region on Earth and so it should be maintained, harmonizing the human presence and the fulfilment of human needs with the mitigation of the impacts in an environment with high degree of fragility.
Therefore, it is necessary to monitor the resulting products from the pressures caused by human activities in Antarctica, as well as to control the use of impacting factors, and to know the consequences for the environment.
The environmental monitoring of the bay allows a good evaluation of the impact of human activity generated by scientists, tourists and support personnel from the stations.  This information provides decision support for the implementation of actions to minimize and mitigate potential environmental impacts and to correct the negative consequences to the environment. 

This theme will comprehend the following monitoring issues:

    • Atmospheric Environment
Impact from atmospheric emissions 
    • Terrestrial Environment
Introduction of contaminants in the environment. Microbial community
Footprint
Production of Solid waste
Waste water
Quality of fresh water
Optimization of the energetic matrix
Fuel handling
Aircraft/vehicle operations
Station population
Field activities
Cumulative impact
Introduced organisms
Noise impact
Impact on the landscape
Preservation of the historic heritage

    • Marine Environment
Quality of marine water (water column)
Quality of the biota (water column)
Quality of the marine sediment and the benthic biota


It is also included in the monitoring programme one component of evaluation and management and one of technological development, related to clean energy and the establishment of a management facility.  

 
Monitoring of the Antarctic climate and environment

THEME 1. Antarctica and the Climate of South America
MONITORING ISSUES
INDICATORS AND PARAMETERS
Tunnel of cold fronts and climate behavior 
Meteorological variables: 
temperature, humidity, pressure, winds, precipitation
Chemistry of the atmosphere and the climate

      Sun-Earth Interaction
Atmospheric electronic concentration and cosmic rays
Measurement of phase and scope of radio signs in very low frequency (VLF).
Measurement of the total electronic concentration of the ionized layer by means of GPS signs
Measurement of the earth electromagnetic field through soil sensors, magnetometers 
Long term monitoring of the mesosphere   temperature
Temperature, winds, OH emission  from the mesosphere ( 90-100 km of height)
Ozone Hole

Global solar radiation, UV, PAR, radiation balance. Temperature, pressure, humidity, ozone layer winds, O3, SO2 e NO2
Greenhouse gases and the Antarctic
Minor Gases: CO2, CO, O3, CH4, Nox


THEME 2. Impact of Global Change in the Antarctic Environment

MONITORING ISSUES
INDICATORS AND PARAMETERS
Glacier retreat
Temperature and soil moisture
Variation of glaciers extent and retreat of geomorphologic features
Changes in the plant communities

Retreat of vegetation coverage and change in the biodiversity of plant communities. 
Changes in the bird population
Fluctuation and distribution of bird population


THEME 3. Impact of Human Activities in the Antarctic Environment
MONITORING ISSUES
INDICATORS AND PARAMETERS
Atmospheric Environment 
Impact from atmospheric emissions
Wind circulation, heavy metal, Black carbon, aromatic compounds, HPAs and volatile organic compounds, sulphur compounds
Terrestrial Environment
Introduction of contaminants in the environment. Microbial community
Number of heterotrophic bacteria 
Molecular structure of the microbial community
Footprint
Spatial coverage of buildings and associated impact including roads, pipes etc.: number and location of field expeditions
Production of Solid waste

Production of solid waste per capita
Waste types/volume/weight
Waste water
TSS, DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, volume, faecal coliforms
Quality of fresh water
Classification by consumption areas
TSS, DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, SS, metals
Optimization of the energetic matrix
Amount of fuel consumed
Fuel handling
Number of spills, size and location of spills
Aircraft/vehicle operations
Distance travelled, number of landings, fuel consumed, amount of emissions
Station population
Number of fixed and fluctuant population at the station
Field activities
Number of persons/day in field, location of field camp
Cumulative impact
Number of samples taken, equipment used
Introduced organisms
Species distribution, population size
Noise impact
Levels of noise
Impact on the landscape
Temporal Analyzes of images of the landscape
Preservation of the historic heritage
Level of preservation of the historic heritage
Marine Environment

Quality of marine water (water column)
salinity, temperature, pH, DO, pCO2, nutrients, chlorophyll a
Quality of the biota (water column)
Phytoplankton, invertebrate larvae, ichthyofauna, biomarkers
Quality of the marine sediment and the benthic biota

Granulometry, CNS, CaCO3, metals, hydrocarbons, 
faecal sterols, Labs, POPs, bacteria of the coliform group and Clostridium perfringens, biogenic production of methane, analyzes of the molecular structure of the microbial community, benthic meio-, macro- and megafauna

Technological Development
Clean Energy

Environmental Management facility
Evaluation and management
Driven Forces:
Pressure, state, impact and response
System of Environmental Management

BOD: Biological Oxygen Demand, COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand, DO: Dissolved Oxygen, SS: Suspended Solids, TSS: Total Suspended Solids, TPH: Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons, POPs: Persistent Organic Pollutants












