





Measures to protect the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, from the introduction of non-native species





Measures to protect the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, from the introduction of non-native species
Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India, Romania, Russian Federation
Introduction
In the provisional work plan of the Committee for Environmental Protection adopted at CEP X, taking action to address the introduction of non-native species is identified as a high priority (CEP X Final Report, Appendix 1).
Consistent with this concern, Australia, China, Indian, Romania and the Russian Federation are instituting a range of precautionary measures aimed at minimising the accidental introduction of non-native species, and high quarantine risk materials such as soil, to the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica (Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6). 
This paper lists the protection measures adopted. Other Parties may wish to consider adopting similar measures to prevent or minimise the introduction of non-native species.
Protection measures
Parties active in the Larsemann Hills agree to:
    1. Educate program personnel, including contractors, about the potential risks to the environment through the introduction of non-native species.
    2. Ensure that personnel entering the ASMA have clean footwear – through, for example, boot cleaning procedures (preferably before departure for Antarctica) or the issue of new footwear. 
    3. Avoid shipping untreated sand, aggregate and gravel to the ASMA.
    4. Collect and incinerate or remove from the region any soil or other organic matter found on cargo.
    5. Remove from the region or contain within station buildings, any non-sterile soil previously shipped to the ASMA. 
    6. Remind program personnel of the Madrid Protocol obligation not to take non-sterile soil to Antarctica, or grow new plants or import plants for decorative purposes.
    7. Contain within station buildings, any plants grown for food. 
    8. Give priority to incinerating or repatriating food waste.
    9. Prevent station food, and food waste, from access by wildlife. 
    10. Develop protocols to avoid the biological contamination, or cross-contamination, of the Area’s lakes, in particular those outside the Facilities Zone. 
    11. Undertake surveillance for introduced species. 
    12. Share information on the finding of any non-native species introduced through program operations and persisting in the Area – in order to obtain scientific and operational advice, if required, on appropriate eradication or containment actions.
    13. Jointly implement these measures, where appropriate.


