





Annual Report pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty





Annual Report pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
1. Impact evaluation on the environment
During the period 2007-2008 activities that merit the preparation of an environmental initial or global assessment were not carried out. The evaluation was restricted solely to preliminary assessments in terms of logistics and research, regarding the ANTAR XVIII expedition.
2. Conservation of flora and fauna
The delivery of permits for sampling, harmful interference and the intentional introduction of non-native species, is granted only for research purposes. Prior to granting such permits the scientific activity as a whole undergoes a process of environmental assessment.

During the 2007/2008 period, only one permit for sampling and manipulation of Antarctic wildlife was granted, which was awarded to the project "Predation, weather, microclimate and choice of nesting site of the colony of Antarctic tern Sterna vittata Gemlin 1789 in Crepin Point, King George Island" project code INANPE - NPC 0605, in the period from December 10, 2007 to January 30, 2008.
3. Waste treatment and elimination
Despite its seasonal nature, there is a Waste Management Plan for the Machu Picchu Antarctic Scientific Base (ECAMP), for which a system for treating solid waste is being implemented. Meanwhile, all waste is removed offsite the area of  the Antarctic Treaty. 

The detail of waste removed from the continent can be seen in Table 1.
4. Prevention of marine pollution 
During this period the Humboldt research vessel was not used. For logistical support, the Almirante Viel Chilean Navy vessel was hired.
5. Protection and management of areas (Annex V) 
The Peruvian activities within Antarctic protected areas require an entry permit to them, through a format prepared by the Antarctic national authority. The process for granting such permits is subject to scientific grounds and is given in conjunction with the Area Management Plan for which admission is sought. 

During the XXIX RCTA Admiralty Bay was designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area, its Management Plan being jointly adopted, for whose implementation Brazil (coordinator), Ecuador, Poland and the United States have been working together.
6. Liability arising from environmental emergencies (Annex VI) 
After following legal and constitutional internal procedures, Measure 1 (2005) was approved by Congress and ratified by the Government of Peru on July 10, 2007, which was timely notified to the depositary country.

Table 1: Summary of waste management for the period 2007/2008
LOCALITY
WASTE TYPE
QUANTITY*
DISPOSAL METHOD
Machu Picchu Antarctic Scientific Base (ECAMP) MacKellar Sound- Admiralty Bay / King George Island
Coordinates: 
62°05´29" S
58°28´16" W.
Group I: 
Wastewater
----
---

Group II
Residual fuel
----
---

Group III
Organic
12 cilinders
Retired from the Antarctic continent

Group IV
Metals
2 boxes
Retired from the Antarctic continent


Plastics
6 cilinders
Retired from the Antarctic continent


Glass
1 cilinder
Retired from the Antarctic continent

Group V
Radioactive waste
No such waste was generated
* The cilinders have a capacity of 55 gallons



