





The Czech activities on the James Ross Island in austral summer 2007/08






The Czech activities on the James Ross Island 
in austral summer 2007/08

Field research realized in the area of the Czech Antarctic Station of Johann Gregor Mendel (CAS JGM) in summer 2007/08 were in accordance with the concept of Czech investigation focused on climatology, botany and geology. The notification duty for mentioned activities was discharged and allowed by Czech Ministry for Environment protection separately for geology  and climatology together with botany (resolution No. 82556/ENV/07). Information about booth activities are presented in separated IP. 
In summer 2007/2008, 6 scientists from (a) Faculty of Science, Masaryk University Brno, (b) Faculty of Science, South Bohemia University, (c) Charles University Prague and (d) Institute of Botany Czech Academy of Science took a part in climatological and botanical investigations related to the below projects:  KONTAKT ME 945 - Multidisciplinary research of Antarctic terrestric vegetation within IPY (authorized by Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports), and Grant Agency of CR 205/07/1377 - Impacts of atmospheric factors on UV radiation regime in territory of Antarctic Peninsula (Grant Agency of Czech Republic). Area and localities of field campaign that started on Jan. 17th and finished on March  9th 2008 are presented on schematic map of the area of interest (see graphic suplement). The field operations comprised 6 main subjects.

(I) Local climate and microclimate of Ulu Peninsula

In climatologic research, data downloading and maintenance of 7 automatic weather stations (AWS) situated in the area of scientific interest were carried out. Main objective was to continue a long-term monitoring of various abiotic factors as well as investigations of spatiotemporal variability of the climatic conditions of the Ulu Peninsula. Another objective was to explain the processes leading to regional atmospheric warming and to determine relief influences on air masses transformation and boundary layer processes. The data files were stored and checked briefly. However, final processing of data sets and their verification will be carried out in CR.
The second task was the maintenance, checks and repairs of damaged meteorological instruments, ventilation units, their holders and auxiliary constructions. The replacement of meteorological sensors was carried for the purpose of their annual calibrations according to the WMO regulations in certificated laboratories, e.g. Solar and Ozone Observatory of the Czech Hydrometeorological Institute in Hradec Králove, and Kipp-Zonen BV respectively. Special attention was devoted to services of the solar radiation sensors and devices (pyranometers, PAR radiometers, UV radiometer and UVB-Biometer), which are situated at the J. G. Mendel station. Prediction of the erythemally effective UVB radiation and evaluation of the influences of atmospheric factors (ozone concentration, optical air mass, aerosols, etc.) will be studied with the help of nonlinear modelling approach. 
The last climatological topic had a relation to the below-specified open top chamber experiments, especially setting, and operation of the meteorological instruments for microclimate and soil climate monitoring. Several topographical surveys were accomplished in Brandy Bay, Whisky Bay, and Santa Martha Cove. Glaciological observation was carried out on the ice cap of Davis Dome.

(II) Effects of global warming on Antarctic vegetation – field experiments with manipulated environment

In 2007-2008 summer season, plant stress physiology team (Masaryk University, Brno) continued  with the installations of open top chambers (OTC) in the Northern part of the James Ross Island. Altogether, 5 new OTCs including data loggers and several temperature sensors were installed into three different locations:
seashore – moss-dominated ecosystem close to the CAS JGM – 6 m a.s.l. (see Fig., referred as A), 
deglaciated table mountain (Berry Hill Mesa, Usnea sp., and Umbilicaria decussata) - 350 m a.s.l. (see Fig., referred as B),
table mountain, close-to-icecap (Davis Dome) - 410 m. a.s.l., no moss and lichen vegetation (referred as C in Fig.).
Recently, three OTC are located at site A, three at the site B, and one at the site C. Typical set up of instruments and sensors collecting environmental data outside (control plot) and inside each OTC consisted of (a) a 13 channel data logger, (b) 3 soil thermometers (Pt-100) placed into the depth of  5,10,15 cm, (c) 2 Cu-Co thermocouple thermometers monitoring surface temperature of typical components of vegetation cover,  (d) 1 Cu-Co thermometer  placed 30 cm above surface, (e) 1 hygrometer measuring relative humidity close to ground. Yearly microclimatological data from control plots and OTC downloaded in January 2008 from the sites A and B showed that in 2007, OTC-induced shift in air, vegetation cover, and soil temperatures was strongly dependent on character of prevailing weather, light and wind speed in particular (for analysis, ref: a MS submitted). High-resolution photos of vegetation cover were taken from a constant height above the control plots and OTCs so that long-term changes in lichen/moss growth rate and biodiversity could be determined. 

(III) Stress physiology of Antarctic autotrophs

A combined field- and laboratory-based approach was applied to study moss and lichen responses to hydration/dehydration. In the field, a portable fluorometric system was installed inside an OTC at site A. The system measured primary photosynthetic processes of moss thalli (effective quantum yield of photochemical processes in photosystem II - II) in a 15 minute interval for 28 days. Preliminary analysis of collected data showed that, specifically for February 2008, the most limiting environmental factor of photosynthetic photochemical processes was hydration. Simultaneously, lab-based experiments were carried out at the J.G.Mendel station using a water potential meter and a modulated fluorometer. They consisted of measurements of  dependence of II on water potential (WP) of lichen/moss thallus. The measurements showed inter-specific differences of studied representatives of moss and lichen vegetation occuring at the James Ross Island. They differed in WP critical for primary photosynthetic processes. Additionally, water stress in desiccating lichen and moss species was studied using a fast chlorophyll induction curve (OJIP). 

(IV) Soil biota evaluation

In January-February 2008, soil and substrate samples were collected from several typical (and contrasting) deglaciated ecosystems of the Northern part of the James Ross Island and transferred to laboratories in Brno, Czech Republic. After isolation, soil microorganisms are cultivated on agars so that biodiversity of bacteria and other soil microorganisms might be evaluated.  

(V) Study of lake ecosystems
 
The fundamental limnological and hydrobiological investigation were carried out in 16 small lakes in the areas of Cape Lachman, Halozetes Valley, Brandy Bay and Solorina Walley. The relatively broad genetic and ecological spectrum is typical for this lakes (flat-bottomed lakes on coastal terraces, thermokarst lakes and corrie lakes - part of them is frozen by surface and bottom ice in summer season).
The profile bathymetric measurements were carried out in all lakes with the aim of estimation of their extreme depth. The physicochemical properties of water at the extreme points (temperature, pH, conductivity, intensity of PhAR, oxygen content) were probed and 1 to 3 samplings for further chemical analysis were taken (alkalinity, total dissolved anorganic karbon, TC, CO2, HCO3, CO3 NO3-N, NO2-N, NH4-N, tot.N, PO4-P, tot. P, Ca, Mg, K, Na, Si) in vertical water profile using a 50 cm step. The samples for content evaluation of bacteria and for determination of phytoplankton and zooplankton were sampled at the same time. The phytobenthos was sampled in relatively deep lakes.
Preliminary analysis of the samples showed that macroscopic fauna is far richer in the James Ross Island lakes than reported in previous studies (Bjőrck et al. 1996) and resemble that of maritime Antarctica (i.e. South Shetlands and west coast of Antarctic Peninsula) (Toro et al. 2007).

(VI) Ecology of lichen communities at hilltop of mesas (Bibby Point, Berry Hill and Lachman Crags) 

Similar approach as in (II) was used to evaluate potential effect of climate warming on the diversity of lichen communities and changes in their biomass, density, and thalli high in particular. For such a purpose, several open top chambers (OTC) were installed in a high-altitude location (see enclosed graphic supplement). The installations began at mesa of Bibby Point already in foregoing summer season. The first OTC equipped with temperature and humidity sensors and datalogers for measurement of basic characteristics of inside and outside microclimate were installed there in 2007. In summer 2008, next OTC couple and snow catch were installed in order to manipulate snow cover. The species diversity and biomass of lichens communities in dependence on the distance from ice caps was observed in 4 longitudinal profiles on Lachman Crags and Berry Hill mesas. Altogether, 75 opened Petri dishes for collection of wind-transported lichen spores were additionally installed in each profile. The amount of spores will be analyzed after a yearly exposition.


































