





Results of Russian studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok during the season 2007-2008





Results of Russian studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok during the season 2007-2008
Study of the subglacial Lake Vostok is one of the main projects in the program of activities of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE), which also attracts attention of specialists of other National Antarctic Programs. In spite of a great significance of investigating different characteristics of the ice cover, water layer and bottom sediments of this lake by means of radio-echo sounding and seismic methods and GPS-technologies, of major interest is the deep ice borehole 5G-1, drilled at Vostok station. The Russian specialists intend to penetrate the surface water layer of the lake through this borehole. The interest in this project has strongly increased at the end of 2005, when RAE resumed drilling operations in the borehole.
At ATCM ХХХ in 2007, Russia informed the Antarctic community about the accident with the drill at the borehole bottom in the middle of January 2007 and about the successful operation on eliminating this incident. After extracting the damaged drill to the surface the RAE drillers were conducting prolonged operations for removing a mixture of antifreeze and water from the lower part of the borehole formed due to ice melting under the action of antifreeze, specially delivered to the lower part of the borehole. As a result, an ice cavity of significant size was formed near the borehole bottom. On 6 June, 2007, the first ice core after the accident 0.85m long was obtained, and the borehole depth reached 3659.12 m. Then, 38 drill runs were made. After the accident, 8.28 m were drilled. The borehole bottom is currently at a depth of 3666.54 m.
On 16 August, 2007, there was a breakdown of two power current-carrying cable lines of the drill winch. An attempt was made to connect the drill by means of a new electrical circuit, but on 28 August, 2007, two more cable conductors were out of order. A new connecting circuit worked only for 7 drill runs. This was caused by a significant wear of the cable, which was used for about 17 years and by large power loads on the upper part of the cable due to an enormous own weight of the cable in the borehole.  As agreed with the Project Management in St. Petersburg, it was decided to rewind and cut the cable. After rewinding, a segment about 75 m long was cut from the upper part of the cable.  
After rewinding the cable additional well caliper logging was performed. Cover plates were installed at the instrument measurement unit to increase the measurement range. 
On 19 October, 2007 during the run for the borehole drilling, two lower pipes with two filters for sludge came unscrewed from the drill and remained in the borehole. All attempts to recover them were to no avail. Moreover, on 23 November, 2007 there was a second cable break and the drill with a special instrument for extraction of the pipes remained in the borehole.
Measurements of the borehole diameter above the damaged drill showed its significant decrease in the bottom zone. As follows from the analysis of records in the drilling log, a decrease of the borehole diameter was a result of inadmissible dropping of the drilling fluid level in the hole. For that moment of time it comprised 170 m from the surface of the borehole. The methodology of drilling operations in deep boreholes does not permit their performance at the drilling fluid level below 100 m. A sharp level decrease was obviously connected with a large work volume for removing a mixture of antifreeze and water from the lower part of the borehole. The data of monitoring show that each lifting of the submerged device from the borehole at such depth leads to a loss of 50-70 litres of the drilling fluid. 
The Project Management made a decision about an operational control of the vertical distribution of the drilling fluid density and measurements of the state of borehole diameter (well caliper logging). After these operations the need for an urgent increase of the drilling fluid density by using all Freon F141b available at Vostok station has become obvious. It was delivered in portions of 75 litres to the layer at the depth range of 2100-3300 m and in portions of 50 litres (in a mixture with kerosene) to the depth range of 1300-2000 m. In total, 850 litres of the drilling mud heaver F141b were delivered to 14 horizons of the borehole 5G-1. As a result of adding the heaver and subsequent adding of two drums of pure kerosene, the level of the drilling fluid in the borehole has risen to a level of 96.5 m on 18 January 2007. 
For the day of completing the work in the borehole (25 January) the average density of the drilling fluid (taking into account adding of 6 drums of kerosene) was 0.920 g cm-3, and the average mass of heaver was 22.3%. On this day, the level of the drilling fluid was raised to 66.05 m by priming 4 drums of pure aviation kerosene. The rise of the drilling fluid level and increase of its density allowed us to reduce the pressure difference between the ice and the fluid in the near-bottom zone to 4.4 bars, and the rate of the borehole compression to 1.3 mm year -1. 
In parallel with the operations for putting in order the drilling fluid characteristics in the deep borehole, a trial of the thermal drill prototype, which will be used for organizing penetration to the water layer of the subglacial lake, was carried out. The pressure sensors and the prototype impermeability were subjected to testing. The ultimate depth at which the prototype was tested was 3622 m. The results of the tests showed the prototype capable for work taking into account the need for some engineering finishing and metrological calibration of the pressure sensors. 
By means of the studies made it was possible to correct the situation with the drill position at the borehole bottom. The lower part of the drill 3 m long is in the new borehole with the initial diameter of 135 mm. The main part of the drill 13 m long is located in the cavity formed as a result of using the antifreeze when eliminating the previous accident. The compression of the borehole around the damaged drill left in the near-bottom zone on 19 October, mainly stopped by 25 January 2008, when the drilling fluid pressure close to normal was reconstructed in the borehole. It is expected that by December 2008, the lower part of the drill will be squeezed by the sides of the hole practically without clearance. Between the upper part of the damaged drill and the sides of the hole some space will still remain sufficient for the antifreeze entry to the lower part of the drill. So the position of the damaged drill in the cavity allows us to hope for the success of the operation for its release and recovery to the surface. 
In order to conduct operation for eliminating the accident and resuming drilling it is planned to carry out seasonal work at Vostok station beginning from the end of November 2008 by a drilling team of 7 specialists. For comparison, only two drillers worked at the station in 2007. In the middle of November, the required volume of aviation kerosene, Freon F141b and antifreeze will be delivered to Vostok station by means of air dropping. A new cable for conducting drilling operations, which is already at Mirny station, will be delivered to Vostok station by a sledge-caterpillar traverse. Special engineering equipment for extracting the drill will be produced in St. Petersburg. In case of successful performance of work during the summer season 2008-2009, drilling will be continued during the Antarctic winter 2009.
Ice drilling in the lower borehole horizons in 2007 was continued in the mono-crystalline medium, when the ice crystals were up to 1.5 m in size without the clearly oriented axes. Drilling of such ice under the conditions of increased temperatures (about -5 С) remains to be quite a complicated engineering problem. As follows from negative experience of drilling at Vostok station in 2007, any technological mishandling in the process of such ice drilling in super-deep horizons might lead to rather tragic consequences. If the efforts to extract the damaged drill components from the borehole bottom in the season of 2008-2009 fail, we shall attempt to avoid the accident area. For this purpose approximately in 30 m above this area, the borehole will be deflected from the vertical with subsequent avoidance of the damaged drill components. Such technology of the work was developed and successfully introduced into practice of RAE drilling operations for eliminating the accident at a depth of about 2.5 km.
Nevertheless, a negative result of drilling operations at Vostok station in 2007 has confirmed in practice theoretical calculations of the authors of the technological project for penetration to waters of Lake Vostok through a deep borehole 5G-1. The accident in October 2007 was a result of the drill being stuck due to narrowing of the borehole diameter caused by a sharp decrease of the drilling fluid level in the borehole. The calculations showed that maintaining the drilling fluid level at a depth of around 170 m, the horizontal rate of the borehole diameter decrease due to insufficient pressure of the drilling fluid column would be about 7 mm a year at the initial borehole diameter of 135 mm. So, a decrease of the drilling fluid level to 300 m would lead to sharp intensification of this process. The specific values of the dependence between the borehole diameter decrease rates and the fluid column height present already a mathematical rather than a physical problem. The diameter decrease in the lower part of the borehole will result in squeezing of the drilling fluid and a natural rise of its level. This will facilitate the process of annual drilling fluid collection from the borehole to the surface in very large volumes, which will not complicate disposal of this fluid. The specific calculations will be presented in the final CEE for the project of water sampling from the surface water layer of Lake Vostok. At ATCM ХХХ, Russia informed the community about preparation and submission of this document to ATCM ХХXI, however lack of new data on the ice characteristics near the ice sheet bottom surface which we hoped to collect during RAE drilling operations in 2007, does not make it possible to finish this document. It will be presented at the nearest time when drilling will be stopped at a safe depth for transfer from the electrical-mechanical drilling to the thermal drilling method. We hope the answer to this question will be given during the next few years.

