





The Recovery of Drilling Fluid from a Deep Ice-core Drilling Site on James Ross Island, Antarctic Peninsula





The Recovery of Drilling Fluid from a Deep Ice-core Drilling Site on James Ross Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Information Paper submitted by United Kingdom and France

1. Introduction 

1.1. During January – February 2008, the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), in collaboration with the Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Geophysique de l’Environnement (LGGE) - CNRS1/INSU2, and the Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et l'Environnement (LSCE), both of France, successfully undertook a deep ice core drilling project close to Mount Haddington (64°12’S, 57°37’W), James Ross Island, Antarctica (Figure 1). The Mount Haddington ice dome rises to an altitude of 1628 metres above sea level.
1.2. The drilling project was undertaken from a temporary field camp over a single austral summer season. An ice core was recovered from a depth of 400 metres, transported to the UK and distributed amongst the collaborating institutes for laboratory analysis. The scientific objective is to obtain a new, and definitive, ice core palaeoclimate record from the Atlantic Ocean/Weddell Sea /northern Antarctic Peninsula sector.
 
2.  Initial Environmental Evaluation

2.1. An Initial Environmental Evaluation was undertaken prior to commencing the activity. The use of Exxsol D60 as a drilling fluid was identified in the IEE as the most significant impact of the project.  Exxsol is a complex petroleum-derived hydrocarbon. As there was no long term scientific gain to be had from leaving the borehole open beyond the end of the season, and as the rate of borehole closure was estimated to be slow enough to prevent equipment from becoming lodged in the hole, the IEE recommended that trials be undertaken to recover the fluid.  Obviously it is important to compare the benefits to be gained from removing the fluid compared with any additional costs of doing so.  In this case the benefits to the environment were considered to outweigh the additional costs.  

3. Drill Fluid Recovery

3.1. Following the successful drilling and retrieval of the ice core, which involved the use of approx 2200 litres of Exxsol D60 drill fluid, some 2000 litres were recovered from the bore hole for safe disposal. The fluid was recovered by means of a 20 litre steel baler (2m long, 108mm steel tube), developed in –house at BAS, which was attached to the drill winch cable. The baler was lowered into the borehole, filled up with drilling fluid, and raised to the surface. A valve at the bottom of the baler allowed the fluid to be emptied directly into the original Exxsol drums. The fluid was recovered over a 5 day period at the end of the drilling season, and required 104 lifts of the baler. To extract the last 2m of fluid column field-modifications were made to transform the bailer into a ‘syringe’ using a one-way valve and sealed plunger (see photo). As a result, less than 10 litres was left in the borehole on departure from James Ross Island. 

4.  Conclusion

4.1. This represents the first successful recovery of a significant quantity of drilling fluid from a deep ice-core bore hole in Antarctica. As noted above, the benefit of recovering drilling fluid from future bore-holes should be weighed against the additional fuel consumption required to recover the fluid, transport it from the drilling site and the corresponding atmospheric emissions. 
This successful outcome was directly linked to the IEE process, and the innovative approach of the drilling technicians and project managers. The significant time and resource required for the remediation of the site, including the recovery of the drilling fluid, was factored in at the project planning stage. 


