





International Polar Year – Education and Outreach in New Zealand





International Polar Year – Education and Outreach in New Zealand

Information Paper submitted by New Zealand


The period 2007/08 has coincided with both the 50 Year Anniversaries of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme and International Polar Year (IPY 2007/09).  The New Zealand Government provided additional funding to provide education and outreach activity specifically around these two important Antarctic activities to profile, the value of science in Antarctica and a strong Antarctic Treaty System.  The following range of activities was programmed over the 2007/08 year to coincide with IPY.

    1. IPY Launch Functions
        1.1. Scott Base, 50 Year Anniversaries/IPY Launch
On 20 January 2007 the New Zealand Prime Minister Rt Hon Helen Clark and Sir Edmund Hillary visited Scott Base to launch IPY and commemorate the 50th Anniversary of Scott Base, the International Geophysical Year (IGY) and New Zealand’s participation in the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition (TAE).  A commemorative function was held with Scott Base staff, New Zealand media and invited guests from the United States (Dr Arden L Bement, Director, National Science Foundation; Claudia A McMurray, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Department of State; Ambassador William P McCormick, US Ambassador to New Zealand and Samoa; Glyn Davies, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State).
        1.2. IPY Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML)
On 29 January 2008 the New Zealand Prime Minister hosted an IPY science launch function in Wellington to farewell scientists and crew on the CAML Research Ship Tangaroa voyage to the Ross Sea.  Speakers included Dr Michael Stoddard (Australian Antarctic Division) and John Morgan (Chief Executive, NIWA) and the Minister of Foreign Affairs Rt Hon Winston Peters.

    2. Travelling Displays
        2.1. “Big Ice” 
Otago Museum and Art Gallery launched the IPY “Big Ice” display of science, history and arts in Antarctica in May 2007 and this has since travelled to exhibitions in Wellington, Christchurch, Palmerston North and Hamilton.  It will shortly open in Auckland followed by openings in Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (Petronas Science Centre) and Canberra, Australia (National Museum of Australia) in 2010.
A “Big Ice” souvenir booklet focussing on science in Antarctica was also produced for sale associated with the display. 
To date 130,000 people have viewed the display.
        2.2. Te Papa IPY Display
Antarctica New Zealand provided funding of $150.0K to Te Papa (National Museum of New Zealand) to produce an IPY travelling display focussed on science, which has now toured at 12 different venues nationally, including museums, art galleries and airport departure terminals.
The display has been seen by over 100,000 people.

    3. Permanent Visitor Attractions
Visitor Attractions:
    • The Antarctic Attraction at the International Antarctic Centre, Christchurch
    • Kelly Tarlton’s Antarctic Attraction, Auckland
Both New Zealand’s commercial Antarctic visitor attractions have opened IPY science displays during 2007.  The two attractions have combined annual visits of 600,000 per year.

    4. Publications
        4.1. “Antarctic Partners – 50 Years of New Zealand/United States Science Co-operation” – 1957-2007.  Funded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and written by Neville Peat this book was written to celebrate 50 years of the New Zealand/United States partnership in Antarctica.
        4.2. “Call Of The Ice” – 50 Years of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme written by David Harrowfield.  This book covers 50 years of New Zealand activity in Antarctica.

    5. Television
        5.1. “Ice” – TVNZ
TVNZ produced a series of 5 x 30 minute documentaries hosted by popular New Zealand presenter Marcus Lush.  These were shown on prime time TV on Sunday nights during the 2007 winter.  They were the second highest rating series shown on New Zealand television during 2007 and averaged 795,000 viewers per night.
The series covered New Zealand’s Antarctic history, the Polar Heroic era, New Zealand science in Antarctica, Scott Base and the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA.
        5.2. ANDRILL and CAML filming projects - TV3/Prime TV
Antarctica New Zealand hosted two separate film crews on visits to Scott Base in November-December 2007 to profile New Zealand IPY science projects – ANDRILL and Marine Science.

    6. Events
        6.1. Christchurch Antarctic Festival 
In September 2007 the Christchurch City Council launched its first full Antarctic Festival with a Family fun day, an airport open day, “science in the pub” lecture series, United States/New Zealand season opening function, an Antarctic church service in the Christchurch Cathedral and numerous other events around the city.  Due to the success of this festival, funding of $100.0K is being sought from the Christchurch City Council towards an ongoing Antarctic festival programme for Christchurch
        6.2. New Zealand Antarctic Society Celebrations of the 50 Anniversary 
The New Zealand Antarctic Society, which will celebrate it’s 75th anniversary in 2008, organised with sponsorship from Antarctica New Zealand a weekend of events to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of Scott Base, the success of IGY and the success of the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic expedition led by Vivien Fuchs and Sir Edmund Hillary.  Polar explorer Will Steger was the keynote speaker at the event which was attend by Sir Ed, Lady Hillary and many of the surviving New Zealand members of TAE and IGY. The highlight of the weekend of events was a gala dinner held at the Wigram Air Force Museum.
        6.3. New Zealand Symphony Orchestra “Exploring Antarctica”
New Zealand Symphony Orchestra (NZSO) organised a series of four nights of Antarctic panel discussion around themes of science, history and art in Wellington to recognise IPY.  They also brought together all New Zealand’s leading Antarctic artists at a special 4 month art exhibition at Wellington’s “NewDowse” Art Galley.
On the final night of the week-long celebration NZSO put on a special symphony presentation by Gareth Farr (one of Antarctica New Zealand’s Artists and Writers) titled “Sinfonic Antarctica”.

    7. Education
        7.1. New Zealand IPY Education and Outreach Forum
Gateway Antarctica, University of Canterbury has established the IPY Education and Outreach Forum and has applied to New Zealand funding agencies to support this work.  The proposal is around ‘providing accessible gateways for Antarctic education’ as an IPY legacy, a result regarding funding is pending.
The forum has included wide representation of APECS, the IPY Youth Steering Committee, research institutions, visitor attractions and Antarctica New Zealand.  Rhian Salmon (IPY IPO Office) attended the inaugural meeting of the Forum.
        7.2. LEARNZ ANDRILL Virtual Classroom
The Ministry of Education funded $60.0K over two years, towards the LEARNZ ANDRILL virtual classroom, profiling the United States/New Zealand/Italy/German IPY science event – ANDRILL.
This involved 3573 students from 89 schools participating in IPY virtual science
    1. www.learnz.org.nz/ and the two ANDRILL field trips are at
    2. http://andrill74.learnz.org.nz/ and http://andrill64.learnz.org.nz/=20
    3. Login to access field trips is:  username = andrill, password = andrill
        7.3. IPY Youth Steering Committee  “Polar Contests”
Antarctica New Zealand, Canterbury and Otago Universities jointly funded New Zealand participation in the IPY Youth Steering Committee initiative IPY “Polar Contests”.  A contest was held for science students across New Zealand who produced an educational project on an Antarctic-related topic. The projects were then judged by an independent panel and the winner participated in the Students on Ice Antarctic Peninsula cruise. The second place winner received a partial tertiary scholarship to Canterbury University.

    8. IPY Website
        8.1. Antarctica New Zealand has established a special IPY science website www.ipy.antarctica.nz 
The website focuses on New Zealand’s approved IPY science projects, planning, field work and achievements.
    9. Media
        9.1. Numerous New Zealand newspapers and magazines have profiled IPY activity in Antarctica including: North and South; New Zealand Listener; New Zealand Herald; The Press; The Dominion and the Otago Daily Times.
        9.2. IPY Science Journalist Scholarship
Antarctica New Zealand and University of Canterbury have set up a partnership to select the best graduate science journalist to participate in an IPY Science Journalism Scholarship to raise profile of IPY science.
    10. Science Outreach
A requirement of the New Zealand Government additional $10.5 million IPY funding was that all Principle Investigators contribute to IPY science outreach as part of their funded science proposal.  Antarctica New Zealand is assisting to co-ordinate this for all science events.

Summary
New Zealand will continue an active programme of profiling IPY activity over the 2008/09 research season with the production of an IPY science series for distribution to all New Zealand’s major daily newspapers, a further LEARNZ IPY science initiative live from Scott Base, the Government endorsement of a new New Zealand Antarctic Science Strategy (as a New Zealand IPY legacy project), a new Antarctic film at the International Antarctic Centre, continued touring of our “Big Ice” display (both nationally and internationally) and a documentary film on the IPY CAML science voyage.
Antarctica New Zealand also intends to engage public opinion research during 2008 to gauge the impact of New Zealand’s IPY science funding new initiatives and the related IPY outreach programme of activity.

