
IP
8







Theme of the Programme:
ATCM 9 

Presented by:
Chile

Original:
Spanish






Rules governing ships in the Antarctic













Rules governing ships in the Antarctic

	1.	Requirements for special equipment
	1.1 	Requirements for ships of any flag
I.-	Check that up-to-date and valid international safety certificates are carried on board.

II.-	Safety equipment must meet the requirements under Chapters III, IV and V of SOLAS (International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea), concerning individual life-saving appliances, as follows:

a.-	Passenger ships and cargo ships on international journeys in non-temperate zones must be provided with the following individual life-saving appliances:

    • In lifeboats, sufficient immersion suits for the number of occupants of the lifeboat or, if the administration considers it necessary and feasible, a suit for each person on board; if this latter is not applicable, thermal aid must be provided for each person without an immersion suit. This rule shall not apply to fully closed lifeboats.

    • In rescue boats, each crew member must wear an immersion suit or other weatherproof protection.

    • For staff organising evacuation, each member of the evacuation team shall be provided with an immersion suit or a weatherproof suit.

    • Any crew on board who have not been provided with an immersion suit shall be provided with thermal aid in the lifeboats.

b.-	Ships must be fitted with communications equipment for the different communications areas established by the IMO (A1, A2, A3 and A4) and officers on the bridge must be properly trained to operate such equipment.
1.2 Additional requirements for ships flying the Chilean flag 
I.-	Article 50 of DS (M) No. 90 of 1999, regulating the professional career of ships' crews, states that deck officers must have passed the “Course on Sailing in Antarctic Waters”.

II.-	Safety elements relative to the number of people on board, making special mention of immersion suits in rescue boats of ships over 300 tonnes, where one suit is required for each crew member of the rescue boat and one each for the number of occupants if the ship is sailing south of the 55th parallel (D.S. 319 (M), “Regulation for the equipping of deck hands on national naval vessels and artefacts”). 
	
2.  Environmental guidelines 
Ships must comply strictly with MARPOL (International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships) beyond latitude 60° South with respect to the ban on tipping sewage, garbage, oily mixtures and harmful substances into the sea, and must have the capacity to store them on board.
	3.	Checks on seaworthiness
When ships set sail for international waters, safety conditions are checked by inspecting the certificates and visually checking the presence and conditions of life-saving appliances, their equipment and seaworthiness (Sailing Law)
	4.	Regulations provided for ships setting sail
There are no special provisions for ships setting sail for the Antarctic.
	5.	Regulations provided for travelling ships and special guidelines
A.-	In view of the special condition governing the Antarctic (Antarctic Treaty), the Chilean Maritime Authority responsible for the Antarctic, in its role as Maritime Rescue Sub Centre (Antarctic MRSC), makes contact with ships and invites them to provide information concerning their crew, passengers and sailing routes. It also provides them with weather information, safety alerts and glaciological conditions for the area.

B.-	Ships flying the Chilean flag are subject to the same conditions as in the rest of the national maritime territory, and have to report their position twice a day.
	6.	Recommendation
A.- Inform the International Maritime Organization (IMO) of the need to establish an obligation for managerial officers on the bridge of ships sailing to the Antarctic (Captain and First Officer) to be qualified to operate in this area of particular navigational complexities. Make it mandatory for managerial officers on the bridge to have undergone a course on sailing in Antarctic Waters, similar to those given in countries such as Chile. 

B.- Propose that the International Maritime Organization (IMO) recognise the need to make it mandatory for ships sailing to the Antarctic to report their position once a day to the MRSC corresponding to the area in which they are sailing pursuant to the International Agreement on Search and Rescue (SAR 79). This would make it possible to locate the position of the vessels and keep an updated record of all ships in the area, allowing the appropriate actions to be taken in emergencies.
     7. Invitation
Chile invites the countries operating vessels in the Antarctic to take part in the Course on Operations in Antarctic Waters held annually in the Chilean Navy's Maritime Instruction Centre. This course is aimed at officers conducting operations in the Antarctic. This year the course will be held from the 13th to the 23rd of October. If interested, please write to the following e-mail: cimar@directemar.cl . Information is also available at: www.cimar.cl .
