





Variability of Antarctic climate 





Variability of Antarctic climate

An obvious character of the climate change that took place at the planet in the 20th century determines the need for a quantitative study of variability of parameters of the Earth’s climatic system for creating justified scenarios of the future climate changes. The South polar area being a unique component of the Earth’s climatic system produces a significant influence on the formation of global climate and serves as an indicator of current climate changes. The global climate models predict in what way the Antarctic climate can change during the current centennial, differing in details from model-to-model. The results of most climate models point to a comparatively moderate air temperature increase in the Antarctic during the next decades. However, many processes occurring in the Antarctic region are not quite fully represented in the climate models, and the studies of current and future state of the climatic system require developing the numerical models based on reliable evidence of the current state of climatic conditions. An unsatisfactory description of the Antarctic atmosphere in modern climatic archives can be attributed not only to a sparse network of stations, but also to inaccessibility for investigation of reliable historical archives of meteorological measurement data. Since the duration of regular meteorological measurements exceeds 50 years only at some stations, the answer to the question whether the air temperature changes in the Antarctic reflect the global climate change remains open. For most Antarctic stations the temperature trends are small and as a rule statistically insignificant. The values of the trends depend to a great extent on the interannual variability and the period of data analysis. Therefore it cannot be definitely said at present what is typical of Antarctica in general: warming or cooling.
A database on climate of the Antarctic atmosphere was created at the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (St. Petersburg, Russia) based on the information of Russian and foreign Antarctic stations, including the results of surface and upper-level measurements with assessment of completeness of initial data, data quality control and taking into account the changes of parameters of the measurement complexes. For construction of this database the results of observations of main meteorological elements at standard synoptic hours at the stations of all countries conducting studies in the Antarctic, were collected for the period of instrumental measurements including data of 44 meteorological, 46 automatic and 20 upper-air stations. The support of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) in the framework of the READER (Reference Antarctic Data for Environmental Research) Project provided for the first time an access to the national meteorological data archives of countries-operators in the Antarctic and unification of the methodology of primary processing of synoptic information. This work is carried out in the cluster project COMPASS IPY 2007/08. One of the Antarctic regions where significant changes both in the surface layer and in the free atmosphere were observed in recent years is the central and southern parts of the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula. The length of climatic series for this region is more than 50 years, and the mean annual temperature has increased here for this period almost by 3о С, which is much higher than in the other regions of the Southern Hemisphere. A probabilistic analysis of the time series of key elements of the Earth’s climatic system of the Antarctic performed for determining the tendencies of multiyear changes and characteristics of their interannual variability given the modulation of annual variations within the interannual and seasonal variations of synoptic scale variability showed that a possible cause of regional warming is intensification of synoptic and mesoscale vortex activity. 
In the data of Russian Antarctic stations the average annual trends of surface air temperature for the entire period of instrumental observations were +0.03 ± 0.02 °C year-1 for Bellingshausen station (1969-2007),  +0.01 ± 0.02 °C year-1 for Mirny Observatory (1956-2007),  +0.02 ± 0.01 °C year-1 for Novolazarevskaya station (1962-2007) and +0.01 ± 0.02 °C years-1 for Vostok station. Only the climatic trends for Bellingshausen and Novolazarevskaya stations are statistically significant.
During the last decade of the 20th century the average air temperature in the lower stratosphere (at the level of 150–100 hPa) over the Antarctic Peninsula has decreased by 4-5 °C in the summer-autumn period compared to the conditions in the 1970s-1980s. For the average annual conditions the statistically insignificant air temperature trend during the period 1956-2002 was -0.06 ± 0.08 °C year-1. In summer, a negative temperature trend (-0.07 ± 0.07 °C year-1) is statistically significant and approximately twice as large as the corresponding values for the winter season (-0.03 ± 0.04 °C year-1). Pronounced cooling in the lower stratosphere is probably connected with the change of radiation forcing due to a decreased ozone concentration and increased carbon dioxide concentration. In the vicinity of King George Island, warming in the troposphere comprises the largest values in the Southern hemisphere, which is explained by variability of the cloud cover, prevailing large-scale advection of air masses and increased activity of extra-tropical cyclones.
The climatic changes of the lower cloud boundary in the 0-2 km, 2-6 km, 6-10 km and 0-10 km layers for different amounts of clouds  - 0-20 %. 0-60 %, 0-80 % and 0-100 % of the sky are estimated for all seasons and for average annual conditions. It was determined that the lower boundary of cloudiness covering 0-100 % of the sky in the 0-2 km and 0-10 km layers at Bellingshausen station has decreased by –35 m/decade and –66 m/decade, respectively. 
The maximum increase of recurrence of low clouds (11.8 %/decade) was recorded for June. The increase of recurrence of cloudiness in the atmospheric layers of 0-6 km и 0-10 km is observed in June and comprises 7 %/decade and 2.2 %/decade, respectively. The maximum seasonal increase of recurrence of low clouds (7.4 %/ decade) and cloudiness in the 0-6 km layer (3 %/decade) is recorded in winter of the Southern Hemisphere. An increase of low clouds and cloudiness in the 0-6 km layer for average annual conditions is 4.0 %/decade and 1.4 %/decade, respectively. During the winter season the lower boundary of clouds covering 80-100% of the sky in the atmospheric layer of 0-2 km rises by 20 m/decade for July and decreases by –18 m/decade in August.
The main integral indicator of climatic changes in the polar regions is the ice cover. Whereas in the vicinity of the Antarctic Peninsula and the adjoining sub-Antarctic islands one observed an intensive retreat of the marginal zone of glaciers from the coastline and a decrease of their thickness, an opposite picture is observed in the region of East Antarctica. According to data of highly precise geodetic measurements carried out during the seasons of 2006-2007 and 2007-2008, it was determined that the ice dome thickness in its marginal zone in the vicinity of Mirny station has increased by 20-30 cm as compared to data of similar measurements made in the mid-1960s. The interannual variability of the area of sea ice surrounding Antarctica remains unchanged compared to multiyear data. Moreover, the past winter of 2007 showed some extreme values in the development of sea ice, not observed for a long time in the area of coastal Antarctic stations. In Ardley Bay in the vicinity of Bellingshausen station, the ice cover was most developed for the last 15 years whereas it was absent at all in some winter seasons.
These facts indicate that at present there are no reliable data on the trends of climatic changes in the entire Antarctic region.



