





Korean Public Awareness Program ‘Pole-to-Pole Korea’





Korean Public Awareness Program ‘Pole-to-Pole Korea’
1. Korea’s ‘International Polar Year’(IPY) Launching Ceremony
Korea’s ‘International Polar Year’(IPY) Launching Ceremony was held at the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea located at Youido Seoul Korea in April 19, 2007.  At this ceremony the researchers from 6 countries including Canada, China, Japan, Russia, U.S.(Alphabetical order) introduced the IPY research programs which they conducted. 
KOPRI(Korea Polar Rearch Institute) also presented the international research programs which it conducts with foreign research institute. 
(Contact point: Mr. Dongmin Jin, KOPRI, dmjin@kopri.re.kr)
2. Special Photo Exhibition on Polar Landscape and Research Activities to commemorate IPY
To attract public attention to the polar regions, KOPRI held a special Photo Exhibition on Polar landscape and activities in the National Science Museum in Daejon from April 20 to July 31, 2007. The photos were taken by top class Korean photographers who had opportunity to go to the Arctic and Antarctic regions with the support of  KOPRI’s ‘Pole to Pole Korea’ Program. As many as 200,000 public participants including students and teachers, have been to the exhibition.
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )

3.  Snowman-Club(online community) Activities 
There are many people in Korea who have much interest in Polar regions and polar- related activities. They made an online community to gather and share all the information online. The name of the association is called the ‘Snowman Club’. It had a gathering on August 11th, 2007 in an aquarium, where a special polar exhibition was held. In that gathering, lectures on Korean activities in the Arctic and Antarctic regions were given by the 3 invited KOPRI researchers. 
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr )
4.  Exhibition on Korean Polar activities in the Future Tech Korea 2007  
Every year, the big science festival is held at COEX, the biggest exhibition hall in Korea, supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology and Korea Science Foundation. In 2007, KOPRI  participated to show what researches were found in the polar regions, current situation of building the first Korean ice-breaker ‘ARAON’ and so forth. In that exhibition, a model of the ice-breaker ARAON, stuffed specimens of Antarctic penguins, and pieces of Antarctic glaciers attracted the participant’s interest. 
(Contact point: Ms. Jiyoung Lee, KOPRI, jylee@kopri.re.kr ) 


