





On the Issue of the Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station





On the Issue of the Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station

Information Paper submitted by Ukraine
Agenda item CEP 6(b)

Background  
At the previous 30th Consultative Meeting in New Delhi Ukraine introduced IP 30 The Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station, and provided a presentation on the draft CEE process associated to this activity, and the construction of the fuel tanks during the 2006/2007 season. 
Ukraine informed the Committee that construction work and operational activities were in
compliance with the requirements of the Environmental Protocol. Particularly the requirements of Resolution 3(2005) are taken into account; exactly, old tanks replaced for the new safety double-skinned one. 
According to the Ukrainian legislation, there was created an interdepartmental commission authorized to present expert resolution on putting the new fuel tank into operation. 
Some Members suggested that Ukraine might present an update of this activity, including activity regarding the old fuel tanks, at the next CEP meeting (Report of the CEP X, items 73-80).

Review of activities carried out following the CEE
After realization of the project on the construction of the fuel tank with capacity 200 m3 and its complex test in operating conditions the Commission noted full conformity of the executed works to the condition predicted in the CEE and to the earlier designed-in constructive decisions. Under the Resolution 2 (1997), during 2007-2008 season, an assessment of actual activity of Vernadsky Station in view of operation of the new fuel tank is carried out. For the whole period of operation the equipment worked trouble-free in strict accordance with the engineering design set by the project.
A complex of measures directed to increase the reliability of technological processes and minimization of their impact on the environment was positively appreciated. An applicable mitigation measure was implemented. The installed small hatch on the top cover of the tank in the inter-wall (inter-tank) space enables to level the pressure difference caused by a sharp change in the atmospheric air temperature. In the future it will be possible to supervise the condition of the tank walls and the inter-wall spaces by means of the installed camera and defectoscopic equipment.

Activity relating to the old fuel tanks
The old fuel tanks with capacity 145 m3 and 33 m3 are put in dead storage. Last summer season a half of the one tank was cleared of oil product deposits which have been taken out from the Antarctic Treaty Area in a special container and then utilized. In accordance with the Environmental Protocol requirements it is planned to finish clearing the both tanks and to use them as a storage facility for dry solid materials.







