





Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (Brussels, Belgium, August 2007)




Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (Brussels, Belgium, August 2007)
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the United States
Agenda Item CEP 7(e)
1. Introduction
The CCAMLR Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean was held in Brussels, Belgium, from 13 to 17 August 2007. It was co-convened by Drs. P. Penhale (USA) and S. Grant (UK), and kindly hosted by Mr. A. de Lichtervelde (Belgium). 
The aim of the Workshop was to provide a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection. Bioregionalisation is a process that aims to partition a broad spatial area into distinct regions, using a range of environmental and biological information. The outcomes of this analysis can be used to assist in the selection of a representative system of protected areas for the Southern Ocean.
This paper summarizes the results of the workshop, and subsequent discussions at CCAMLR-XXVI. It also discusses how the CEP and CCAMLR might utilize the outcomes of this workshop to identify candidate areas for protection in the Southern Ocean. 
2. Workshop background
The CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (2005) recommended that a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean should be undertaken to provide a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection. In 2006, WWF and the Antarctic Climate & Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre held an Experts’ Workshop which developed a proof of concept for defining bioregions (Grant et al., 2006). 
Following this work, CCAMLR noted the importance of developing a strategic approach and harmonised regime to protect the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System. It invited the CEP to participate in a Bioregionalisation Workshop Steering Committee established by CCAMLR to work towards the 2007 Workshop.
CCAMLR identified two separate components of work to be undertaken towards the establishment of a system of marine protected areas:
        (i)  technical development of methods for bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean
        (ii)  consideration of methods for selection and designation of marine protected areas.
The focus of the 2007 Bioregionalisation Workshop was on component (i). Further work on component (ii) is now a priority in order for progress to be made on establishing areas for protection. 
The CEP has agreed that it should engage constructively with CCAMLR on the issue of bioregionalisation and protected areas (CEP IX, para 99). The Chair of the CEP was nominated to provide representation to the Bioregionalisation Workshop Steering Committee, and an additional CEP Member was nominated subsequently. CEP Members were encouraged to work together with their CCAMLR colleagues on this initiative (CEP X, para 194), however few were able to attend the Brussels Workshop. Nevertheless, the Workshop highlighted the importance of ongoing co-operation between the CEP and CCAMLR in the context of elaborating a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of protected areas.


3. Data and methods
The Workshop was organized around two subgroups considering the benthic and pelagic systems separately. It was agreed that current knowledge of benthic-pelagic coupling is not sufficient to allow a combined benthic-pelagic bioregionalisation to be produced at this stage. 
The Workshop considered available bathymetric, physical oceanographic and biological data for the pelagic bioregionalisation. Biological datasets providing information on the spatial attributes of different areas were also considered, and it was determined that some of these datasets would be most appropriate for use at the regional scale. Data from the SCAR Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) Survey, and the SCAR Marine Biodiversity Information Network (SCAR-MarBIN) were recognized as having particular value to bioregionalisation studies.
For the benthic bioregionalisation, the Workshop agreed that data on bathymetry, seafloor temperature and currents, geomorphology, sediments and sea-ice concentration are important. Biological data considered for inclusion in the analysis included data on benthic invertebrates from the SCAR MarBIN network, and data on demersal finfish from the CCAMLR database.
The classification method developed at the 2006 Experts’ Workshop for a broad-scale pelagic bioregionalisation (Grant et al., 2006) was reviewed and endorsed by the 2007 Workshop. The same method was used as the basis for a broad-scale benthic bioregionalisation.
Statistical methods to generate predicted distributions for species based on physical data were also examined, and referred to CCAMLR Working Groups for further consideration.
4. Workshop results
The Workshop defined broad-scale bioregions for the pelagic and benthic1 systems (Figures 1 and 2). It also examined data that might be used in finer-scale classifications, and made recommendations on specific data sets that might be most appropriate for this purpose.
For the benthic system, geomorphic maps were also generated showing key features relevant to benthic bioregionalisation, including shelf banks, depressions, steep slope areas, canyons, sediment mounds, seamounts, fracture zones and abyssal plains areas (Figure 3 shows a map of geomorphic provinces for the western Antarctic Peninsula).
The Workshop agreed that in providing a framework for understanding the spatial structure and function of ecosystems, it is important to consider spatially defined ecosystem processes (such as oceanographic fronts, upwelling areas etc.) in addition to biodiversity pattern information (distribution of habitats and species). The Workshop developed maps representing ecological processes and other features that cannot easily be incorporated into a classification system, such as penguin foraging ranges (Figure 4) and habitat utilization by albatrosses.
The Workshop highlighted ‘systematic conservation planning’ (Margules & Pressey, 2000) as an appropriate process by which protected areas could be selected and designed. This provides a framework within which conservation objectives are set, spatial data are collated, and candidate areas are identified to meet the defined objectives. Reserve selection software can be used to assist with the selection of such candidate areas, based on available data. This approach has been used previously by South Africa to design a conservation plan for the Prince Edward Islands (Lombard et al., 2007), and it should be an important component of future work in other regions within the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR Areas.
5. Further work
The Workshop identified several topics on which further work could be undertaken:
    i) Refinements to the bioregionalisation results could be made in the future as methods are improved and further data are acquired and analysed;
    ii) Further fine-scale bioregionalisation studies could be undertaken in areas for which data are currently available;
    iii) The inclusion of ecological process and species data could also be considered, particularly in the context of systematic conservation planning. This may be particularly applicable at finer scales;
    iv) The identification of areas for protection to achieve conservation objectives should now be addressed.
6. Discussions at CCAMLR-XXVI
The Workshop Report was presented at CAMLR-XXVI (October 2007), and was endorsed by the Scientific Committee and the Commission. The Scientific Committee noted that the results from the Workshop are a primary foundation for understanding the biological and physical heterogeneity in the Southern Ocean, which can be used by CCAMLR and the CEP to inform spatial management. 
The Scientific Committee also endorsed the recommendations made by the Workshop on further work to be undertaken on this topic, including the use of the workshop results to identify candidate areas for protection. CCAMLR agreed that it should undertake further work during 2008 within the context of its Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM), given the existing focus within that Working Group on issues relating to Southern Ocean ecosystems and spatial management. 
7. Relevance of Workshop outcomes to the CEP
The results of the Bioregionalisation Workshop are sufficient to allow progress to now be made on developing practical approaches to the selection of protected areas. The results of this Workshop will assist in elaborating the “systematic environmental-geographic framework” required by Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, and complement the Environmental Domains classification under development for the terrestrial environment.
The outcomes of bioregionalisation analysis can be used as one of a range of tools to support decision-making on the selection of marine protected areas, which may include Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). In particular, the process of systematic conservation planning is a useful framework to facilitate the selection and design of representative protected areas, and could be used further by the CEP in the design of protected areas on land as well as in marine areas.
Bioregionalisation outcomes may also have relevance to other issues such as environmental monitoring and reporting, mapping of sensitive or vulnerable areas, identification of knowledge gaps and research requirements, and the improvement of management responses to, for example, the introduction of non-native species.
This work is of importance to the CEP in terms of developing a harmonised approach to the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty system. It has provided an opportunity to strengthen the links and opportunities for collaboration between SC-CAMLR and the CEP on the protection of the marine environment, and demonstrated the potential and importance of further joint efforts across the two bodies.
As highlighted through its input to the 2007 Brussels Workshop, the contributions of SCAR are also of critical importance to this process. Further involvement by SCAR in the collation of data, and provision of expertise would be of great value.
As noted at previous meetings, the CEP should continue to consider its own requirements and priorities for developing a scientific approach to the protection of the marine environment, in parallel with the work of CCAMLR on this topic (CEP IX Report, para 101). CEP Members are encouraged to continue working with their CCAMLR colleagues to use the outcomes of the 2007 Bioregionalisation Workshop in developing protected areas to achieve the conservation objectives of both CCAMLR and the CEP.


References
Lombard, A.T., Reyers, B., Schonegevel, L.Y., Cooper, J., Smith-Adao, L.B., Nel, D.C., Froneman, P.W., Ansorge, I.J., Bester, M.N., Tosh, C.A., Strauss, T., Akkers, T., Gon, O., Leslie, R.W. & Chown, S.L. 2007. Conserving pattern and process in the Southern Ocean: designing a Marine Protected Area for the Prince Edward Islands. Antarctic Science 19(1): 39-54.
Lynnes, A.S., K. Reid, J.P. Croxall and P.N. Trathan. 2002. Conflict or coexistence? Foraging distribution and competition for prey between Adélie and chinstrap penguins. Mar. Biol., 141: 1165–1174. 
Margules, C.R. & Pressey, R.L. 2000. Systematic conservation planning. Nature 405: 243-253.
SC-CAMLR-XXVI. 2007. Report of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee. CCAMLR, Hobart, Australia. 
SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11. 2007. Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean. Executive Summary and Report of the Workshop. 
SC-CAMLR-XXVI/BG/27. 2007. Antarctic seafloor geomorphology as a guide to benthic bioregionalisation. Submitted by Australia.
SC-CAMLR-XXVI/BG/28. 2007. Update of benthic bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean. Submitted by the Workshop Co-Conveners.







Figure 1 - The primary regionalisation from the 2006 Hobart Workshop.  The regionalisation uses four physical environment layers (depth, SST, silicate concentration, nitrate concentration) (from SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11, Figure 3).






Figure 2 - Benthic regionalisation using bathymetry, sea-floor temperature, slope, and sediment class data (from SC-CAMLR-XXVI/BG/28, Figure 8).














Figure 3 - Geomorphic provinces of the western Antarctic Peninsula. (from SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11, Figure 11).








Figure 4 - Relative foraging effort of chinstrap penguin colonies in the west Antarctic Peninsula; foraging effort is scaled to colony size; foraging range is taken from Lynnes et al. (2002). (from SC-CAMLR-XXVI/11, Figure 17).

