





Report on Exploration of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments: Environmental and Scientific Stewardship





Report on Exploration of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments: Environmental and Scientific Stewardship
Introduction
There is growing scientific and public interest in the exploration of subglacial aquatic environments in Antarctica and as such, increased attention is being paid to the environmental protocols for and management of these pristine areas.  At the request of the National Science Foundation (NSF) / United States Antarctic Program, the US National Research Council1 convened a multinational committee of polar and non-polar scientists to develop a set of environmental protection standards for exploration of subglacial lake environments in Antarctica.  Specifically, the committee was asked to: 1) define acceptable levels of contamination for equipment entering subglacial aquatic environments; 2) develop a sound scientific basis for contamination standards; and 3) recommend the next steps for defining an overall exploration strategy.  The committee sought international input as it developed a rationale for environmental standards.  The committee hopes that its report will generate a broad, international discussion about environmental stewardship during the study and exploration of subglacial aquatic environments. 
This paper outlines the process and recommendations of the committee’s work including its recommendations.  The full committee report is available as a bound hard copy or can be viewed online at http://lab.nap.edu/nap-cgi/discover.cgi?term=subglacial%20aquatic&restric=NAP.   
The US believes the committee’s report provides a firm basis for further discussion on the environmental protection standards for sampling of subglacial aquatic environments.  The US has submitted this paper to encourage discussion within the CEP.  The US feels the report’s implications for environmental stewardship warrant further attention and consideration within the ATCM.  
Sampling Discussion
While initially charged with examining sampling of subglacial lakes, the committee broadened its discussion to “subglacial aquatic environments.”  Given the interconnectivity of subglacial lakes with rivers and streams beneath ice sheets, the committee noted that alteration to or contamination of a single lake or stream could alter or contaminate others in the system.  With this scope established, the committee adopted the premise that until there are definitive data concerning the absence of microbial populations, it should be assumed that microbial life in subglacial lakes exists.  In its discussions, the committee addressed the physical and biological environment of subglacial aquatic environments, current drilling and sampling techniques, and issues of Antarctic governance.  
When defining levels of “cleanliness” for equipment, the committee addressed both biological and non-biological contamination.  Regarding biological contamination, the committee noted that microbes naturally occurring in the ice sheet as well as microbes on the drill may be introduced into lakes during drilling.  However, microbes from drilling activities that do not naturally occur in the ice sheet would likely not be able to survive in the subglacial aquatic environments and overall impact on lake communities is anticipated to be low.  In an effort to reduce the likelihood of microbial contamination of these environments, the committee report recommends protocols and technologies, including hot water drilling and sterile drilling fluids, to minimize microbial introductions.
The committee addressed concerns of non-biological contamination including chemical contamination and the introduction of deployable equipment.  It was recognized that the drilling fluids required to enter these environments at in situ temperatures and pressures could potentially become contaminants. The committee noted the need for technological developments in drilling fluid compositions to meet environmental protection standards.  
The committee recommends that microbial contamination of objects entering a subglacial aquatic environment not exceed the concentration of existing microbes in the basal glacial ice and suggests that current drilling projects evaluate the appropriateness of this standard.  The committee concluded that drilling in conjunction with sampling procedures will inevitably introduce chemical contaminants into subglacial aquatic environments and that steps should be taken to evaluate and ensure that these activities have only a minor and/or transitory impact on the environment.  
Committee Recommendations
In its report, the committee proposes a set of recommendations and a decision tree for management procedures, environmental stewardship, and review of sampling plans.  To summarize, the committee recommends the following steps to manage resources while allowing the exploration and sampling of subglacial aquatic environments to occur:
    • Develop a consensus-based international plan for exploration.  
The NSF should work with U.S. representatives to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to involve those nations interested in developing a consensus-based management plan for the scientific exploration of subglacial aquatic environments.  
    • Characterize subglacial aquatic environments with remote sensing.
Interested parties should immediately begin to obtain remote sensing data to characterize a wide range of subglacial aquatic environments.  Data and samples should be obtained from subglacial aquatic environments as soon as practicable to guide future environmental stewardship, scientific investigations, and technological developments. 
    • Establish protected areas.  
As soon as adequate survey data have been gathered, subglacial aquatic environments intended for research should be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas to ensure that all scientific activities are managed within an agreed international plan that is fully documented.  Certain exemplar pristine subglacial environments should remain untouched for long-term conservation purposes. 
    • Identify and assess key exploration locations.  
The following steps should be taken to guide decisions about which subglacial aquatic environments should be studied in order to gain maximum scientific benefit with minimal environmental impact: (1) assemble continent-scale radio-echo sounding data in order to identify subglacial aquatic environments and perform detailed radio-echo sounding of known lakes; (2) identify regions of likely high basal melt-rate; (3) construct a hydrologic map of the subglacial drainage system for each catchment; (4) identify potential target environments for sampling based on the subglacial drainage system; (5) assess the likelihood of attaining scientific objectives based on how representative the aquatic environment is of other lakes and settings, accessibility, and the constraints of logistics and cost. 
    • Establish acceptable levels of biological contamination. 
Drilling in conjunction with sampling procedures will inevitably introduce microorganisms into subglacial aquatic environments.  The microbial contamination of the environment should not exceed the minimum concentration of existing microbes in the basal glacial ice.  Based on current data, the maximum recommended concentration is 100 cells / mL.  Sampling at currently developing drilling locations should be used to evaluate biological contamination standards. 
    • Establish acceptable levels of non-biological contamination.  
The concentrations of chemical contaminants entering a subglacial lake should be documented and the total amount added to these aquatic environments should not be expected to change the measurable chemical properties of the environment.  Instruments such as monitoring equipment may be introduced for scientific purposes.  Use of toxic and biodegradable materials as well as non-miscible substances should be avoided.  
    • Continue research and development.  
Research and development should be conducted on: methods to reduce microbial contamination throughout the drilling, sampling, and monitoring processes; methods to determine the background levels of microbes in glacial ice and lake water; and development of sampling and monitoring instruments small enough to fit through the drilling hole.  Multinational projects should be encouraged in the study of subglacial aquatic environments.  All projects aiming to penetrate into a subglacial lake or stream should be required to undertake a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE). 
Conclusions of the Committee
The committee notes that many fundamental questions about subglacial aquatic environments can only be answered by drilling to and entering these environments to sample the water, particulates, and sediments.   Accordingly, the management of subglacial aquatic environments requires thoughtful environmental stewardship while allowing for carefully-planned field research.  As the study and exploration of subglacial environments evolves, the initial methods and protocols recommended in this report will need further development, revision, and refinement.  The committee hopes this report will form the basis for continuing international discussions on how best to approach future study and exploration of subglacial aquatic environments.
Future Steps
The US presents this summary of the committee’s report to provide points for consideration with regard to the exploration and sampling of subglacial aquatic environments.  The US looks forward to broadening this discussion in the CEP in light of the additional expertise that members of the CEP can provide.  The US hopes that such discussion will provide additional guidance to ensure that scientific research conducted in subglacial aquatic environments is consistent with environmental stewardship goals.  

