





Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) Report to XXXI ATCM




Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) Report to XXXI ATCM
1. What is AFoPS? (for further details see www.afops.org)
AFoPS, the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences, was established in May 2004 when the three Directors-General of the polar research institutes of China, Japan, and South Korea gathered in Shanghai. The Director-General of the Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), Dr. Yeadong Kim, chaired AFoPS until 2006, followed by Dr. Yoshiyuki Fujii, the Director-General of the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR). India and Malaysia joined AFoPS, and delegates from the five countries gathered for the first time at the VIth Delegates Meeting in Tokyo in February last year. In September 2007, scientists from Indonesia and Thailand were invited as observers to the delegates meeting in Kuala Lumpur.
Heads of the national polar or Antarctic research institutes of each member country act as national representatives in AFoPS. There are five working groups: Earth Science (ES), Life Science (LS), Planetary Science (PS), Engineering & Logistics (E&L), and Public Relations & Data Management (P&D). Workshops have been held by the working groups in specific research fields like glaciology.
2. AFoPS Activities
2.1 	VIIth Delegates Meeting in Kuala Lumpur, 2007
The VIIth AFoPS Delegates Meeting was held on 10 and 11 September 2007 at the Corus Hotel in Kuala Lumpur, hosted by the Malaysian Antarctic Research Centre (Figure 1). A total of 30 delegates from four AFoPS countries, China, Japan, South Korea, and Malaysia, and two invited countries, Indonesia and Thailand, participated in the meeting. A new committee member list was distributed, and new WG chairs were proposed by the Secretariat as Dr. Shiraishi for WG-ES, Dr. Shin for WG-LS, Mr. Sun for WG-E&L, and Dr. Motoyoshi for WG-P&D, and were agreed on by all participants.
The member countries introduced polar research plans, including IPY 2007–2008 programs. China introduced the 24th Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition program, including the Prydz Bay, Amery Ice Shelf, and Dome A (PANDA) project; construction work; international cooperation; and education and outreach activities. Plans to rebuild the Great Wall and Zhongshan stations and the Chinese icebreaker Xuelong were also reported. Japan presented an overview and future plans for Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions (JARE 49–51 for 2007–2010), including the Japanese-Swedish Antarctic Expedition traverse in 2007–2008, geological research in Dronning Maud Land, and research cruises to the Southern Ocean by the R/V Umitaka-maru. A transportation plan for JARE 50 (2008–2009) with the Australian Antarctic Division’s R/V Aurora Australis was also introduced, as well as features of the new Japanese icebreaker under construction. South Korea introduced the history, future, and major activities of the Korean Polar Research Institute in the Antarctic and the Arctic, and also reported on the outreach activity of the “Pole to Pole Korea Campaign.”
Malaysia reported on current research projects and selected results in polar areas, such as “Observational and Simulated Analysis of a Severe Windstorm in Mid May 2004” and “Biodiversity and Bioactive Compounds in Antarctic and Arctic Bacteria.” The programs introduced include “Biological and Functional Diversity of Prokaryote Communities in Ecologically Distinct Polar Environments” supported by BAS, KOPRI, AAD, and NCAOR; “Geological and Biological Responses to Climate and Sea-level Changes in Antarctica”; “Model Development and Application of Microwave Remote Sensing in Antarctica”; and “Interhemispheric and Joint Atmospheric Studies Between Polar (Antarctic-Arctic) Regions,” related to ICESTAR/SCAR and IHY/IPY programs.
Scientists invited from Indonesia introduced the development of the Indonesian Antarctic Research Program under the Australian Program since 1996 and its future with a plan to establish the Indonesian Antarctic Division. They prioritized multidisciplinary programs like “Ice, Sea, Atmosphere, and Climate Interaction” and “The Southern Ocean Ecosystem” and expressed the intention of Indonesia to collaborate with foreign research institutions through AFoPS. A scientist from Thailand introduced his participation in JARE 46 in the 2004–2005 summer season for marine ecological research as the first national Antarctic program of the Thai National Science and Technology Development Agency. He also expressed interest in polar research from academic communities in universities and the Government of Thailand.
Frameworks for collaborative research were discussed, and a session titled “Recent Advances in Polar Sciences and Global Warming” for the Asia-Oceania Geosciences Society (AOGS) was proposed to be held in South Korea in mid June 2008, with conveners to be from AFoPS countries. Japan introduced an NIPR program to invite Asian scientists to work on polar sciences and presented application details. Applicants are requested to attach a letter of recommendation from a national representative of AFoPS. After the meeting, participants were invited to the Malaysian Antarctic Research Centre and biology laboratories working on Antarctic microorganisms at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur.


Figure 1 - Participants in the VIIth AFoPS Delegates Meeting in Kuala Lumpur on 10 and 11 September 2007.

2.2 	VIIIth Delegates Meeting in Tokyo, 2008
The VIIIth AFoPS Delegates Meeting was held on 13 and 14 March 2008 at the National Museum of Nature and Science in Tokyo, hosted by the National Institute of Polar Research (Fig. 2). A total of 25 delegates from the five AFoPS countries, China, India, Japan, South Korea, and Malaysia, and one invited country, Thailand, participated in the meeting.
Five AFoPS countries introduced activities and plans on polar research that included IPY programs. China introduced the Chinese Polar Program for 2007–2008, including scientific programs, logistic programs, international cooperation, and outreach programs relating to IPY. The completion of upgrading the R/V Xuelong and construction of a new wharf for the Polar Research Institute of China in Shanghai were also reported. The Chinese Arctic cruise plan for the coming summer and the CHINARE inland ice-core drilling project were introduced along with a future plan to construct the Dome A station and conduct ice-core drilling.
India introduced the first Indian Arctic Expedition, carried out last year, and also presented “Recent Climate Change in Antarctica: Ice Core Perspectives,” which explained the current status of Indian ice-core studies and proposed the establishment and implementation of an ice-core project among AFoPS countries in a way similar to EPICA.
Japan outlined the JARE 48 winter and JARE 49 summer programs, including “Stratospheric Ozone Observation in 2007–2008,” “the Japanese-Swedish Antarctic Expedition traverse,” “Geological Survey in the Sør Rondane Mountains in Dronning Maud Land,” “Ecological Observation of Antarctic Lakes,” and “Completion of a Four-year Cleanup Campaign in the Syowa Station Area.” The new Japanese icebreaker Shirase was also introduced, as well as collaboration with the Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition (ANARE) for the next season’s JARE. The new Shirase was reported as planned to launch in April 2008 and to start her voyage to Antarctica with the 2009–2010 season. Research in the Arctic was introduced, including monitoring observations for atmospheric sciences at Ny-Ålesund, joint observation in Iceland, and ISCAT radar observation. The IPY 2007–2008 MERGE program was introduced along with the outreach activity campaign called “Bring School Students’ Ideas to the Arctic and the Antarctic,” in which JARE members will carry out the experiment proposed by students that wins first prize.
South Korea introduced activities carried out by the Korean Antarctic Research Program, including a meteorite expedition. It also presented construction and cruise plans for a new South Korean icebreaker, the Araon, as well as the remodeling of King Sejong Station. The International Symposium on Polar Sciences, to be held in South Korea in September 2008, was announced. A South Korean research project focused on the marine ecosystem in the Southern Ocean was introduced, and future cooperation among AFoPS countries in this research area was proposed.
Malaysia introduced scientific expedition activities for the 2007–2008 season in the Arctic and the Antarctic, and introduced plans for biological research projects that include international collaboration and physical research projects that include remote sensing.
Regarding collaboration among AFoPS countries, views were exchanged on the future AOGS in relation to AFoPS, and it was agreed that the exchange would continue on an e-mail basis. The exchange of personnel was reported for a training course for Antarctic expedition members among Japan, China, and South Korea. Some announcements were made on the proposal for the IASC reformation plan, the annual workshop for Antarctic medical research and medicine to be held on 23 August 2009 at NIPR in Tokyo, and the Antarctic Treaty Summit to be held in Washington, D.C., in late 2009. The next AFoPS Delegates Meeting will be held in October at the kind invitation of the South Korean Polar Research Institute.
 

Figure 2 - Participants in the VIIIth AFoPS Delegates Meeting in Tokyo on 13 and 14 February 2008.

2.3 	Other Related Activities
The NIPR started a program to invite Asian scientists in polar sciences to the NIPR for two weeks to three months to foster collaborative research with NIPR scientists. Applicants should be faculty staff and be nominated by a national representative among the AFoPS countries. A few successful applicants are selected each year to receive international travel and accommodation expenses to visit and conduct research at the NIPR. In FY 2007 a marine biologist from Chulalongkorn University in Thailand was invited to NIPR for about two weeks for taxonomical study of Antarctic marine benthic invertebrates, collected by a Thai scientist who participated in JARE 46. Two applications by glaciologists from China and India have been approved so far for stays of about three weeks and two months respectively in 2008.

