





Ross Sea Heritage Conservation Project: Conservation of Shackleton’s Hut, Cape Royds, ASPA 157




Ross Sea Heritage Conservation Project: Conservation of Shackleton’s Hut, Cape Royds, ASPA 157
Information Paper Submitted by New Zealand
Purpose
This paper provides information on the Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project the Antarctic Heritage Trust is undertaking at the Antarctic historic sites on Ross Island.  These include the bases left by Captain Scott and Ernest Shackleton and the first building on the continent.  New Zealand is aware of the high level of interest of other Parties in these historic sites.  Comments are invited from any Party with an interest in the conservation of Antarctica’s human heritage.
Background
The Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project has been conceived, managed and funded by the Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT), a New Zealand not-for-profit organisation, which is carrying out the conservation work of the historic sites in the Ross Sea region, in accordance with the management plans adopted by the ATCM.  Extensive logistical support has been provided by Antarctica New Zealand.  Funding support to date has come from the governments of New Zealand, Britain, Norway and Ireland, along with various international agencies, including the Getty Foundation, the Garfield Weston Foundation and the American Express Foundation, as well as individual philanthropists and donors.
Update
Each of the Ross Sea explorers’ historic bases has been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (table 1).
Table 1.  List of Historic Explorers’ bases in the Ross Sea region
Expedition
Site
ASPA
Adopted by
Built January 1911 by the British Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition of 1910-1913, led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott, RN.  It was also used by the Ross Sea party of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914-1917.
Cape Evans, Ross Island
155
Measure 2 (1997)
Built in February 1908 by the British Antarctic (Nimrod) Expedition of 1907-1909, led by Sir Ernest Shackleton.  It was also periodically used by the Ross Sea Party of Shackleton's Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914-1917. 
Cape Royds, Ross Island
157
Measure 1 (1998)
Built in February 1902 during the National Antarctic (Discovery) Expedition of 1901-1904, led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott.  It was also used by Sir Ernest Shackleton during the 1907-1909 British Antarctic Expedition and later by his stranded Ross Sea Party during the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914-1917. 
Hut Point, Ross Island
158
Measure 1 (1998)

There are three main structures in the Area.  Two built in February 1899 during the British Antarctic (Southern Cross) Expedition, led by C.E. Borchgrevink (1898-1900), were used for the first winter spent on the Antarctic continent.  Scott’s Northern Party hut is situated 30 metres to the north of Borchgrevink's hut.  It consists of the collapsing remains of a third hut built in February 1911 for the Northern Party led by V.L.A. Campbell of R.F. Scott's British Antarctic (Terra Nova) Expedition (1910-1913), which wintered there in 1911. 
Cape Adare
159
Measure 1 (1998)

The planning for the Ross Sea Heritage Restoration Project has been completed.  Detailed conservation plans for Captain Scott’s two expedition bases, Ernest Shackleton’s only Antarctic base and Borchgrevink’s base, the first buildings on the continent, have been prepared.
The sites have been at risk of loss and are listed by the United States based World Monuments Fund in their Watch List of the World’s 100 Most Endangered Sites.
Now in the centenary of Ernest Shackleton’s Nimrod expedition, a three year programme of extensive conservation of Shackleton’s hut (ASPA 157) is nearing completion.  This has included conservation of the building fabric itself and the extensive artefact collection on site. 
The building conservation has included three summer seasons of conservation of the building fabric.  The project has totalled 119 days by teams of heritage carpenters onsite drawn from New Zealand, Britain, Australia and Canada.  The work has included containing environmental threats posed by decaying stores on site, repairing and overlaying the roof to match the original material, repairs to external cladding, removing large quantities of ice from under 90% of the building, installing a waterproof membrane around the building and replacing modern alterations to the building with timbers species consistent with the original site in keeping with ICOMOS1 heritage principles. 
 In a world first for heritage conservation in polar climates, the artefact conservation programme has seen 4100 objects conserved by professionals in Antarctica.  A purpose built mobile conservation laboratory was built and staffed over three Antarctic winters and summers by a total of fifteen professionally qualified conservators from the international heritage community. This has included conservators from New Zealand, Australia, Britain, United States and Canada.
The conservation work has, and continues to be, profiled and blogged on the high profile Natural History Museum, London site www.nhm.ac.uk/antarctica-blog/.  It has drawn over a third of a million visits from people interested in this programme of conservation.
Shackleton’s expedition base is accessible virtually via the Antarctic Heritage Trust’s website www.nzaht.org
The focus of Antarctic Heritage Trust’s work now is to conserve Captain Scott’s last expedition base at Cape Evans in time for its upcoming centenary and it is fundraising internationally for the cause.
Images
A series of photos from the restoration work at Cape Royds is attached.


Useful Websites
AHT website
www.nzaht.org 
NZ and UK AHT shared website
www.heritage-antarctica.org 
AHT website dedicated to polar explorer Carsten Borchgrevink
www.norwaysforgottenexplorer.org 
Antarctica New Zealand
www.antarcticanz.govt.nz 
Natural History Museum blog written by AHT staff in Antarctica
www.nhm.ac.uk/antarctica-blog/ 
Further information
Further information may be obtained from:
Executive Director
Antarctic Heritage Trust
Private Bag 4745
Christchurch, New Zealand
Email: n.watson@nzaht.org

