





Indian IPY Activities





Indian IPY Activities

As the IPY completes one year successfully, India has contributed strongly to its scientific & outreach program that will continue into 2008-09 & beyond. National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR, under the Ministry of Earth Sciences) is the national coordinating agency and has well defined scientific & outreach activities that seek to educate school children, general public & scientific community about the challenges & need of the polar research. 
Scientific Programme
Two scientific projects have been endorsed by the ICSU/WMO Joint Committee, which are Project id. 70 and Project id. 129: 
    • Project id. 70: Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica (short title: Upper-ocean characteristics between Africa and Antarctica) by Dr. A. Luis, National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research, Goa.

It envisages profiling of density structure in the upper ocean by launching expendable CTD probes from a cruising ship between South Africa and Antarctica (18-76°E). The data collection campaign for the project, under the umbrella of Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (CASO), a strategy for climate research for the IPY, started in January 2007 and shall be continued during austral summer of 2008-09. The hydrographic data so collected have been analyzed for quantifying the changes in the vertical density structure by comparing with historical data. Using T-S diagrams water mass characterizations have been carried out for every 5 degree latitude interval. In an attempt to understand the circulation, geostrophic currents and Ekman components estimated from ship's wind observations have been merged to obtain the total zonal transport along the near-meridional sections. 

    • Project id. 129: Land Based Anthropogenic Impact of Coarse Particles on Antarctic Shelf (short title: Aerosol Impact on Antarctica) by Dr. A. Tiwari, National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research, Goa.
This study aims to collect the samples on the ship course starting from Goa (India) to the India bay at Antarctica (70°45.94'S and 11°44.13'E) and further en route to the site of India’s third station at Larsemann Hills (69°24'S and 76°10'E). For aerosol observations necessary instrument like High Volume Sample, Aerosol Spectrometer, Aethalometer, Quartz Crystal Cascade Impactor, Sun Photometer were installed onboard expedition ship MV Emerald Sea. Automatic Weather Station was also installed onboard to understand the wind effect on transport of aerosol. Experiment was carried over Arabian Sea to Southern Ocean and India Bay in Antarctica. Further observations were extended at Maitri station. 
Besides above-mentioned endorsed research proposals the following project will also contribute to the IPY theme:
    • Study of the short-term Holocene climate variability’s in Antarctica and the Southern latitudes utilizing sediment cores from the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern ocean, the cores from the periglacial lakes and the shallow ice-cores from Antarctica  by scientists of National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research and other participating organizations such as Birbal Sahni Institute of Paleobotany, Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Geological Survey of India, Annamalai University, Center for Cellular Microbiology etc. 

This proposed project seeks to illuminate rapid decadal to millennial scale climate changes at high latitudes by employing high-resolution studies on the ice cores and lake sediment cores from Antarctica and marine sediment cores from the Southern Ocean. 
Following papers & special volumes in various scientific journals have been published to further dispense the information regarding IPY themes:
    1. Special issue of Indian Journal of Marine Science entitled “Antarctic & Southern Ocean – Physical Processes”, edited by N. Khare, R. Ravindra and B. Huang published in March 2008.
    2. Khare, N. (2007), The International Polar Year (2007-2009): An impetus to polar research. Current Science, 93, pp. 449.
    3. Rasik Ravindra and Manish Tiwari. International Polar Year (2007-2008). Hill Geographer (in the press).
    4. Special section in Current Science that contains several scientific papers on Indian Antarctic studies is being published.
    5. Another issue of Indian Journal of Marine Science that is entitled “Antarctic & Southern Ocean – Geoscientific & Biological Studies”, edited by N. Khare, R. Ravindra and S.R. Rintoul (in the press).
Outreach Programme
NCAOR is actively involved in the outreach activities related to IPY focusing on generating awareness in general public about the causes & impact of climate change with reference to Polar Regions. NCAOR had sponsored the visit of two students to Antarctica during the 25th Indian Antarctic Expedition (IAE) under the “Students Participation Programme”. A series of lectures were delivered by one of them at more than twenty schools & colleges in the rural & suburban areas of Maharashtra regarding the wonders of Antarctica. Students from several schools and colleges and scientists/visitors from various Indian institutes/foreign countries have visited NCAOR & its labs, especially ice core laboratory, to get firsthand experience of polar research. NCAOR has also collaborated with WWF-India (World Wide Fund for Nature) for carrying out the outreach activities to schools throughout the vast expanses of India. In this regard a schedule of events was released on 1st March 2007, which includes competitions such as poster & model making, stamp designing, petition writing etc. for school children that will be held during 2007-2009. The first competition, poster making & slogan writing, was held at New Delhi on April 10, 2007 and prizes were distributed by the H'ble Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences on the Earth Day in 2007. The winners of these competitions were felicitated & invited for launching of the XXVII Indian Antarctic Expedition at Goa on 5th December 2007. 

Under the aegis of IPY 2007-2008, a 14 year old Indian student – Sh. Omar Beg, from Father Agnel School, New Delhi was selected by Student On Ice, for their annual Arctic expedition that was held from August 2nd to 17th, 2007. NCAOR has supplied audio-visual & printed material on polar science to Nehru Science Centre for their exhibitions on the theme “The Story of Poles”, which was inaugurated on 2nd November 2007 by Director, NCAOR. The exhibition consisted of graphical panels, 3D interactive exhibits, animations, charts, 3D models, computer kiosks etc. NCAOR also participated & financially supported the “4th Science-Expo” organized by Nehru Science Centre at Mumbai from 11-15 January 2008 and “Science Fiesta – 2008” organized by Goa Science Centre at Panji, Goa from 26-28 February 2008. Lectures were delivered by NCAOR scientists at both the exhibitions that highlighted the effort of Indian scientists in unraveling the mysteries of the past using ice cores and other anthropogenic problems faced by Antarctic environment. 

Moreover, under the "Popular Book Series" initiative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, a book entitled "Story of Antarctica" is under publication by NCAOR. Similar books on "Story of the Oceans" and "Glaciers - The Rivers of Ice" have already been published & distributed to students in different states of India. Financial sponsorship has been extended to the “Geographical Society of the Northeast Hill Region”, India for popularizing polar science and other aims of IPY to general public in Northeastern states. 


