





Report on scientific studies in the Antarctic at the second stage of the Subprogram “Study and research of the Antarctic” in 2003-2007 





Report on scientific studies in the Antarctic at the second stage of the Subprogram “Study and research of the Antarctic” in 2003-2007
The main directions of Russian studies and operations in the Antarctic are formulated in the subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” of the Target Federal Program “World Ocean”. During the period 2003-2007, work was carried out for fulfilling the second stage of this subprogram. The aims and goals of scientific studies at this stage were generalized in 14 projects that are being carried out on the basis of special full-scale experiments undertaken by the Russian Antarctic Expedition for the last few years in the Antarctic or using the archived materials of national and foreign studies carried out in this region in the past. Specialists of 27 research institutes, scientific-production organizations and universities of Russia participate in these projects representing the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, Ministry for Natural Resources of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Agriculture, Ministry for Transport of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Defense of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Education and Science of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and the Russian Academy of Science. 
Based on the analysis of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological, geophysical, biological and geological data collected during the 48th – 52nd RAE and in the previous Antarctic expeditions, results of mathematical modeling and analysis of satellite information, studies of the South Polar area were carried out. The most important results are as follows:
    1) An archive of meteorological and upper-air information for the South Polar area, the databases on ice situation in the marginal Antarctic Seas and an archive of global climatic fields for the 20th and 21st centuries for different model scenarios were created. The database on key parameters of the climatic system of the Antarctic for the period of instrumental meteorological measurements was prepared. Estimates of modern tendencies of climate changes in the surface layer, in the troposphere and stratosphere of the Antarctic from experimental data taking into account statistical significance and stability of the trends are given. Estimates of consistency of the atmospheric processes in the Earth’s polar areas and materials for the generalized report on climate changes in the Antarctic in the 21st century were prepared.
    2) Data of the expedition oceanographic studies in the Commonwealth and Lazarev Seas and at transect between Africa and Antarctica were processed. Estimates of parameters of the spatial-temporal variability of the Antarctic slope front from data of observations in the Commonwealth Sea were derived. The AARI numerical model of the global ocean circulation was evolved. Estimates of the seasonal and interannual variability of the parameters of currents and ice thickness, ice concentration and drift in the Southern Ocean are given. The characteristics of water exchange between the oceans were determined on the basis of general water circulation models. A morphological structure of Antarctic sea ice of the Southern Ocean using satellite and shipborne observations was described. 
    3) Data of the new ice core studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok, data of geophysical observations in the borehole 5G-1 and data of radio-echo sounding, seismic and glaciological studies in the northern part of Lake Vostok were analyzed. A layout of the updated chart of ice sheet thickness of Lake Vostok at the scale of 1:1 000 000 was created. Estimates of glaciation parameters of the key regions of the marginal zone of East Antarctica during the last glacial maximum were derived. A method of decontamination of the ice samples for biological studies was developed.
    4) Quantitative characteristics of the modern continental ice discharge and estimates of accumulation within the ice catchment basins were derived. The variability of Antarctica coastline was estimated and scenarios of the evolution of glaciers of the marginal zone of Antarctica and Sub-Antarctica were developed. Estimates of the dynamics of mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet during the second part of the 20th century were performed.
    5) A methodology of monitoring the state of the magnetosphere from PC index data for a solar activity cycle (1995 - 2005) was devised. An assessment of channels of solar activity impact on the polar atmosphere was performed. Numerical modeling of a three-dimensional response of the atmospheric chemistry (ozone and other trace gases), wind and temperature in the Earth’s polar regions to the Sun’s proton flare was carried out. A numerical model of the ionic layer in the stratosphere was constructed. Quantitative estimates of the impact of an interplanetary electric field on the atmospheric processes in the winter Antarctic were given.
    6) An analysis of solar and space sources of impulse signals was performed. An assessment of the effects of impulse space-physical emission in the lower atmosphere was given. The software-hardware provision of impulse emission monitoring was created.
    7) An assessment of the variability of total ozone concentration during the period of the Antarctic ozone anomaly in 2003 - 2007 was made. A complex of equipment for measurements of the Н2О, СО2, СН4, СО and N2О concentrations in the atmosphere at Novolazarevskaya station was prepared. An assimilation model of gas composition of the Antarctic atmosphere was updated taking into account the processes of formation and evolution of polar stratospheric clouds. The database of ground and satellite measurements of ozone and other greenhouse gases in the Antarctic atmosphere was set up. 
    8) Archives of the hourly sums of total radiation and spectral aerosol thicknesses of the atmosphere in Antarctica from 1983 up to present were prepared. Data of measurements of semi-spherical and zonal spectral density distributions of the energy brightness of the atmosphere and cloudiness at the range of 0.35-2.9 µm under different meteorological conditions at Novolazarevskaya station were processed. The radiation models of the state of the atmosphere and cloudiness at the range intervals of 3-13 µm from data of measurements in the Antarctic were developed. A data archive of solar radiation measurements at the Russian Antarctic stations for the entire observation period 1956 to 2006 was established 
    9) A project of electronic-reference manual on the Antarctic environment and a project of the automated work place of investigator-hydrologist at the Antarctic station were prepared. A working variant of the “Antarctic geo-information system (GIS)” was created.
    10) New data on the species composition of some groups of animals and plants, marine and terrestrial ecosystems, including the taxonomic lists by individual groups of biota by the Antarctic regions were analyzed. The descriptions of the new species for science from different groups of flora and fauna and an analysis of the structure of benthic pelagic community of the Weddell Sea were given. A quantitative analysis of zooplankton in Ardley Bay (in the vicinity of Bellingshausen station) was performed from the materials of full-scale year-round investigations. Data of monitoring of a colony of emperor penguins of Haswell Island were processed. Data of molecular-genetic and biochemical studies of Antarctic lichens were analyzed. A dependence of micro-biota on the character and manifestation of natural and anthropogenic loads was investigated. The information-retrieval system and a database on the Antarctic biota were set up. 
    11) An assessment of ecology of sea ice zone of the Antarctic was performed. Data on biodiversity of coastal and pelagic ice were collected and analyzed. A hydrochemical analysis of the collected sea ice and water samples and the taxonomic analysis of the species composition of biota of coastal sea ice were conducted. Estimates of the numbers and biomass of ice biota, plankton collections and intensity of fluorescence in water and sea ice samples were carried out.
    12) Charts of the anomalous magnetic and gravity fields of the continental margin of the Wilkes Land were prepared. A tectonic scheme of the Earth’s crust structure of the Mac Robertson Land and the Princess Elisabeth Land and a scheme of the geological structure of the Adelie Land were created. Models and paleotectonic reconstructions reflecting the structure, geo-dynamics and history of development of the Antarctic lithosphere were constructed. Charts of the sub-glacial relief and thickness of the glacial strata of the central part of East Antarctica and a map of the sedimentary mantle thickness of the Southern Ocean were constructed. 
    13) A database of magnetometric and gravimetry data on East Antarctica in the sector of 50–900 E was created. The geological maps of the areas of the Yamato and Belgica Mountains and the Ritscher Upland were prepared. A map of anomalous magnetic field and a scheme of tectonic structure of the Princess Elisabeth Land were constructed. 
The results obtained in 2003-2007 have made a significant contribution to achieving the fundamental objective of the subprogram – determining the past and current and projecting the future changes in the Antarctic natural environment. 

