





Report on the Research Expedition of the Czech Geological Survey to Antarctica, 2008






Report on the Research Expedition of the Czech Geological Survey to Antarctica, 2008

Participants: 
Nick Halls, Vojtěch Janoušek, Ondrej Lexa, Bedřich Mlčoch, Daniel Nývlt, Václav Pavel, Zdeněk Venera, Radek Vodrážka, Jiří Žák

Duration: 
3.1.2008-15.3.2008

Terms of Reference:
The expedition organised by the Czech Geological Survey to the area of  James Ross Island, the adjacent part of the Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula and Seymour Island was carried out as a part of the research project (VaV MZP SPII 1a9/23/07) financed by the Czech Ministry of the Environment Contribution of the Czech Republic to study of the ozone layer and UV radiation in Antarctica, palaeoclimate and palaeogeographic reconstruction of the selected area in Antarctica and related geological research and mapping, approved for 2007-2011 and headed by P. Mixa. 

The expedition consisted of 4 activities:
    1. R. Vodrážka carried out a palaeontological research at Seymour Island.
    2. B. Mlčoch and D. Nývlt finished geological mapping at scale of 1:25.000 of the northern part of James Ross Island.
    3. Z. Venera, O. Lexa, V. Janoušek, J. Žák and N. Halls worked on the Trinity Peninsula on structural, tectonic and petrological research in the Permian and Mesozoic rocks.
    4. V. Pavel studied population dynamics and breeding biology of birds around the Czech Antarctic Station of Johann Gregor Mendel (CAS JGM), James Ross Island with regard to implications for protection of local avian populations.

Course of the expedition:
The participants arrived on 4/01/2008 to Rio Gallegos, Argentina where they waited till 17/01/2008 for air transportation to Marambio Base, Seymour Island. R. Vodrážka stayed at the Base until the end of the expedition. The rest of the party continued 19/01/2008 with the help of Argentinian Air Force helicopters to CAS JGM. In two days the station was prepared for a regular operation and field work was launched.
B. Mlčoch and D. Nývlt continued with geological mapping of Mesozoic sediments and Cenozoic volcanics around Brandy Bay, Whisky Bay and Santa Martha which was the remaining area to complete the geological map of the north of JRI at scale 1:25.000. By means of  stationary GPS D. Nývlt verified in the field spatial data for a newly produced topographic map at scale 1: 25.000. Their work terminated on 27/02/2008.

During January and February 2008 V. Pavel monitoring the coast around CAS JGM, approx. 21 km from Brandy Bay around Cape Lachman to Santa Martha Cove) observed 9 species of birds and 1 mammal species: South Polar Skua (Catharacta maccormicki), Antarctic Tern (Sterna vittata), Kelp Gull (Larus dominicanus), Adélie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), Gentoo Penguin (Pygosceli papua), Southern Giant Petrel (Macronectes giganteus), Lesser Snow Petrel (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson’s Storm-petrel  (Oceanites oceanicus), Imperial Shag (Phalacrocorax atriceps) and Weddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddellii). Based on regular observations of the area, quantities of animals present were estimated. Apart from the N coast of JRI, following species were found on the Camp Hill coast, Trinity Penisula: Chinstrap Penguin(Pygoscelis antarctica), Southern Elephant Seal (Mirounga leonina) and Crabeater Seal (Lobodon carcinophagus).

The group of Z. Venera, O. Lexa, V. Janoušek, J. Žák and N. Halls worked on three sites on the Trinity Peninsula. The coast of Camp Hill and Crystal Hill was accessed by boats and to Pitt Point the party was transported by Argentinian Air Force helicopters. At these sites structural and petrological research was carried out. They described and sampled about 60 sites for microstructural study, geochemical analyses and radiogenic dating. Particularly valuable observations were made at outcrops along the coast which were deglaciated only very recently, probably in the last decades. The studied areas are composed of the Permian to Triassic Trinity Peninsula Group rocks which underwent very low-grade metamorphism and polyphase deformation. A significant part of the Peninsula is affected by the activity of the Antarctic Peninsula Batholith, beginning at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary, culminating in the Cretaceous and diminishing until recently with scarce volcanic phenomena. Results of this  field work will bring a new light on the tectonic evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula in relation to opening of the James Ross backarc basin.
The team finished its work on 09/02/2008 and travelled back again via Marambio Base to Rio Gallegos. During the expedition the impact on the environment was minimised and no damages to the environment were made.

Finally, we would like to express our high appreciation of the assistance and hospitability provided to us by the staff of the Dirección Nacional del Antártico - Instituto Antártico Argentino, and Fuerza Aérea Argentina.





