





Open-Ended Intersessional Contact Group on Review of Measures: Area Protection and Management 







Open-Ended Intersessional Contact Group on Review of Measures: Area Protection and Management 
Working Paper submitted by the United States

At ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh, the Meeting discussed the review of past Measures and Recommendations.   It determined that the primary focus of the exercise, for the time being, should be on Recommendations and Measures related to area protection and management, taking into account Annex V to the Environmental Protocol.  The Meeting requested that the United States chair an open-ended e-mail contact group to perform the following tasks, where feasible:  “(i) review in detail all Recommendations and Measures related to area protection and management; (ii) propose which Recommendations and Measures would be appropriate for citation in a resolution or decision on this subject; (iii) draft a proposed resolution or decision; and (iv) prepare a working paper on the subject for consideration by ATCM XXX.”
In August, 2006, the United States distributed, with the assistance of the Secretariat, an initial communication to all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party Points of Contact.  That communication included a substantive discussion, which is reproduced in the attachment.
The United States received three responses to its communication, all in March of 2007.  One delegation expressed full agreement with the analysis and recommendations, but expressed some reservations about how to review and analyze past Recommendations involving specific areas whose management plans pre-date the entry into force of Annex V, which requires additional discussion.  Another delegation stated that it preferred a content-analysis (or pragmatic) approach to the legal-analysis approach, without discussion of travaux préparatoire of Annex V, and stated that the intersessional contact group should (1) check if there is any Area or any issue (cf. management plan) in previous Recommendations or Measures on specific areas not yet covered by the current Annex V ASPA system; (2) if there are ones not yet covered, list those Recommendations or Measures as still “current;” and (3) if those are not yet effective, recommend that the Consultative Parties approve them, or, in the alternative, the ATCM could adopt a new Measure covering the same content under the Annex V system.  A third delegation concurred with this content-analysis approach.  
Over the past several years, there have been discussions on the margins of ATCM’s on the review of measures exercise.  Many delegations realized that these discussions are difficult to have on the margins, due to the complexity of the issues, the need for close reading of numerous instruments and the competing demands of participating in the Meeting itself.  It was determined that it would be best to proceed intersessionally, so that experts could focus carefully on the issues and respond to substantive written discussion.  It was thought that this process would lead to progress on this issue, and eventual decisions or resolutions.
The United States notes that all of the responses to its August, 2006 paper were received immediately before the working paper deadline in March of 2007.  The United States is considering whether it is in fact worthwhile to continue this review process intersessionally.  The timing of and relative lack of responses to the initial communication below, for whatever reasons, suggests that this issue might not progress much further absent renewed interest by a wide range of Parties.

Text of Discussion Portion of Communication on Review of Measures
Sent by the United States on August 31, 2006
 

Discussion
General Recommendations on Area Protection and Management 

The Secretariat, in SP 5, identified Recommendations relating to specific protected areas and “general Recommendations.”  The general Recommendations were identified as VII-2 (Criteria for the selection of SPAs); VII-3 (sites of special scientific interest); VIII-3 (institution of SSSIs); XIII-5 (Protected Area system; comparability of accessibility of scientific data); XIV-6 (Institution of Marine SSSIs); VI-8 (Entry permits for SPAs); XV-8 (Management plans for SPAs); XV-9 (Improved descriptions and management plans for SPAs); XV-10 (Specially Reserved Areas); and XV-11 (Multiple-use Planning Areas).  The first five in this list entered into effect. The others did not.
A review of Annex V and its negotiating history supports a conclusion that Annex V had the effect of superseding or replacing these general Recommendations.  In other words, those five Recommendations identified above that were in effect as of the entry into force of Annex V have been superseded or replaced and are therefore no longer effective.  Those other Recommendations that have not yet entered into effect would have been superseded or replaced had they been in effect at the time of the entry into force of Annex V, and it is not necessary for Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to approve them.
A review of each of the Recommendations listed above shows that the subject matter of each of these Recommendations is covered by a provision in Annex V.  For example, in Recommendation VI-8 (1970), the core operative provision recommends that the Governments “take such action as may be appropriate to prohibit the entry by their nationals into a Specially Protected Area, except in accordance with a permit issued” under the prior agreed conservation measures.  Article 3(4) of Annex V states:  “Entry into an Antarctic Specially Protected Area shall be prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued under” the permit provision of Annex V. See Appendix 2 to ATCM XXIX SP 5.
One may conclude that Annex V was a consolidation and elaboration of the general rules governing the area protection and management system.  The intention was to replace the existing system with a new, streamlined system.  A review of the negotiating history supports this conclusion.   For example, in the initial discussions of Annex V in 1990, New Zealand and the United States “indicated that their proposals were essentially based on existing recommendations on the subject.” (Interim Report of the 11th Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting, Viña del Mar (1990) p. 107-08 - emphasis added).  “Various delegations supported the concept of this proposal, with the understanding that, given the proliferation of categories and regimes of Antarctic protected areas, the new proposed system would lead to standardization and streamlining of the subject.” (Emphasis added.)
Discussions in Bonn support the view that Annex V was meant to replace the previous system.   In discussions of Annex V in Bonn, the United States stated that a number of Recommendations related to the area protection and management system “were expected to be superseded.”  Final Report of the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Bonn (1991), pp 22-25.  At that time, the United Kingdom “recommended that the system required major rationalization but without any loss to the existing quality of protection.  It was stressed that the system should be concise, unambiguous and in conformity with the existing Annexes to the Protocol.”  Id.

In conclusion, the negotiating history shows that Annex V was intended to supersede or replace existing general Recommendations on the protected area and management system.  The drafters intended to “avoid two separate systems operating simultaneously.”  They wished to have a new, streamlined, workable regime that built on the previously existing Recommendations in this area.  Accordingly, Annex V was intended to create one unified system, replacing the several general Recommendations that had previously been adopted, whether or not they had entered into effect.  Therefore, the general Recommendations on protected area and management that were in effect on the date of entry into force of Annex V ceased to be effective when Annex V entered into force.  The general Recommendations that had not entered into effect on that date will not enter into effect, and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are not expected to take any action with respect to them. The group should consider whether it concurs with this analysis.  If it does, the group might consider drafting a proposed resolution or decision.
Recommendations Related to Specific Areas 
During the contact group deliberations about the review of Recommendations and Measures in Edinburgh, there was discussion of the Recommendations and Measures relating to specific areas as well, with reference to SP-5.  The contact group considered the effect of Article 3(3) of Annex V.  That paragraph provides:  “Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly.”  The contact group in Edinburgh gave consideration also to Decision 1 (2002), which adopted a naming and numbering system for ASPAs, including a list of ASPAs that included their names and numbers.  Many in the contact group were of the preliminary view that Article 3(3) of Annex V had the effect of designating as ASPAs all previous SPAs and SSSI’s that had been adopted by past ATCM’s, including those that had not yet entered into effect.  
Consideration should be given to the proposition that all Recommendations designating Specially Protected Areas or Sites of Special Scientific Interest prior to the entry of force of Annex V were superseded or replaced by Annex V, and are therefore no longer effective. If there is a consensus on this conclusion, the contact group should consider how to review past Recommendations involving specific areas.

