





Report of the CEP Observer to the Twenty-fifth meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR, 23 to 27 October 2006




Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty-fifth meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR, 23 to 27 October 2006
Introduction
At CEP IX, the Committee requested that the report of the CEP Observer to the meeting of CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee, should be presented as a Working Paper to ensure more detailed consideration by the CEP of areas of joint interest. The Committee also requested that the report should identify delegates responsible for the working groups of SC-CAMLR and references to electronic versions of the final reports from CCAMLR meetings (para 191 of the Final Report of CEP IX refers). This report will attempt to meet those requirements.
CCAMLR Overview
The principal decision-making body is the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The Commission has two standing committees: The Standing Committee on Administration and Finance (SCAF) and the Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance (SCIC). Like the ATCM, all decisions on matters of substance are taken by consensus.
The institutional features of the Convention comprise, in addition to the Commission, a Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and a permanent Secretariat, based in Hobart, Australia. The Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) has three permanent working groups:
    • Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM):
    • Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) and
    • Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM). 
In addition an Ad Hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fisheries (WG-IMAF) carries its activities as part of WG-FSA, and an Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas (WG-EMM ASPA) carries its duties as part of WG-EMM. From time to time, the Scientific Committee also established subgroups to deal with ad hoc tasks.
Current CCAMLR officers are as follows:
    • Commission Chair - Mr Peter Amutenya (Namibia)
    • SCIC Chair - Mrs Valeria Carvajal (Chile)
    • SCAF Chair - Dr Hermann Pott (Germany)
    • Scientific Committee Chair - Dr Edith Fanta (Brazil)
    • WG-EMM Convener - Dr Keith Reid (UK)
    • WG-FSA Convener – Dr Stuart Hanchet (New Zealand)
    • WG-SAM Co Conveners – Dr Chris Jones (USA) and Dr Andrew Constable (Australia)
    • WG-IMAF Co-Conveners - Ms Kim Rivera (USA) and Mr Neville Smith (New Zealand)
    • WG-EMM ASPA Convener - Dr Polly Penhale (USA)
A map of the CCAMLR convention area is provided at Appendix 1.
More detailed information on CCAMLR and its various institutional bodies can be found at www.ccamlr.org


CEP Observer’s Report
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Chair, Dr Neil Gilbert (New Zealand), was the CEP observer at the twenty-fifth meeting of the Scientific Committee to Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CCAMLR) held from 23 to 27 October 2006.
The Scientific Committee was chaired by Dr Edith Fanta from Brazil and was attended by all CCAMLR Members. Contracting Parties to the CAMLR Convention were invited to attend and the People’s Republic of China, Mauritius, the Netherlands and Peru were represented. As part of CCAMLR’s ongoing relationship-building efforts, a number of non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade in toothfish were invited to attend and Cambodia and Mozambique did so. Observers from ACAP, ASOC, CCSBT, CEP, COLTO, FAO, IUCN, IWC and SCAR also attended.
This report highlights issues that may be of particular interest to the CEP including, where applicable, the response of the CAMLR Commission to the recommendations of the Scientific Committee. The full report of the Scientific Committee meeting will shortly be publicly available on the CCAMLR Secretariat website at www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sr/drt.htm.
Appendix 2, also reports the outcome to the CCAMLR Commission’s discussions on its interactions with the CEP, which will be of interest to Members.
Intersessional meetings of SC-CCAMLR
    • The Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) met from 17 to 28 July 2006 in Walvis Bay, Namibia. 
    • The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) met in Hobart prior to the Scientific Committee meeting, from 9 to 20 October 2006.
    • The Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM), was also held in Walvis Bay, Namibia, from 10 to 17 July 2006.
    • An ad-hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fishing (WG-IMAF) was conducted as part of the WG-FSA meeting.
    • The second meeting of Sub Group – Approaches to Stock Assessment and Modelling (SG-ASAM) met in Hobart, Australia on 23 and 24 March 2006. 
Issues arising
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM)
Marine protected areas
The co-conveners of the Bioregionalisation Steering Committee (Drs Penhale and Grant) presented an update on progress towards the 2007 CCAMLR Workshop on Bioregionalisation. The 2007 workshop is viewed as the next step in the process leading to the establishment of a system of MPAs for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment.
Two separate components of work towards this aim were recognised:
    i) Technical development of methods for bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean;
    ii) Consideration of methods for selection and designation of MPAs.
The focus of the 2007 Workshop will be on the first of these. The aim of the workshop is to advise on a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, including, where possible, advice on fine-scale subdivision of biogeographic provinces. Work on methods for selection and designation should proceed in parallel.
The Scientific Committee was invited to consider how individuals might contribute in advising on, and undertaking key tasks, including:
    i) Identification and collation of relevant datasets which will be of use in the workshop analysis;
    ii) Further development of a program of work to be undertaken during the workshop;
    iii) Review of existing bioregionalisation methods and approaches;
    iv) Undertaking fine-scale bioregionalisation analysis for areas of interest, particularly areas for which data are available.
Belgium offered to host the 2007 Bioregionalisation workshop in Brussels in the week of 13 – 17 August 2007. The Scientific Committee encouraged members to identify experts who might participate in the workshop.
This matter will be the subject of a separate paper presented by CCAMLR on behalf of the Workshop Steering Committee.
Management of protected areas
The Scientific Committee referred to ATCM Decision 9 (2005) and recommended that all ATCM protected area proposals with marine components should continue to be provided to CCAMLR for review, unless they are clearly not required according to ATCM Decision 9.1 The Scientific Committee also recommended that standard terminology be adopted within CCAMLR to distinguish between ATCM draft management plans with a marine component, and marine protected area (MPAs) per se.
Krill-centric ecosystem
The Scientific Committee noted that the analysis of long-term penguin population data from both the South Shetland and South Orkney Islands had revealed consistent declines in both Adelie and chinstrap numbers over the past 20 to 30 years. It had previously been assumed that differences in winter sea-ice conditions had opposite effects on these species. As these new analyses revealed population declines in both species, this may reflect the influence of reduction in prey availability linked to large-scale climate forcing.
The scientific Committee requested Members to consider:
    • What the potential effects of climate change on Antarctic marine ecosystems might be, and how this knowledge could be used to manage the krill fishery;
    • How the effects of fishing might be distinguished from the effects of climate change.
Fisheries (WG-FSA)
Fish resources
Thirteen fisheries, including seven exploratory fisheries, were conducted under conservation measures in force in 2005/06. These included fisheries for icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) and krill (Euphausia superba). The CCAMLR areas, subareas and divisions covered were as follows: Subareas 48.3, 48.4, 48.6, 88.1 and 88.2, Divisions 58.4.1, 58.4.2, 58.4.3a, 58.4.3b, and 58.5.2. Other fisheries for D. eleginoides occurred in the EEZs of South Africa (Subareas 58.6 and 58.7) and France (Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1) by longline vessels.
Toothfish
Up to 5 October 2006 a total of 13 704 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. had been reported as being taken in the Convention Area by 13 Members during the 2005/06 season, compared with 16 250 tonnes in the previous season. Data reported in CCAMLR’s catch documentation scheme indicated that 8048 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. were taken outside the Convention Area in 2005/06, compared with 12 847 tonnes in the previous season.
Icefish
The total reported catch limit of mackerel icefish (C. gunnari) for the 2005/06 season was 2434 tonnes, compared with 3563 tonnes taken the previous season. These fisheries were undertaken in Subarea 48.3 and Division 58.5.2.
Krill resources
A total catch of 105 084 tonnes of krill in the 2005/06 season was reported at the time of the Scientific Committee meeting, by five Members and one acceding State (Vanuatu), all in CCAMLR Area 48. In comparison, the total catch for 2004/05 was 127 035 tonnes. Eight Members announced in advance their intention to fish for krill in the 2006/07 season, with a total catch of 368 000 tonnes. 
In advising the Commission on the increased interest being shown in the krill fishery, the Scientific Committee noted that it still had inadequate information from the fishery on which to base management advice, and drew the Commission’s attention to the need for systematic scientific observation of all krill fishing activities.
New and exploratory fisheries
In 2005/06, fishing occurred in seven exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp. For 2006/07, 12 Members submitted paid notifications for exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp.
In advising the Commission, the Scientific Committee noted that substantial progress has been made in assessing stocks of Dissostichus species in subareas 88.1 and 88.2 to assist in developing management advice.
However, for other subareas and divisions in which exploratory fisheries are conducted the Scientific Committee was unable to develop management advice based on assessments of yield. The Scientific Committee reiterated the urgent need to develop a means for estimating abundance and providing assessments of stock status in exploratory fisheries other than subareas 88.1 and 88.2. To this end the Scientific Committee reiterated the importance for Members to conduct fish-tagging and fishery-based research and to submit data to the Secretariat in a timely manner.
Depredation
The Scientific Committee agreed that there remains a need to develop a system to quantify the interactions between marine mammals and the longline fishery. Differences remain in existing methods used to estimate depredation and the Scientific Committee recommended that standard protocols be developed within CCAMLR’s Scheme of International Scientific Observation so that levels of depredation within the toothfish fisheries can be reliably estimated.
Bottom trawl fishing and destructive fishing practices within the CCAMLR Convention Area
The Scientific Committee noted that it supports attempts to remove destructive fishing practices in the Convention Area and that at present bottom trawl fishing is prohibited in some areas adjacent to the Antarctic Continent. It further noted that at present there are no new plans to initiate bottom trawl fishing.
In considering the advice of the Scientific Committee, the Commission agreed to make explicit the means by which bottom trawling in high-seas areas of the Convention Area should be managed in order to avoid impacting vulnerable marine ecosystems, including the benthos and benthic communities. It therefore agreed that for any bottom trawling in high seas areas of the Convention Area to be approved, the Commission needs to be satisfied that the fishery would not have a significant impact on vulnerable marine ecosystems, including benthos and benthic communities. 
The Commission requested the Scientific Committee to review the use of bottom trawling gear in high-seas areas of the Convention Area, including with respect to relevant criteria for determining what constitutes significant harm to benthos and benthic communities in the Convention Area.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area
The total estimated IUU catch of Dissostichus spp. in the Convention Area during the 2005/06 season was 3080 tonnes. The overall estimated IUU catch has decreased over the past three years, but it had increased in Divisions 58.4.1, 58.4.2 and 58.4.3b, with the estimated IUU catch from these areas accounting for almost 90% of the total estimated IUU catch for the Convention Area. Approximately 13 IUU fishing vessels have been reported to be regularly engaging in IUU activities in Division 58.4.3b (BANZARE Bank). 
The Commission recommended that Members be requested to increase surveillance efforts in the Convention Area and particularly in the areas identified above. 
Incidental mortality associated with fishing (WG-IMAF)
Marine mammals
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2005/06:
    • There were no reports of marine mammals being caught in long-line fisheries (compared to 2004/05 when 5 pinnipeds and 2 cetaceans were caught), though one Antarctic fur seal and one elephant seal were caught, but released alive;
    • One Antarctic fur seal was caught and killed in the krill trawl fishery (compared to 95 caught during krill fishing in 2004/05);
    • One leopard seal was caught and killed in the toothfish trawl fishery (compared to one Antarctic fur seal in 2004/05).
The Scientific Committee noted the positive result for 2005/06, but emphasised the need for continued monitoring and vigilance of incidental mortality in all fisheries.
Seabirds
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2005/06:
    • Only one seabird mortality was observed in all longline fisheries in the Convention Area (with the exception of the French EEZ in subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1) – a white-chinned petrel (compared to 97 birds estimated killed in longline fisheries in 2004/05);
    • When seabird mortalities from subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1 EEZs are included, the total extrapolated seabird mortalities during longline fishing operations were estimated to be 2589.
    • For the first time no albatrosses were observed captured in longline fisheries in the Convention Area.
    • 33 seabirds (including albatrosses and petrels) were killed and a further 89 released alive and uninjured from the trawl icefish fishery in subarea 48.3.
The Scientific Committee noted the ongoing efforts to reduce seabird mortality in the French EEZ fisheries and that efforts were resulting in a reduction of seabird by-catch by about one half each year. The Scientific Committee looked forward to a further presentation from France at SC-CAMLR XXVI on its efforts to further reduce seabird by-catch.
The Scientific Committee estimated that potential seabird by-catch as a result of IUU fishing was 4583 birds. The Scientific Committee advised the Commission that this estimate is the lowest so far made and presumably reflects a commensurate reduction in IUU fishing. However, the Scientific Committee noted that even these levels are of substantial concern and are probably unsustainable for some populations.
The Scientific Committee noted the availability of new data on seabird by-catch outside the Convention area suggesting that levels are much greater than those reported within the Convention Area and that this remains a serious cause for concern.
Marine Debris
The CCAMLR Secretariat reported on surveys to monitor marine debris and its impact on marine mammals and seabirds. The CCAMLR marine debris database contains data from 12 sites, predominantly within Area 48. The Scientific Committee noted that:
    • marine debris at Bird Island, and Signy Island (South Orkney Islands) peaked in 1994 to 1996, however there was an increase in the amount of debris recorded in 2003/04 (86% at Signy Island and 97% at Bird Island);
    • The level of marine debris in seabird colonies at Bird Island increased between 1998 and 2003 since when there has been a substantial decline. 44 items of fishing gear (mostly longlining gear) were found in seabird colonies on Bird Island for the 2005/06 reporting period.
    • Three incubating wandering albatrosses at Bird Island were reported as being contaminated with oil for the 2005/06 reporting period. All were reported on the same day (30 December 2005).
The Scientific Committee encouraged all Members to submit data on marine debris to the Secretariat.
A CEP Observer has been invited to participate in the next Scientific Committee meeting in October 2007 (SC-CCAMLR-XXVI).

New Zealand
March 2007
Appendix 1
Map of the CCAMLR Convention Area






Appendix 2
Extract of report language from the Final Report of the XXVth meeting of the CCAMLR Commission.
Agenda Item 15 Co-operation with other elements of the Antarctic Treaty System.
15.11 The Chair of the Scientific Committee reported on her attendance at CEP-IX (CCAMLR-XXV/BG/40). This report has been submitted to, and discussed by, the Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR-XXV, paragraphs 9.2 to 9.4). Following the Executive Secretary’s report, the Scientific Committee Chair noted the following additional points:
(i)	WG-EMM’s five-year work plan was seen by CEP as a model for organising the latter’s future work;
(ii)	CEP encouraged members to provide logistic and financial support for scientific research operations and outreach under the IPY banner;
(iii)	CEP’s involvement in the preparation of, and potential participation in, the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop to be held in 2007 (paragraphs 6.1(i) and 6.2(ii));
(iv)	CEP emphasised the need to maintain a dialogue with CCAMLR on introduced marine species and the potential for fishing vessels to contribute to introducing new species to the Southern Ocean;
(v)	A Workshop on Non-native species in Antarctica was held in New Zealand in April 2006; the report of which was submitted for consideration to CCAMLR (SC-CAMLR-XXV/BG/21);
(vi)	A request to SCAR to take regular advice from CCAMLR on the level of incidental seal mortality arising from fishing operations, in particular during krill fishing;
(vii)	Prevention of marine pollution and best practice in terms of dealing with marine debris;
(viii)	The need to receive more information on noise pollution from acoustic technologies being used by CCAMLR fishing and research vessels.
15.12 The Scientific Committee Chair noted that CEP and the CCAMLR Scientific Committee cooperate effectively and stressed the continuing need for the mutual exchange of observers between the two bodies.
15.14 Australia acknowledged that cooperation between CEP and the Scientific Committee would become increasingly important in the future and expressed the view that it might be worthwhile to schedule a joint meeting of the two bodies in about two years (SC-CAMLRXXV, paragraph 9.4).
15.15 The Commission approved CCAMLR’s representation at ATCM-XXX by the Executive Secretary and the Chair of the Scientific Committee at the meeting of CEP-X.

