





Site Guidelines for Brown Bluff, Tabarin Peninsula




Site Guidelines for Brown Bluff, Tabarin Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the United States
(in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators – IAATO)
Introduction
    1. The concept of “Site Guidelines for Visitors” to Antarctic sites was adopted by the ATCM in 2005 (Resolution 5(2005)).  In January/February 2006, the United Kingdom led an international team, including representatives from Argentina, Australia, Norway, the United States and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) on an on-site review of ATCM adopted and newly proposed Site Guidelines.  As a result, Resolution 6(2006) was adopted at ATCM XXIX, which endorsed Site Guidelines for 12 sites in the Antarctic Peninsula.
    2. The on-site review team also submitted a Working Paper: ‘Policy Issues Arising from on-site review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula’ (ATCMXXIX/WP002).  This paper highlighted a range of policy issues arising from the work of the review team and included recommendations for the further development of Site Guidelines.  The CEP considered the paper and endorsed those recommendations relevant to its work (CEP IX Final Report, paras 106-112).  One of the recommendations in the paper was that “priority be given to preparing visitor Guidelines for Brown Bluff”, recognising that this site was the only site in the top 15 visited sites in Antarctica without site specific visitor guidelines and not covered by a management plan or managed by a national operator.
    3. In light of this recommendation, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) prepared a draft set of guidelines for Brown Bluff.  The draft was then reviewed by the US-based NGO Oceanites (and member of the 2006 on-site review team).  Subsequently the UK member of the 2006 Site Guidelines review team undertook an on-site review on 23 January 2007, in the same way as the 12 existing site guidelines had been reviewed (ATCMXXIX/WP001).  The final version of the Site Guidelines is attached to this paper for further consideration by the CEP.
    4. In light of the preparation of the guidelines by those with experience of the site, and since the draft guidelines have already been reviewed on-site in line with the work of the on-site review team of 2006, the proponents of this Working Paper would propose that the CEP recommends to the ATCM that:
    • Resolution 6(2006) be updated to include Brown Bluff in the list of sites for which Site Guidelines have been prepared and endorsed by all Parties; and
    • the Secretariat publishes the Site Guidelines for Brown Bluff on its website and in hard copy, as it has done for the 12 existing Site Guidelines already endorsed by Treaty Parties.




March 2007

