





Approaches to Tourism Policy – Next Steps




Approaches to Tourism Policy – Next Steps
Working Paper submitted by the United States


Summary

	In light of significant past and projected increases in tourism in Antarctica, and the resulting challenges for environmental protection and ensuring safety of passengers, it is important that ATCM build on its prior work developing policies on tourism.  The United States wishes to propose to other Parties a series of issues that it believes deserve further scrutiny, both by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and by expert groups that may be able to assist in the review of key technical issues.  The matters that should be addressed include:  promoting appropriate policies for search and rescue of private expeditions, including by encouraging approval of Measure 4 (2004); improving communications between stations and ships; giving ATCM-level support to key requirements for shipborne tourism; reviewing issues related to vessel and operational standards, and search and rescue procedures; and increasing efforts by Parties to promote full implementation of the Environmental Protocol.


1.  Background
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP’s) have given considerable attention to tourism and tourism policies over the past years.  In general, the system in place has worked well.  The ACTP’s have made important progress in advancing sound policy, including the 2006 endorsement of Site Guidelines in Resolution 2 (ATCM XXIX).  It should be acknowledged that the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) has done an admirable job of implementing rules for its members that promote safety and environmental stewardship.  Nevertheless, the overall responsibility for the management of all human activities in Antarctic lies with the ATCP’s.  Thus, the United States presents, for consideration, its views and recommendations to promote further progress in the area of management of Antarctic tourism. 
Significant increases in tourism are placing pressure on the Antarctic environment that requires close monitoring and evaluation.  In 2006-07, more than 35,000 passengers are expected to have visited the Antarctic Treaty Area on 54 commercially-organized tour and small sailing vessels.  This volume of traffic represented an increase of nearly 17 percent over the fewer than 30,000 individuals who visited the Continent on 45 vessels in 2005-06.  These latest figures do not include approximately 2,650 persons (up from 2,243 travelers in 2005-6) who participated in overflights of or air/land-based tourism in Antarctica.   During the past fifteen years, the number of passengers entering Treaty waters have increased more than four-fold, albeit from a small base and amidst a general increase in global tourism.  This notable growth in tourism has accelerated in recent years and shows no signs of abating.  
In addition, increased tourism raises important issues related to safety and shipping that deserve regular review and assessment.  This is particularly true given the prospect that large tour vessels capable of carrying more than 4,000 passengers and crew will visit Antarctica in larger numbers.  These large ships, whether or not they land passengers, give rise to special environmental and safety concerns, especially related to search and rescue.
The incident at Deception Island on January 30, 2007, where the Nordkapp touched bottom while transiting Neptune’s Bellows, serves as a reminder that vessels of even well-reputed tour companies can find themselves in distress amidst Antarctica’s harsh and unpredictable environment.  While not related to tourism, the February 2007 fire aboard the Nisshin Maru on the other side of the continent is a stark reminder of hazards faced by vessels operating in Antarctica.  The ATCP’s should take a hard look at tourism issues now, especially those related to vessel safety, and not await more serious events to spur them to action.
The United States recently completed an inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol during which the United States for the first time conducted inspections of tourist vessels.  The U.S. Inspection Team inspected three vessels operated by different tour companies, with the permission of the masters of each ship, as well as on-shore activities conducted from each vessel.  The Team also visited Petermann Island and reviewed how the ATCM site guidelines are applied there.  These inspections provided valuable perspectives, inter alia, on how IAATO’s rules are implemented by tour companies, how tour operators cooperate among themselves, and how tourists interact with the Antarctic environment.  The Team also gained useful insight on how tour operators interact with Antarctic stations, which in some cases are actively seeking visits by tourists.  
The Inspection Team took note of two maritime incidents that had occurred in the past two years.  While navigating through brash ice, one ship struck a growler (small iceberg) which caused minor damage to its hull.  Another ship was caught on a sand bank for a number of hours and had to be pulled free by another ship.  While the incidents are not necessarily representative of the Antarctic tour industry as a whole, and we understand that the number of such incidents overall is small, they are useful to keep in mind as the ATCM gives further consideration to addressing the safety and environmental risks of tour ships in Antarctica.   
Consideration should be given at ATCM XXX in New Delhi to next steps related to Antarctic tourism, including actions that ATCP’s should take in the future to address key concerns.  This paper suggests some possible avenues for further work.  
2.  Private Expeditions and Search and Rescue 
Cooperation among National Programs is the norm in Antarctica.  It is in that spirit that National Programs assist those in distress, including tourists.  There are numerous examples each year of assistance provided to non-governmental entities, including medical care and medical evacuations.  
The U.S. Government is not able to offer support or other services to private expeditions, U.S. or foreign, in Antarctica.  In emergency situations, the United States is prepared to attempt, in accordance with international law and humanitarian principles, the rescue of private expeditions provided that there are no unacceptable risks posed to U.S. personnel and the rescue can be accomplished within means available to the United States.  Such emergency assistance is limited to rescue, and evacuation would be undertaken in a manner which, in the judgment of the United States, offered the least risk to U.S. personnel, equipment and scientific programs.  
It was the ATCP’s concern with the burden placed on national Antarctic programs by such emergency situations that led to adoption of a legally binding measure at ATCM XXVII (Cape Town, 2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Measure 4 provides in relevant part:  

That Parties shall require those under their jurisdiction organising or conducting tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, to demonstrate compliance with the following requirements:

- that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for health and safety,
search and rescue (SAR), and medical care and evacuation have been drawn up and
are in place prior to the start of the activity. Such plans and arrangements shall not be
reliant on support from other operators or national programmes without their express
written agreement; and

- that adequate insurance or other arrangements are in place to cover any costs
associated with search and rescue and medical care and evacuation.

ATCM XXVII also adopted Resolution 4 (2004) in order to take certain steps to promote the objectives of Measure 4 (2004) before its entry into effect.  That resolution included guidelines calling on tour operators and others organizing or conducting non-governmental activities in Antarctica to take the above actions listed in Measure 4 (2004).  It also called for the observation of additional voluntary guidelines for certain kinds of Antarctic non-governmental activities.
This Measure and the accompanying Resolution are important contributions to ensuring the safety of tourists through necessary advance planning.  The United States requires domestic legislation in order to implement and prior to approval of the Measure.  We are still in the process of developing this legislation.  In the meantime, the United States has called on those tour operators under its jurisdiction to fulfill the provisions of Resolution 4 (2004).  If other governments require legislation or regulations prior to approval of Measure 4, we hope that they are also in the process of taking the necessary steps.
    • The ATCM should encourage Consultative Parties to take the steps necessary for the approval of Measure 4. 
    • The ATCM should encourage all Parties to call on those tour operators under their jurisdiction to fulfill the provisions of Resolution 4 (2004).
3.  Communications
A vital aspect of promoting safety of passengers on tour vessels in Antarctica involves ensuring that vessels can reach Antarctic stations in the event of emergency.  During the United States inspection of stations and vessels at the end of 2006, the U.S. Team had considerable difficulty reaching some stations, despite the use of advanced communications equipment on board the NSF research vessel M/V Laurence M. Gould.  As a result, the Team developed, in consultation with communications specialists, a series of proposals that could help improve communications between vessels and stations.  These include improvements in how stand-by frequencies are monitored, recommendations related to equipment, and a recommendation that COMNAP verify annually information submitted for the Antarctic Telecommunications Manual (ATOM).   Parties may wish to refer to the proposals found on pages 9-10 of the U.S. Inspection Report, which has been submitted to the ATCM and CEP.   
    • The ATCM should encourage Parties and vessel operators to improve communications systems as a means for promoting safety of passengers and crew on tour and other vessels in Antarctica.
4.  Management of Shipborne Tourism
At ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh, 2006), the Tourism Working Group discussed a proposal to limit passenger landings from large tour vessels.  At the time, the United States felt that there had been insufficient study and coordination of views to permit adoption of a resolution at that meeting.  The United States has since had the opportunity to consult with tour operators and other governments.  It has also benefited from observations made by its Inspection Team of heavily visited tourist destinations on the Antarctic Peninsula.  
The proposal to discourage landings ashore by vessels carrying more than 500 passengers does not fully address the problem of cumulative impacts at particular sites.  In part, this is because multiple ships carrying fewer passengers could cause an even greater impact and, in part, because such a blanket proposal does not take into account the differences among sites.  In addition, regulating the number of passengers landing does not address the potential for cumulative impacts on the marine environment.  Nonetheless, after careful consideration, we see merit in taking a precautionary approach that limits landings from ships carrying more than 500 passengers, especially given that many popular sites cannot easily accommodate such vessels.
Accordingly, in principle, the United States would support moving forward at ATCM XXX with a limit on landings from ships carrying 500 or more passengers.  We prefer that the ATCM begin with non-binding language, perhaps in a resolution, rather than a binding measure at this point.  
While the United States believes that IAATO has made excellent progress in developing policies and guidelines which govern the activities of its members, we believe it is the responsibility of the ATCP’s to determine the key requirements for shipborne tourism.  The ATCP’s should build on their prior efforts, beginning with Recommendation 1 (ATCM XVIII, Kyoto, 1994).
The U.S. Inspection Team saw first-hand how tour operators conduct landings at various sites and was impressed by their professionalism.  It was clear to the Team that well-organized landings by tour vessels, one at a time, were essential for protection of the environment at the sites and for ensuring the safety of tourists.  
As a result of its review of existing IAATO regulations and drawing on its experience during the recent inspection of tour operations, the United States believes that certain rules, currently being applied by IAATO members, should be given firmer grounding within the Treaty System.  In our view, rules that are appropriate for such status include requiring 1) that only one ship should land at any one site at any one time, 2) that  no more than 100 passengers should be permitted ashore from any vessel at any time, and 3) there should be a minimum 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio while ashore.  A draft resolution to this effect is attached.
    • The ATCM should consider a resolution indicating that tour operators using vessels carrying more than 500 passengers should not land any passengers and endorsing key requirements for shipborne tourism that have wide support among tour operators and governments, such as those mentioned above.  
5.  Review of Issues Related to Vessels 
The increase in water-borne tourism in Antarctica, including via large ships, has underlined the importance of reviewing and elaborating if necessary, maritime standards ensuring passenger safety and minimizing potentially adverse effects of maritime activities on the Antarctic environment.  The United States believes a number of issues related to tourist vessel design, navigation, and search and rescue should be discussed among the ATCP’s, and that it may be worthwhile for the ATCM to seek advice, as it has in the past, from appropriate expert bodies.  
There is a long history of review of maritime safety and environmental matters in the Treaty System, including prior engagement with the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  ATCM XXII (Tromso, 1998) called on Consultative Parties to provide input to the IMO via their national maritime authorities on a then-draft Polar Shipping Code as it related to activities within the Antarctic Treaty area. The ATCM asked COMNAP to identify and formulate steps to enhance emergency response and contingency planning guidelines, and assess navigation/communications requirements for ships operating in the Antarctic.  ACTM XXIII (Lima, 1999) commissioned a Meeting of Experts to develop draft guidelines for Antarctic shipping and related activities taking specific account of the nature of such regional shipping, environmental conditions in Antarctica, and the unique system of internal governance applying in the Treaty area.  That Meeting of Experts, hosted by the United Kingdom in April 2000, generated a framework document and seven recommendations for consideration by ATCM XXIV (St. Petersburg, 2001).  The ATCM decided to consider intersessionally whether work on Antarctic-specific guidelines should continue or be postponed until the IMO promulgated guidelines which, since May 1999, had been narrowed to encompass only Arctic shipping.  COMNAP submitted at ACTM XXV (Warsaw, 2002) its thinking on possible amendments to the then-draft Arctic shipping guidelines.
IMO adopted in December 2002 non-binding guidelines for commercial vessels operating in Arctic ice-covered waters. Significantly, ships governed by those Arctic guidelines excluded fishing vessels separately covered by the 1993 Torremolinos Protocol, as well as yachts not engaged in commercial activities.  The Arctic guidelines also applied only to vessels engaged in international voyages, thus arguably excluding ships making round-trip excursions from a single port.  Finally, the Arctic guidelines were limited to vessels traveling in waters which are at least one-tenth covered by ice which poses a structural risk to ships.  Parties at ATCM XXVI (Madrid, 2003) noted the IMO’s adoption of Arctic guidelines and asked that COMNAP confirm its preliminary, technical amendments extending those guidelines to the Antarctic.  ATCM XXVI separately adopted a measure convening a Meeting of Experts to discuss, inter alia, safety and self-sufficiency, including search-and-rescue (SAR), of non-governmental activities in Antarctica.  This initiative resulted in the subsequent adoption of a 2004 measure on contingency and emergency planning for tourism and non-governmental activities, and a resolution recommending that Consultative Parties with hydrographic surveying and charting capability in Antarctic waters redouble coordination with the IHO’s Committee on Antarctica.     
Acting on a COMNAP report confirming its earlier tentative findings, ATCM XXVII (Cape Town, 2004) endorsed and transmitted to IMO a request that it extend its new Arctic shipping guidelines to ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  In addition to changes broadening the geographic scope of those guidelines, COMNAP suggested that IMO comment on whether it was necessary to apply the full double bottom requirement to all classes of vessels.  In August 2004, the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee referred the ATCM’s request to its Sub-Committee on Ship Design and Equipment (DE Sub-Committee) which, in March 2007, commenced work on this matter with a view to completing action in 2008.  While the prospective extension of current Arctic guidelines to ice-covered Antarctic waters is clearly relevant to commercial cruise vessels operating there, it is important to note that those guidelines were not conceived with passenger vessels as their principal focus.  Specifically, the structure and subdivision of vessels capable of carrying more than 500 passengers, as well as their special fire protection and lifesaving requirements, did not figure prominently in the original Arctic shipping guidelines or the subsequent extension to Antarctic shipping.  
In May 2006, the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee separately approved measures, earlier adopted by its Sub-Committee on Radiocommunications and Search and Rescue, which are intended to enhance contingency planning guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities.  These guidelines are particularly relevant to vessels operating in Antarctic waters since they address circumstances where there is a discrepancy between the number of people potentially at risk and the total recovery capacity of SAR facilities in the region.  This is part of a multi-year effort during which IMO has adopted amendments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) that will enhance, once they enter into force in July 2010, the general safety of passenger vessels.  Their guiding principle is to ensure that a ship is “its own best lifeboat" by prescribing standards for propulsion and safely returning to port or, if necessary, for safely abandoning ship.  These measures complement standards established in such documents as MSC/Circ.1079 "Guidelines for Preparing Plans for Co-operation between Search and Rescue Services and Passenger Ships,” MSC.1/Circ.1184 "Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities," and MSC.1/Circ.1214 "Performance Standards for the Systems and Services to Remain Operational on Passenger Ships for Safe Return to Port and Orderly Evacuation and Abandonment After Casualty.”  
The United States believes the ATCP’s should review key issues related to the overall adequacy of guidelines governing vessel design, operational standards, and search and rescue procedures as they apply specifically to passenger vessels in Antarctic waters.  In doing so, the ATCP’s may wish to seek views of experts, such as IMO and COMNAP.  We propose that issues to be reviewed include the following:  
    1) Whether there is a need for additional design, operational, and search and rescue guidelines governing passenger vessels whose operations in the Antarctic Treaty Area could pose important safety issues, even when they are not navigating ice-covered waters as defined by proposed new polar shipping guidelines.  
    2) Whether, given the potentially catastrophic human and environmental consequences of an accident, vessels with a capacity of more than 500 passengers should be subject to special construction standards beyond the redundancy in propulsion and other essential systems prescribed in the IMO’s Passenger Vessel Safety Initiative. 
    3) Whether the presence of increasingly larger ships and greater congestion in waters near the Antarctic Peninsula require the adoption of more stringent, regionally-specific navigational standards.  
    4) Whether, notwithstanding extensive new SAR guidelines, the increased volume of Antarctic tourist activity justifies a general re-assessment of procedures whereby limited SAR resources can be employed to respond to potential maritime accidents. 
    • The ATCM should commit to review key issues related to vessel design, operational standards, and search and rescue procedures related to tour vessels as outlined above.  A draft resolution reflecting these points is attached.  
    • The ATCPs may wish to consider also the possibility of intersessional contacts among Consultative Parties, and between them and COMNAP, concerning matters related to safety and operation of passenger ships in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  Experts could be asked to identify, for example, possible gaps or deficiencies in SAR coverage for passenger vessels while taking cognizance of national programs already operating within maritime SAR regions extending across the Southern Ocean to Antarctica.
    • ATCP’s may further wish to consider, in light of growing Antarctic tourism, the continued adequacy of current procedures used to catalogue, collect data, and share information concerning the dimensions, construction characteristics, passenger capacities, and routing of vessels.  

6.  Implementation of the Advance Notification Requirements of the Treaty
The United States regulates roughly half the tourism-related expeditions visiting the Treaty area each year.  As a result, the United States has focused in particular on the implementation of Article VII (5) to the Antarctic Treaty and the requirements of the Protocol.  
Under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, Parties are required to provide advance notification “of all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory.”  Under the U.S. regulatory scheme, U.S. tour operators organizing expeditions to Antarctica are required to provide advance notification of their expeditions to the U.S. Department of State, which in turn provides this information to the Treaty Parties by diplomatic note.  We have found that identifying the responsible Party for a tourist expedition can be complicated. The United States urges Parties to be pro-active in sharing information as early as possible on potential expeditions where the responsible Party may not be clear.  It also urges all Parties to provide advance notification of tourist expeditions within their jurisdiction, and in the case of overlapping jurisdiction to coordinate sufficiently such that at least one Party provides notification.   
    • The ATCM should urge all Parties to implement fully the advance notification requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and related provisions of the Protocol, to share relevant information and to cooperated with respect to tourist expeditions that may be subject to multiple jurisdictions.
7.  Implementation of the Requirements of the Protocol 
It is the view of the United States that implementation of the Protocol is the primary mechanism for promoting good tourism policy in Antarctica. 
The United States implements the Protocol through legislation and regulations, including a comprehensive system to implement Annex I regarding Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA).  The United States has found that, for tourism activities, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is the appropriate level of environmental documentation where multiples of the activity over time are likely and may create a cumulative impact.  All U.S. ship-based operators have conducted an environmental assessment on at least the IEE level.  These IEE’s are included in the list of CEE’s and IEE’s submitted annually to the ATCM by the United States.  The United States would be pleased to share with other ATCP’s the details of how it implements its Annex I obligations as they relate to tourism, and would be interested in learning how other Parties implement these obligations. 
As they review issues related to tour vessels, Parties should continue to consider the discharge of sewage consistent with Article 6 of Annex IV to the Protocol.  The ATCP’s may wish to consider whether and how Parties can continue to foster the collection of information for environmental impact assessments. 
Research on Antarctic Peninsula ecosystems over the past fifty years has documented many changes, including an increase in average annual temperatures and changes in the population structure of marine and terrestrial communities.  Annex V on Area Protection has implemented a system of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA’s) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA’s).  In particular, the development of ASMA’s has included areas which are subject to tourism (e.g., Admiralty Bay ASMA, McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA, Deception Island ASMA, and draft ASMA’s for Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Palmer Basin and Western Anvers Island). The United States believes that the development of ASMA’s is an excellent tool for managing human activities, including tourism. For some sites, the designation as an ASPA might be warranted.
There are many ways that Parties to the Protocol can implement their obligations and apply those obligations to tour operators under their jurisdiction.  It would be very beneficial for all ATCP’s to report at the ATCM on the national legislation and practices through which they are implementing their Protocol obligations as they related to tourism.
    • The ATCM should underscore the importance of the Protocol in regulating tourism and call on all Parties to implement their obligations fully, including through ensuring that sufficient resources are available for governmental oversight.  
8.  Review of Cumulative Impacts
Cumulative Impacts remains a major source of concern to Treaty Parties as they consider tourist activities.  Despite the importance of the topic, the lack of long-term, comprehensive data on Antarctic ecosystems has hindered progress.  The United States wishes to raise for consideration the possibility of undertaking a constraints analysis in relation to areas visited by tourists.  Constraints analysis is a method for evaluating cumulative effects that can be used to identify thresholds for environmental systems of concern.  Constraints analysis begins by identifying limiting factor in the environmental system.  Mathematical equations are then developed to describe the capacity of the resource or system in terms of numerical limits or thresholds imposed by each limiting factor.
Constraints analysis has proven very useful in the context of studying the impact of visitors to U.S. national parks.  A constraints analysis could be done in the Antarctic Peninsula in areas where tourist activity occurs to determine the amount of visitation that will not result in deterioration or degradation of the environment.  Potential limiting factors at some areas in the Antarctic Peninsula may include, for example, the concentration of wildlife and the erodability of soils.  GIS overlays could then be used to develop mathematical equations describing the thresholds for visitation in these areas imposed by each limiting factor.  The constraints analysis could then be used to suggest limits for visitation in these areas of the Antarctic Peninsula.
    • ATCP’s may wish to consider the possibility of undertaking a constraints analysis, through the CEP, in relation to particular areas visited by tourists.
The United States looks forward to discussing the issues raised above with other Consultative Parties at New Delhi.

Annex


Resolution A (2007)

Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,
Concerned by the potential impacts that tourist activities may have on the Antarctic environment, including its wildlife;
Desiring to promote the safety of life at sea and the protection of the environment in the Antarctic Treaty Area,
Noting Decision 4 (2004) regarding Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic and Antarctic Ice-Covered Waters and subsequent activities at the International Maritime Organization (IMO);
Concerned about recent incidents involving vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
Seeking to ensure that the ATCP’s make policy decisions on the basis of the highest quality expert advice;
Recommend that:

    1. All Parties report, in advance of and with a view to discussion at ATCM XXXI, on how they implement through law, regulation and practice the obligations of the Protocol and its Annexes, particularly with regard to tourist activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

    2. Tour operators in the Antarctic Treaty Area that use vessels that carry more than 500 passengers be discouraged from making, or not be authorized to make, any landings in Antarctica.

    3. Tour operators in the Antarctic Treaty Area be encouraged, or required to, 

        a) Coordinate with each other such that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time;
        b) Restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer;
        c) Maintain a minimum 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio while ashore.  

    2. The Parties consider the following questions, including which expert bodies should be consulted in relation thereto:

        a) Whether there is a need for additional design, operational, and search and rescue guidelines governing passenger vessels whose operations in the Antarctic Treaty Area could pose important safety issues even when they are not navigating ice-covered waters as defined by proposed new polar shipping guidelines.  
        b) Whether, given the potentially catastrophic human and environmental consequences of an accident, vessels with a capacity of more than 500 passengers should be subject to special construction standards beyond the redundancy in propulsion and other essential systems prescribed in the IMO’s Passenger Vessel Safety Initiative.  
        c) Whether the presence of increasingly larger ships and greater congestion in waters near the Antarctic Peninsula require the adoption of more stringent, regionally-specific navigational standards.  
        d) Whether, notwithstanding extensive new search and rescue (SAR) guidelines, the increased volume of Antarctic tourist activity justifies a general re-assessment of procedures whereby limited SAR resources can be employed to respond to potential maritime accidents.  

    3. Keep under review matters related to ships operated by tour operators in Antarctica.
