





Draft Management Plan for ASMA No. X: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole





Draft Management Plan for ASMA No X: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole
The United States submitted a draft management plan for an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) in the South Pole region to CEP VIII (ATCM XXVIII WP 6, Stockholm, 2005).  The plan was considered by an intercessional contact group (ICG).  Comments during the intercessional period were received from Australia, IAATO, Norway and the United Kingdom.  Responses to those comments (excluding minor editorial notes) were posted on the ICG website and are summarized in Table 1. At CEP IX (Edinburgh, 2006) the United States presented an update on the status of the draft Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station ASMA (ATCM XXIX IP 55).
The United States has completed its revision of the draft Management Plan, after consideration of comments and the incorporation of small changes related to the South Pole Modernization project. The draft Management plan is attached for consideration by Committee for Environmental Protection.  

Table 1. ICG Comment and Response Table

Location
Comments/Suggestions
Response
Section 1
The figure of 45,350 sq km seems excessive. [IAATO]   

Recalculated.  Total Area of South Pole ASMA equals (approximately) 26,400 square km. 
Section 1
Is ‘high altitude’ a necessary environmental aspect to include? [UK]
Yes, because of the physiological altitude.  This weather phenomenon is related to barometric pressure and is greater than would be expected just based on elevation. 
Section 1
Station elevation appears inconsistent with the ice sheet elevation. [UK]
Clarified. 
Section 4
Consider rephrasing to read: “Designated for an indefinite period, subject to periodic review by the Antarctic Treaty parties, as required in Annex V and adopted procedures.”
Clarified.
Section 5
Should the north arrow on map 4 be deleted (as all directions are north)? [UK]
Labeled ‘Grid North’ in reference to alignment with the Greenwich Meridian (0 degrees longitude).
Section 6ii(a)
Construction and modification in the Operational Zone should be better explained. [Australia]
Clarified. The installation or modification of structures in the operational zone would be contingent on environmental assessment as required by Article 8 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Sections 1, 2, and
6ii(c)
The ASMA should better reflect the historical significance of the site since both HSM 1 and 80 are in the area.  An addendum to include the 'nothing to be removed' statement to apply to Amundsen's tent or any other relics from the 1911-12 era should be added. [IAATO, Norway, Australia] 
More detailed description added.  And the ‘Aim and Objective’ to maintain the historic values of the Area. 

Section 7(vi)
Surely there should be an exception for 'removing' snow to melt for drinking and cooking by NGO parties. [IAATO]
Clarified.  Edited to read, “Aside from removal of snow and ice for scientific purposes or for drinking water supply and cooking water during expeditionary activities, nothing should be removed…”
Section 7(vii)
Is sewage treatment being considered as part of the new facilities within this ASMA? [UK]
At this time the USAP is monitoring the research and developments in waste management and the processes of other countries operating in Antarctica.  
Section 7(vii)
Are NGAs able to dispose of human waste in established ‘sewer bulbs’? [Australia]
All waste brought in or generated by NGAs is to be containerized and taken out when the visitor leaves.
Appendix A; Bullet 8
Clarify time guidelines for visits to South Pole. [IAATO, UK]
Sunday from 13:00- 17:00 South Pole Station Time [00:00 to 04:00 GMT/UTC] is the preferred visit time.  
Appendix A; Bullet 9
Who is to be asked for permission to access the Antarctica Logistics & Expeditions (ALE) Cache? [UK] 
As ALE controls and supplies the cache permission should be asked of ALE personnel.  However the statement referencing the cache has been removed completely.
Appendix B, Section 1
A brief explanation of the derivation of the 2 km flight altitude and the 150-km radius of the clean-air zone is suggested, in order to provide some scientific basis for the figure.  Also some definitions of ‘essential purposes.’ [IAATO, UK]
NOAA has conducted many hours of aircraft measurements of air pollutants.  Data shows that plumes can be traced for hundreds of miles in stable air.  To protect measurements at the ARO and in the snow it was recommended that aircraft fly above 2 km to stay out of the boundary layer air and to limit deposition of particles and gas into the snow surface.  The 150 km radius was selected as a reasonable buffer distance.  However, Arctic studies suggest that twice that distance is justifiable.
Map 3
Will the traverse route be incorporated into the ASMA with a resulting expanded area? [IAATO]
No. The approach to the South Pole station for the traverse followed the vehicle-supported oversnow approach route, as seen in Map 3.
General
Access to the geographic pole? [Australia, UK, Norway]
Access will not be a problem since based on calculations of the ice sheet movement the geographic pole will never be located under the elevated station.  
General
Is a web forum for management a possibility? [Australia, UK, Norway]
The US is currently exploring the use of a web forum as a management tool for the South Pole ASMA.

