





Climate Changes




Climate Changes
Introduction
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global average sea level
Antarctica and the Arctic are important to the global climate. Average Arctic temperature has increased at almost twice the global average over the last decades, and the trend is expected to continue in this century.  IPCC 2007 notes that new data show that losses from the ice sheets of Antarctica very likely have contributed to sea level rise since 1993, The Polar Regions are sensitive barometers of climate change. 
Antarctic climate research is of utmost importance to enhance our understanding of the Earth system and its interactive human and non-human processes through time. We need this knowledge in order to:
    • improve evaluation and understanding of current and future global change; and
    • place on an increasingly firm scientific basis the challenge of sustaining the global environment for future human societies. 
When signing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to The Antarctic Treaty the Antarctic Treaty Parties committed themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment. Extensive knowledge on the consequences of climate changes to the Antarctic environment is a prerequisite for the Parties to fulfil these commitments.
Antarctic ice  - a unique climate archive
At The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Edinburgh 2006 Foreign and Commonwealth Office Minister Lord Triesman pointed out in his opening address that Antarctica can allow us to unlock the secrets of the planet’s climate from former years and former ages. It also possesses the capacity, if our stewardship of the world proves inadequate, to impact in new ways on the Earth’s fundamental systems, including weather, both responding to, and contributing to, climate change and rising sea levels.
Antarctic ice cores provide unique climate archives containing information on past climate and environmental changes at local, regional and global scales. The isotopic composition of the water trapped as ice allows us to estimate the past temperature of the Antarctic region. The chemical composition of the ice also includes information on dust and aerosols transported by the atmosphere, which help us to understand the extent of droughts and volcanic activity on surrounding continents. Finally, air bubbles trapped in the ice enable us to determine the composition and abundance of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere through time. Comparing the data from the present with those from the past enables us to determine the impact of human activities on the composition of the atmosphere. 
In the Protocol on Environmental Protection to The Antarctic Treaty, article 3 Environmental Principles, the value of Antarctica as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment is emphasised.
In recognition of the importance of Antarctica to the global climate, Antarctica as a sensitive barometer of climate change, and that the polar regions health is vital to the well-being of the earth’s systems and its inhabitants, the Antarctic Treaty Parties – in The Edinburgh Antarctic Declaration on the International Polar Year 2007-2008, expressed that the scientific research undertaken during the International Polar Year will increase knowledge of the Antarctic and yield a better understanding of the major terrestrial, ocean and atmospheric systems that control the planet. 
The Antarctic Treaty Parties further expressed that they also will champion the global importance of the Polar Regions in international forums. This will include: analysing and using scientific data and information collected from the Polar Regions during the International Polar Year, which could contribute to future assessments by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; and supporting efforts to tackle climate change.
Climate changes – consequences to the Antarctic environment.
The Antarctic ice sheet is up to 4500 meters thick in places and it holds 90 per cent of the world's fresh water. It is also crucial to the circulation of the world's ocean currents and therefore to global air circulation. 
IPCC 2007 notes that the great ice sheets of Antarctica have changed little in extent during the last century, and that current global model studies project that the Antarctic ice sheet will remain too cold for widespread surface melting and is expected to gain in mass due to increased snowfall. However, net loss of ice mass could occur if dynamical ice discharge dominates the ice sheet mass balance.
Some areas of Antarctica may show a pronounced change and dynamic response. The IPCC 2001 Special Report on The Regional Impacts of Climate Change states that there is growing evidence of recent atmospheric warming on the Antarctic Peninsula. Three large sections of ice shelves in the Antarctic Peninsula have collapsed over the past 11 years, followed by a marked acceleration and thinning of glaciers that were held back by the shelves. IPCC concludes that this appears to be consistent with a warming trend in this region. 
It is reasonable to suppose that the main effect of global warming will be a simple retreat of the ice edge southward. IPCC 2001 notes that climate change is likely to produce long-term - perhaps irreversible—changes in the physical oceanography and ecology of the Southern Ocean. Projected reductions in sea-ice extent will alter under-ice biota and spring bloom in the sea-ice marginal zone and will cause profound impacts at all levels in the food chain, from algae to krill to the great whales. Marine mammals and birds, which have life histories that tie them to specific breeding sites, will be severely affected by shifts in their foraging habitats and migration of prey species. Warmer water will potentially intensify biological activity and growth rates of fish. Ultimately, this should lead to an increase in the catch of marketable fish, and retreat of sea ice will provide easier access to southern fisheries. 
IPCC 2001 notes that the Antarctic Peninsula has experienced spectacular retreat and collapse of ice shelves, which has been related to a southerly migration of the January 0°C isotherm resulting from regional warming. The loss of these ice shelves has few direct impacts. Projected warming is likely, however, to break up ice shelves further south on the Antarctic Peninsula, expose more bare ground, and cause changes in terrestrial biology, such as introduction of exotic plants and animals. 
According to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to The Antarctic Treaty the Parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. 
It is therefore essential for the Parties to be informed on the status of the environment and any progress made in Antarctic climate research.
Recommendation
Norway recommends that The Antarctic Treaty Parties, expressing their concern over the projected adverse effects of anthropogenic and natural climate change on the Antarctic environment, include climate changes in Antarctica as a new item on the agenda for the annual Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

