





Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 130





Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 130

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand

Introduction
In accordance with the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998), New Zealand has initiated a five-year review of the management plan for the following Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA):

    • ASPA 130, Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island.

The lower end of Tramway Ridge was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 11) after a proposal by New Zealand on the grounds that the Area supports an unusual ecosystem of exceptional scientific value to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists.  Mt. Erebus (3794 m) is one of only three known high altitude localities of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the Antarctic.
The review process for ASPA 130 has been completed and is described in this paper.  
Review of Activities
In the period since the last revision of the ASPA 130 Management Plan, the US has not issued any permits to enter the Area. New Zealand has issued three permits to enter the Area during the period, and small soil samples were taken for microbial biomass and DNA extraction research.  Temperature loggers were installed within ASPA 130 over the winter of 2006 and were removed in November 2006.  Entry was to the non-restricted zone only.
A review of relevant literature suggests that the biological community at the Area remains unusual and of scientific interest, particularly for comparative study with Mt Melbourne (ASPA No. 118) and Mt Rittman as knowledge of these high altitude warm ground Antarctic habitats increases. 
In addition to biological studies the Area, which has the highest surface soil temperatures on Mt Erebus, has been used for temperature recording to monitor the mountain’s volcanic activity. Because of the significant gas emissions, the Area has also been entered to measure the quantity of CO2, to gain information on the degassing behaviour of the magmatic system underlying Mount Erebus.
No significant management activity has been undertaken in the area, which has been considered appropriate to the low use of the Area and its sensitivity to visitation.
Consultation with science community
The New Zealand researcher known to have worked in the Area since its designation and the National Science Foundation were contacted to gauge whether information in the management plan was still current and whether the values identified had changed since the last revision. There were no comments on the Management Plan.
Conclusion
Given the enduring nature of the values in this Area and the absence of any other concerns regarding this Area, no substantive changes to the text of the plan are proposed. 
Relevant literature

Bargagli, R., Broady, P.A., Walton, D.W.H.  1996.  Preliminary investigation of the thermal biosystem of Mount Rittman fumaroles (Northern Victoria Land, Antarctica). Antarctic Science, 8, (2), 121-126. 
Broady, P.A.  1993.  Soils heated by volcanism. Antarctic Microbiology, ed. Friedmann, E.I.  Wiley, New York, 413-432.
Broady, P.A., Greenfield, L.G., Given, D. and Thompson, K.  1987.  The biota and environment of fumaroles on Mount Melbourne, northern Victoria Land.  Polar Biology, 7, 97-113.
Broady, P.A.  1984.  Taxonomic and ecological investigations of algae on steam-warmed soil on Mt Erebus, Ross Island, Antarctica. Phycologia, 23, (3), 257-271.
Melick, D.R., Broady, P.A., Rowan, K.S.  1991.  Morphological and physiological characteristics of a non-heterocystous strain of the cyanobacterium Mastigocladus laminosus Cohn from fumarolic soil on Mt Erebus, Antarctica. Polar Biology, 11, (2), 81-89.
Sheppard D.S. Le Guern F. Christenson B.W. 1994. Compositions and mass fluxes of the Mount Erebus volcanic plume. Volcanological and environmental studies of Mount Erebus, Antarctica. Antarctic research series 66. Washington, American Geophysical Union. 
Skotnicki ML, Selkirk PM, Broady PA, Adam KD, Ninham JA.  2001.  Dispersal of the moss Campylopus pyriformis on geothermal ground near the summits of Mount Erebus and Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land, Antarctica.  Antarctic Science, 13, (3), 280-285.
Lesser MP, Barry TM, Banaszak AT. 2002.  Effects of UV radiation on a chlorophyte alga (Scenedesmus sp.) isolated from the fumarole fields of Mt. Erebus, Antarctica.  Journal of Phycology 38: 473-481.

