





Current Status of the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii): A Specially Protected Species under Annex II




Current Status of the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii): A Specially Protected Species under Annex II
Introduction
    1. Resolution 2 (1999) of XXIII ATCM requested SCAR, in consultation with the Parties, CCAMLR and other expert bodies as appropriate, to examine the status of the species currently designated in Appendix A of Annex II to the Environmental Protocol, and with the assistance of IUCN, to determine the conservation status of native Antarctic fauna and flora and advise the CEP on which species should remain or be designated as Specially Protected Species.
    2. At XXIII ATCM an Intersessional Contact Group, chaired by Argentina, was established to discuss the criteria that could be used to designate Specially Protected Species.  The Final ICG report was presented as XXV ATCM/ WP8.  The advice to the ATCM was encapsulated in Resolution 1 (2002), which noted that the CEP had decided to adopt the IUCN criteria on endangerment to establish the degree of threat to species, requested SCAR to assist in reviewing those species which were classed as “vulnerable”, “endangered” or “critically endangered” (taking into consideration regional assessments of populations), as well as reviewing those species classed as “data deficient” or “near threatened” which occurred in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
    3. Working Paper XXVIII ATCM WP34 proposed how the IUCN criteria could be applied to Antarctic species. At XXIX ATCM SCAR tabled WP39 proposing that, on this basis and on the grounds of the presently available population data, Antarctic Fur Seals (Arctocephalus spp.) should be delisted as Specially Protected Species. Measure 4 (2006) recommended that the words “All species of the genus Arctocephalus, Fur Seals” be deleted from Appendix A to Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection, and this Measure was adopted by the Parties. Measure 4 noted that the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii) remains a Specially Protected Species. This leaves the Ross seal as the only species currently afforded Special Protection under Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
    4. In keeping with Resolution 2 (1999) of XXIII ATCM, SCAR here presents currently available population data on the Ross seal to enable its status as a Specially Protected Species to be re-examined.
    5. In summary, SCAR recommends that the status of the Ross seal remain unchanged. This recommendation is made on the basis of the available data and the IUCN criteria, and in keeping with the recommendation that in the absence of sufficient data on which to base a scientifically sound decision no change in status of a species should be made.
Context
    6. The IUCN criteria are well-established, universally recognized and applied, and have been in use for a sufficient time to validate their usefulness and applicability at a global level. IUCN use three categories for species considered to have a high to extremely high risk of extinction (“threatened” species) – Critically Endangered, Endangered and Vulnerable. A fourth category – Near Threatened – applies to species close to qualifying as threatened in the near future if the threatening process(es) continue. On conservation grounds, it is considered appropriate to be able to designate species in all three threatened categories (Critically Endangered, Endangered and Vulnerable) as Specially Protected Species.
    7. Designating Specially Protected Species in cases where not enough information is available (the precautionary approach applied for Data Deficient species) is not considered appropriate at the moment. Concern for these species should initially trigger new efforts to obtain the necessary information on the distribution, abundance, and where possible, trends in extent and population, upon which an informed judgement can be based through the application of the IUCN criteria.
    8. Accepting that a change in a species’ protection status should only take place where sufficient data are available on which to base such a decision, de-listing should also only be considered where data on which to base such a decision are sufficient.
    9. In the discussions at CEP VIII a range of suggestions were made on how to regularise the proposals for listing and de-listing. The IUCN criteria used worldwide to identify species in need of special protection have been considered in detail at previous meetings.  For the purposes of assessing the degree of threat or endangerment for any species four characteristics are critical:
        a. How large is the population and is it, either globally or regionally, increasing, stable or decreasing?
        b. Is the geographic spread increasing, stable or decreasing?
        c. Is the breeding population sufficient to ensure breeding success each year (for an annual breeder)?
        d. Are there any known threats to the stability of the population?
Assessment of the Status of the Ross Seal
    10. 10. 	SCAR has used the format agreed at CEP VIII to address the current status of the Ross seal. The key questions in the assessment process agreed are answered in the following paragraphs with detailed data supplied in Appendix 1.
    11. Based on the application of IUCN global criteria is the species currently on the Red List?
Yes. However, it is listed as Lower Risk, Least Concern. That is, based on the IUCN criteria and on evidence available to the Seals Specialist Group of the IUCN, the species is not dependent on conservation measures for its ongoing status and is not close to qualifying as vulnerable.
    12. Based on the application of IUCN criteria how should the Antarctic population be treated? 
Given the tendency of the species to remain in the Antarctic pack ice area, assessments should be based on global, rather than regional criteria.  
    13. Based on the IUCN global criteria does the conservation status indicate a significant risk of extinction? E.g. is the conservation status “vulnerable” or higher?  
Assessments using the most recent data (Appendix 1) indicate that based on IUCN Criteria B-E (Annex 1) the species cannot be considered Vulnerable or in a higher risk category. Using Criterion A there is no evidence of current population reduction and no reduction is projected. However, modern and past data are not readily comparable, making assessment of trends across the entire Antarctic region problematic. Even in more localized areas, comparable data often exist for two time periods only, making the establishment of trends impossible. A trend signal can only be established above natural population variation when data from more than three time periods are available. No major direct threats to the seals have been identified, though changes in pack ice extent may have implications for Ross seal populations.  Lack of comparable, temporal population data make assessments of any such effect difficult. 
    14. Does the proposal involve a species of interest to other authorities or organisations (e.g. sea birds) in regard to active protection?
Yes. The Ross seal is protected under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals.
Recommendation
    15. SCAR recommends that the status of the Ross Seal remain unchanged as a Specially Protected Species. It does so based on the fact that insufficient data are available to make a scientifically justifiable recommendation to change the species status. This conclusion is consistent with the recommendation that data deficiency should signal the need to collect additional data, not change a species’ status.
    16. SCAR, in consultation with the Parties, CCAMLR and other expert bodies as appropriate, should establish how further assessments of the population size and trends of the Ross seal can best be undertaken to improve the availability of comparable data.

ANNEX 1
Summary of the five criteria (A-E) used to evaluate if a species belongs in a category of threat (Critically Endangered, Endangered or Vulnerable).

Use any of the criteria A-E
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
A.  Population reduction     Declines measured over the longer of 10 years or 3 generations
A1
³ 90%
³ 70%
³ 50%
A2, A3 & A4
³ 80%
³ 50%
³ 30%
Al.  Population reduction observed, estimated, inferred, or suspected in the past where the causes of the reduction are clearly reversible AND understood AND have ceased, based on and specifying any of the following:

(a)  direct observation


(b)  an index of abundance appropriate to the taxon


(c)  a decline in AOO, EOO and/or habitat quality


(d)  actual or potential levels of exploitation


(e)  effects of introduced taxa, hybridization, pathogens, pollutants, competitors or parasites.
A2.  Population reduction observed, estimated, inferred, or suspected in the past where the causes of reduction may not have ceased OR may not be understood OR may not be reversible, based on (a) to (e) under Al
A3.  Population reduction projected or suspected to be met in the future (up to a maximum of 100 years) based on (b) to (e) under Al.
A4.  An observed, estimated, inferred, projected or suspected population reduction (up to a maximum of 100 years) where the time period must include both the past and the future, and where the causes of reduction may not have ceased OR may not be understood OR may not be reversible, based on (a) to (e) under Al.
B.  Geographic range in the form of either B1 (extent or occurrence) AND/OR B2 (area or occupancy)
B1.  Extent of occurrence 
< 100 km²
< 5,000 km²
< 20,000 km²
B2.  Area of occupancy
< 10 km²
< 500 km²
< 2,000 km²
AND at least 2 of the following:


a  (i) Severely fragmented AND/OR 
(ii) # locations


= 1


£ 5


£ 10
b  Continuing decline in any of:  (i) extent of occurrence;  (ii) area of occupancy;  (iii) area, extent and/or quality of habitat;  (iv) number of locations or subpopulations;  (v) number of mature individuals
c  Extreme fluctuations in any of:  (i) extent of occurrence;  (ii) area of occupancy;  (iii) number of locations or subpopulations;  (iv) number of mature individuals
C. Small population size and decline
Number of mature individuals
< 250
< 2,500
< 10,000
AND either C1 or C2:



C1.  An estimated continuing decline of at least:
(up to a maximum of 100 years)
25% in 3 years or 1 generation
20% in 5 years or 2 generations
10% in 10 years or 3 generations
C2.  A continuing decline AND (a) and/or (b):
a (i)   # mature individuals in each subpopulation:
< 50
< 250
< 1,000
a (ii) or % individuals in one subpopulation at least
90%
95%
100%
b      extreme fluctuations in the number of mature individuals
D. Very small or restricted population
Either:



D1.  number of mature individuals
£ 50
£ 250
£ 1,000
AND/OR



D2.  restricted area of occupancy
na
na
AOO < 20 km² or # locations £ 5
­E. Quantitative Analysis



Indicating the probability of extinction in the wild to be:
³ 50% in 10 years or 3 generations (100 years max)
³ 20% in 20 years or 5 generations (100 years max)
³ 10% in 100 years






