





The M/S Nordkapp incident




The M/S Nordkapp incident 


1. Introduction 
On 30 January 2007 the cruise vessel M/S Nordkapp touched bottom during passage of Neptune’s Bellows, Deception Island, Antarctica. The cause of the grounding was human error (faulty navigation). A small spill of marine diesel oil (MGO) occurred during response action following the grounding. Although the grounding incident at Deception Island was extensive, and the damages sustained by the ship were large, the overall consequences of the grounding for human safety and the environment were limited. Details of the incident are provided in this paper. 
Furthermore, the incident, the handling of the incident both at the scene of the incident and at home, and other aspects related to the incident has brought a number of issues related to ship safety and incident handling to the attention of Norwegian authorities. Some of these issues are highlighted in this paper as it is believed that these matters may have wider interest within the ATS. 
2. Description of incident 
Short description of incident
On 30 January at 14:30 pm (local time) the M/S Nordkapp (owned and operated by Hurtigruten Group ASA, hereafter referred to as HG ASA) touched bottom during passage out of Neptune’s Bellows, Deception Island, Antarctica. The vessel refloated immediately after the grounding, and the vessel backed up through the Bellows into Port Foster. Emergency procedures for grounding and oil pollution were initiated according to vessel and company plans. There was no immediate risk to passengers or crew, and the vessel was able to take all immediate response action via its own resources without calling a mayday. No leakage of fuel was observed immediately following the grounding, but an oil boom was deployed as a precautionary action. 
During draining of damaged tanks, oil contaminated water was released into the waters of Port Foster at Deception Island. The amount of escaped marine diesel was estimated and reported to be around 500 – 750 litres. However, the maritime inquiry later established that it is not possible to make an accurate estimate of the actual amount spilled. The tank in question was technically speaking empty, which in practice means that there potentially was a residue of 5-7 m3 MGO in the tank. There were still residual remains in the tank at arrival in Rio de Janeiro. 
On Wednesday 31 January, after weather delay, passengers from M/S Nordkapp were taken onboard the vessel’s sister ship, the M/S Nordnorge for transport to Ushuaia, Argentina. Late Friday 2 February the Nordnorge reached Ushuaia with the passengers from Nordkapp onboard. The passengers from Nordkapp were thereafter transported by charter to Santiago, Chile, where they continued their journey home according to original plans.
Early Thursday 1 February the vessel moved from Deception Island to Maxwell Bay, King George Island, where it underwent further assessment and damage control. Divers were flown in to King George Island to conduct intermediate repairs and sealing of the damaged areas of the hull. Oil booms were deployed also here as a precautionary measure. A small leakage from the damaged tanks was reported observed near the vessel during anchorage in Maxwell Bay. 
An escort boat was summoned to accompany M/S Nordkapp on their voyage over the Drake Passage, with departure from King George Island on Thursday 8 February. The vessel went into dry-dock in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) for further repairs, before heading on to Bremerhaven (Germany) for full overhaul.
The fuel spill
Immediately following the grounding of the ship at Deception Island an oil boom was deployed from the ship and around the damaged side of the ship as a precautionary action. During the transfer of marine diesel oil from the damaged tanks contaminated water was released into the waters of Port Foster at Deception Island. Due to the nature of the spill (fuel type), the weather conditions at the time (wind and waves), and potentially faulty use of response equipment, the oil boom did not sufficiently contain the leakage of marine diesel1, and the spill reached a larger area of Port Foster. 
Friday 2 February, after having arrived Maxwell Bay, HG ASA took action to make arrangements for conducting an aerial survey and on-site evaluations of the fuel spill at Deception Island as soon as the weather would permit transport. However, after the weather cleared, the aircraft available was grounded due to mechanical problems. HG ASA thereafter initiated a process to consider alternative actions to conduct an on-site survey.  
Norwegian Antarctic authorities consulted the Norwegian Coastal Administration and had them examine and asses the fuel spill based on pictures received from Deception Island. The initial consideration from this expert body indicated that the spill was limited in size and would likely, due to the nature of the fuel type, disintegrate relatively quickly, especially considering the reported weather situation at the site.
Meanwhile personnel and scientists at the research stations in Deception Island continuously assessed the situation with respect to the spill, its evolution and possible effects. Norwegian authorities received regular reports on observations and effects of the spill from the personnel at the Gabriel de Castilla station at Deception Island, through the Spanish national Antarctic program. 
Following the on-site initial observations of fuel smell and fuel spills on the beaches of Port Foster, further reports over the next few days indicated that the light marine diesel disintegrated quickly, and by Saturday 3 February no observable signs of the spill remained inside Port Foster and no effects of the spill on the biota had been registered. The observations reported from the Spanish station were supported by further observations and examinations conducted by IAATO member vessels during visits to the area after the incident. On Monday 5 February the support vessel of the Spanish Antarctic program conducted a full survey around Port Foster. On basis of the result of their survey activities the Spanish program concluded Tuesday 6 February that there no longer was any evidence of spills along the beaches or in the water of Port Foster. Furthermore no effects on biota at Deception Island had been observed. 
On this basis Norwegian authorities concluded that no further on-site action was required by the operator. HG ASA was, however, requested to follow up with further assessments of the situation at Deception Island during visits to the area by M/S Nordkapp’s sister ship M/S Nordnorge in the weeks after the incident. The operators were also required to conduct a survey in the Maxwell Bay area, to ensure that no leakage has affected the surrounding area during anchorage in this area.
The operator conducted visual inspections at Deception Island on 16 February, in which they concluded that the MGO from M/V Nordkapp had entirely evaporated/dissolved. 
Assistance from other operators
A number of operators offered immediate assistance to the vessel after the incident. HG ASA’s initial consideration was nevertheless that no assistance was required by outside resources for immediate response action. However, in the days following the incident a number of national operators, including the on-site personnel of the Spanish and Argentine national Antarctic programs, as well as IAATO members, offered and gave the MS Nordkapp invaluable assistance. Norway recognizes and extends appreciation to all Parties and Organizations that have offered and provided assistance during and after the incident. Some of the key assistance that was provided is described in the below.
Damage control
HG ASA approached the HMS Endurance (UK) asking for assistance with diving operations to assess the level of vessel damage. The HMS Endurance provided technical advice on the damage sustained by the vessel, as well as damage repair. HMS Endurance’s diving team conducted an underwater inspection of the vessel hull providing photography and video footage to enable a seaworthiness assessment by Det Norske Veritas2 prior to transiting from Port Foster to Maxwell Bay.  
At arrival in Deception Island the HMS Endurance also provided technical advice on use of maritime pollution equipment.
Handling of passengers and crew
While passengers were transferred from M/S Nordkapp to M/S Nordnorge using the vessels’ own Polar Circle boats,  HMS Endurance provided boat and helicopter cover on their own initiative. In addition to requesting the assistance of M/S Nordnorge for transport of passengers and crew, HG ASA also approached another IAATO vessel for transport assistance, and received a willing response. Due to weather conditions this action was, however, not carried through. The HMS Endurance transported 50 Nordkapp crew to King George Island, from where they were transported by Princess Cruises onboard the Golden Princess  to Ushuaia.
Assistance related to assessments of environmental damage
In the aftermath of the fuel spill in the Deception Island caldera continuous oil spill and damage surveys, observations and analyses were carried out by members of the Spanish and Argentine national Antarctic programs present at the site. Norwegian authorities received regular updates from the work done by scientist and staff at Gabriel de Castilla station, and were on basis of these reports able to continuously assess the development of the situation and consider the need for any further response actions.
Furthermore, on 1 February IAATO requested all its member vessels visiting Deception Island to monitor for and report back on any observations related to the fuel spill. In addition, three IAATO vessels (Polar Pioneer, M/S Hanseatic, M/S National Geographic Endeavour) were tasked to complete more detailed inspections of the shores along Port Foster and/or Neptunes Bellows. 
A number of useful reports were received during the following days, supporting the findings of the on-site personnel. 
On 4 February divers onboard IAATO Member Lindblad Expedition’s M/S National Geographic Endeavour made a dive in Neptune’s Bellows in an attempt to investigate the site of the grounding. Damaged areas on Raven Rock were observed, with a total dimension from the lowest point on the west to the eastern margin of the scraped area of at least 8 meters.  From the lowest point on the NNW to the south margin of the scrape was at least 6 meters.
Maritime inquiry
A maritime inquiry was conducted in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on 5 March. The main findings of the inquiry can be summarized as follows:  
    • The cause of the grounding was human error (faulty navigation). Wind probably had limited, if any, influence on the situation.
    • There was no technical aspects related to ship or navigation that caused or contributed to the grounding.
    • The maritime inquiry confirmed that a small spill of marine diesel oil (MGO) occurred during response action following the grounding. However, it also established that is not possible to estimate the accurate amount of fuel spilled during the incident.
Notifications to the Antarctic Treaty system
Article 7 (2) of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol on Prevention of Marine Pollution states that: “Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated immediately to all Parties and to the Committee”. 
On Friday 2 February, after having been informed about the discharge of small amounts of marine diesel oil into the Deception Island caldera, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) submitted a notification about the incident to Antarctic Treaty Parties through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (cf. ATS/2007/C2e). The notification was based on information received so far from the scene of the incident.

MFA continuously considered the need for follow-up notification in the following days, and decided, based on incoming reports from the site, that no further incident update was necessary until Wednesday 7 February at which time the vessel was about to leave Antarctica and it had been duly confirmed that there were no observable remains of the spill in the area (and no effects detected). MFA thus circulated a final notification on 7 February through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (cf. ATS/2007/C4e).
3. Lessons learned 
Although the grounding incident at Deception Island was significant, and the damages sustained by the ship were large, the overall consequences of the grounding for human safety and the environment were limited and had as such a lucky outcome. The incident, the handling of the incident both at the scene of the incident and at home, and other aspects related to the incident has brought a number of issues related to ship safety and incident handling to the attention of Norwegian authorities. These are issues that will require further evaluation and consideration in the months and years to come. In the below some of these issues are highlighted as it is believed that these matters may have wider interest. 
In this context it is also useful to take note of WP 17 submitted by France to ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh, as well as the discussion following the introduction of this document (ref paras 94-98 in the final report). WP 17 on Contingency Planning and Emergency Response induced a discussion on the risks to human safety and to the environment in the context of Antarctic activities. Based on the discussion COMNAP agreed to submit a paper on the subject to ATCM XXX, which likely will complement some of the issues raised in the below3. Furthermore, a number of relevant issues have been drawn up in other documents submitted to this meeting (cf. eg. WP 6 (USA) and WP 23 (UK)). 
Operational issues
Response equipment 
In order to respond to a fuel spill incident it is important that adequate response equipment is available to make a timely and appropriate response. In ”Guidelines for ships operating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters”4 it is suggested that all ships navigating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters should be adequately equipped and their crews properly trained to provide effective damage control and minor hull repair. Furthermore it is suggested that all ships should have the capability to contain and clean up minor deck and over side spills. 
The M/S Nordkapp was equipped with oil spill contingency equipment5, as requested by Norwegian authorities in context of activity approval. No requirements have, however, been specified with respect to type and amount of equipment. 
With regard to the Deception Island incident it was initially reported in the aftermath of the fuel spill that due to the weather conditions the oil boom that had been deployed was not able to contain the entire amount of the light weight surface spill. However, assessment of pictures from the incident scene also indicated that i) the type of equipment was potentially not the most appropriate for the type of fuel spill experienced (eg. not appropriate for the type of fuel) and ii) that the deployment of equipment seems to have been faulty, indicating lack of sufficient competence in use of the equipment. The report from the maritime inquiry also notes the issue of type of equipments vs. type of fuel. The inquiry report also suggests that the crews’ familiarity with the oil spill response equipment could have been better, and that training in use of the equipment was limited.
The Deception Island incident indicated that it is necessary to consider issues related to type and use of equipment more closely. Consequently, as a result of the incident Norwegian authorities will take the following follow-up actions:
    • Consider closely what types of equipment are appropriate for handling different types of fuel spills in Antarctica, ia. by considering experiences gained by the various Antarctic operators, by Arctic operators and Best Available Technology (BAT) in general. 
    • Consider whether there is a need to strengthen the legal requirements, through global IMO rules, related to use of response equipment and the competency in using it (documented training). This is an especially relevant issue in the process relating to the consideration of national implementation of Annex VI and its provision on preventive measures in Article 3. 
Heavy Fuels vs. Light Fuels 
The M/S Nordkapp used light marine diesel oil (MGO), which was an important factor in limiting the consequences of the spill at Deception Island. 
When Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) is released to the environment its natural degradation is very slow due to the heaviness of the product as such. When released in near coastal areas it usually ends up at the beach. If the beach is left un-cleaned, such oils can stay in the environment for a very long time giving the fact that it clings very efficiently to hard surfaces if released under the right circumstances.
Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. They can, however, result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. 
The Deception Island incident indicated that type of fuel used indeed is a vital consideration. This is an issue that has been highlighted in earlier ATCM discussions, cumulating in ATCM Decision 8 (2005) in which the Treaty Parties decided to address a request to the International Maritime Organization to examine mechanisms for restricting the use of Heavy Fuel Oil  in Antarctic waters, taking into account i) the relatively high risk of fuel release in the Antarctic Treaty area due to conditions such as icebergs, sea-ice, and uncharted waters; and ii) the high potential of environmental impacts associated with a spill and emission of HFO in the Antarctic Treaty area.   
At ATCM XXIX (ref. para 113) Norway offered to keep the ATCM informed as this issue is progressed in the IMO. Norway has submitted a document to IMO sub-committee for Bulk, Liquids and Gases. The document will be discussed during the 11th session in April 2007. Norway proposes in respect of the Antarctic area, except for ships engaged in a search and rescue operation any use and carriage of heavy grade oil and for all ships, any discharge into the sea of oil or oily mixtures from any ship shall be prohibited.
Consequently, as a result of the incident Norwegian authorities will take the following follow-up actions:
    • Continue to bring the HFO issue (cf. ATCM Decision 8 (2005)) forward in the IMO system. 
    • Consider how experience from policy developed for Norwegian Arctic regions regarding restrictions on use can prove useful in the context of the Antarctic situation6. 
Rescue capacity 
It is important that passenger ships are prepared for operations in areas remote from SAR facilities, both with regard to survival equipment and passenger handling in case full evacuation is necessary. 
After the grounding incident it was not possible for M/S Nordkapp to continue with its passengers onboard, and it was necessary to implement a controlled evacuation. Two aspects made this matter one of the lesser concerns during this particular incident: i) the sister ship of the damaged ship (M/S Nordnorge) was nearby and had sufficient capacity to take onboard the evacuated passengers, and ii) the IAATO organizational agreement in which member vessels agree to assist other member vessel in any emergency would ensure that other vessels in the nearby area would provide assistance if M/S Nordnorge had not been available for evacuation purposes. 
 In the context of rescue capacity it is interesting to note  the ‘Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities’ approved by the Maritime Safety Committee (MSC) of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO). In this document in is emphasized that SAR co-operation planning arrangements should be enhanced for ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities, and the use of voyage ‘pairing’ is suggested (i.e. two or more passenger ships operating in the same general area at the same time, using each other as a SAR facility in case of accident ). The guidance provided in this document is important to consider further in the context of Antarctic operations, as Antarctica very well can be defined as a “remote area” in the context of rescue facilities. 
It should furthermore be noted that the requirements suggested in the ”Guidelines for ships operating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters” (see foonote 4) with respect to rescue equipment (ref. chapter 11 in the guidelines) is useful guidance to all ships operating in Antarctica, whether they operate in ice-covered waters or not.
Communication and information issues
Information and communication with/from operator 
Procedures relating to notification about incidents at sea is in Norway regulated through the Seaworthiness Act7 and Regulations pertaining to notification about incidents at sea8. The procedures apply to all Norwegian vessels, and provide procedures for reporting to coastal states, Norwegian maritime authorities, etc. M/S Nordkapp followed these procedures as specified following the incident at Deception Island.
All Norwegian operators in Antarctica are in addition required to give immediate notification of any incidents that occur south of 60º S to Norwegian Antarctic authorities. However, no further specification is given with regard to follow-up reporting. The incident at Deception Island emphasized the importance of clear and accurate information from operator in order to provide a sound and correct basis for any response action that need to be initiated from the authorities. Such clear and accurate information is also necessary in order to comply with internationally agreed exchange of information procedures.
Norwegian Antarctic authorities received an immediate notification from HG ASA in the case of the Deception Island incident. The immediate assessment of the situation from the operator’s side was that the incident was not critical with regard to safety of ship or passengers and that the situation did not pose any risk to the environment. 
The Deception Island incident indicates that it is extremely important to have clear provisions with regard to information and communication during incidents. Consequently, as a result of the incident Norwegian authorities will take the following follow-up actions:
    • Consider how national requirements to operators regarding communication and reporting during incidents can be strengthened and clarified.
    • Further develop national incident response strategy.
    • Consider and discuss whether there could be advantages in developing a common incident response strategy framework within the ATS.
Issues related to cooperation during incidents 
Antarctica is relatively isolated and usually inaccessible for immediate deployment of national representatives (response team, environmental experts, etc.) to follow up any incident on site. On-site assessment and consideration of incident is on the other hand vital for the authorities in order to assess the need for response actions. In some instances, there may be representatives from other Parties or organizations on or near the site that could assist in such assessments. It is important to explore how on-site resources can be utilized in a best possible manner.
During the Deception Island incident Norwegian authorities were fortunate to receive invaluable information from on-site national operators as well as IAATO members in assessing the development of the situation. The operators had an interest in assessing the situation for their own purposes which became an advantage for Norwegian authorities. In other instances it might have been necessary to request assistance from operators in the nearby area.
The Deception Island incident indicates that it is extremely important to be able to use support from other operators on the scene in assessing the situation and need for response action. Consequently, as a result of the incident Norwegian authorities will initiate the following follow-up actions:
    • Further develop national communication procedures in order to initiate communication between on-site representatives of other Parties and authorities
    • Consider and discuss whether there could be advantages in developing a common incident response strategy framework within the ATS.
Issues related to information exchange with Treaty Parties 
Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty require each Contracting Party to inform other Contracting Parties of all their expeditions to and within Antarctica. A number of later ATCM recommendations specify the form of such exchange of information9. The tourist expeditions organized out of Norway (including those conducted onboard M/S Nordkapp) are annually reported through the Norwegian web-based Annual Exchange of Information10. 
Article 7(2) of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol on Prevention of Marine Pollution states that: “Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated immediately to all Parties and to the Committee”. The Deception Island incident showed that many Parties may need further and more detailed information after initial notification about the incident in question. 
Furthermore, Article 4 (3) of Annex VI to the Environmental Protocol on Liability Arising From Environmental Emergencies states that “Each Party shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and co-operative responses to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and co-operative response procedures by its operators that cause environmental emergencies”.
Consequently, as a result of the incident Norwegian authorities wish initially to initiate the following follow-up actions:
    • Assess procedures for pre-season exchange of information
    • Further develop national procedures for incident reporting
    • Consider and discuss whether there could be advantages in developing a common incident information exchange strategy framework within the ATS.
