





Revised Management Plan for 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 150 
Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay,
King George Island





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 150
ARDLEY ISLAND,  MAXWELL BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND 


1. Description of Values to be Protected
Ardley Island (62°13' S; 58°56' W) was originally designated as Site of Special Interest (SSSI) No. 33 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991), pursuant to a proposal by Chile. The Area has been protected in order to conduct intensive research, but it also includes a visitor zone, with a scientific station and tourist zone, within the protected area or in its surroundings. During ATCM XXIV, through Measure 3, the expiry date of protection was extended.
The island was designated as a Protected Area on account of the diverse assemblage of bird species that breed in it (Table 1), in order to allow a study of their ecology and the factors that affect their populations.

Table 1: List of bird species breeding at Ardley Island

Spanish common name
English common name
Species
Pingüino Adelia
Adelie penguin
Pygoscelis adeliae
Pingüino de barbijo
Chinstrap penguin
Pygoscelis antarctica
Pingüino papua
Gentoo penguin
Pygoscelis papua
Skua o salteador pardo
Brown skua
Chatharacta antarctica lonnbergi
Skua o salteador polar
South Polar skua
Chatharacta maccormicki
Petrel gigante
Southern giant petrel
Macronectes giganteus
Petrel de Wilson
Wilson’s storm petrel
Oceanites oceanicus
Golondrina de vientre blanco
Blackbellied storm petrel
Fregetta tropica
Petrel damero o del cabo
Cape petrel
Daption capense
Gaviota dominicana
Kelp gull
Larus dominicanus
Gaviotín antártico
Antarctic tern
Sterna vittata
Paloma antártica
Lesser sheathbill
Chionis alba

Its beaches are also visited by seals, which use the Area to rest and moult. The most common ones are Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii). During the last few seasons, Chilean researchers have reported the occurrence of leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) preying on penguins in the area.
Ardley Island also possesses a developed and outstanding flora, with several species of lichens and macrolichens, mosses and vascular plants. Both the flora and fauna are thought to be extremely sensitive to human disturbance.
The island also has geological and paleontological values that, even though they were not taken into account in the original designation, might aid in the study of its evolution and that of King George Island and of other islands of the South Shetland group. 
Due to its proximity to Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, Ardley Island is an attractive area for tourist activities. Over the few last years, tourism has increased from a few visitors to approximately a hundred visitors per season (from January to April of each year).
2. Aims and Objectives
The Management Plan of ASPA Nº 150 aims to:
    • Preserve the community of birds and the terrestrial ecosystem.
    • Avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance in the Area.
    • Allow scientific research on marine Antarctic birds, on the ecosystem and physical environment associated with the values for which the Area is protected, with the less possible interference.
    • Allow other scientific research in the Area provided it does not compromise the values for which the Area is protected. 
    • Minimize the possibilities of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area. 
    • Allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management Plan.
    • Allow regulated tourist visits in the Area in accordance with the applicable code of conduct. 
3. Management Activities
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:
    • Copies of this Management Plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at the following locations:
    1. Julio Escudero Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    2. Eduardo Frei Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    3. Bellingshausen Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    4. Great Wall Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
    5. King Seyong Station, King George Island.
    6. Artigas Station, King George Island.
    7. Jubany Station, King George Island.
    • The staff to be posted at Ardley Island will be specifically trained on all matters concerning this Management Plan and the measures established in the Madrid Protocol.
    • Signposts (markers, signs or any other information structures) will be placed on sites where they do not disturb the protected values or research activities, for scientific, management or information purposes, and shall be maintained in good condition.
    • The circulation will only take place on vegetation-free areas, taking a wide berth from the fauna, except when the scientific projects specifically mention otherwise and provided the correspondent harmful interference permits have been issued.
    • Visits shall be made as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designed and to ensure management and the maintenance measures are adequate.
    • Entry into the Area by vehicles of any kind is strictly prohibited. Work crews should consist of no more than 10 persons during critical stages of birds’ breeding cycle (incubation, hatching and early chick rearing) and no more than 20 at any other time.
4. Period of Designation
Designated for an indefinite period.
5. Maps and Photographs
Three maps are enclosed to this Management Plan as Annexes:
Map 1. Ardley Island in relation to King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
Map 2. Ardley Island. Map showing Ardley Is and the main stations and constructions in the area, including the roads and main access points to the protected area. 
Map 3. Ardley Island. Detailed map of the transit area for visitors and tourists across the protected area,including the main stations and buildings outside the protected area.
6. Description of the Area 
i. Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Ardley Island (62º13’ S; 58º54’ W) is located in the southwest coast of King George Island, about 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Peninsula, Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). It is about 1 km southeast of the Bellingshausen Station (Russian Federation) and of the Escudero and Frei Stations (Chile), and about 5 km east of the Great Wall Station (China).
The island is about 2.0 km long and 1.5 km at its widest, and rises to about 50 m altitude. Geomorphologically, the Area comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are some raised beach terraces.
It is snow and ice free in summer. A small freshwater pond, about 100 m long, on the southwest part of the island, remains between November and February.
The protected area comprises most of the island, excluding a marked path that starts at the isthmus joining the island to Fildes Peninsula and ends at the scientific structures, as well as a strip in the southwest part of the island extending approximately 5 m from the coastline (but not above 1 m above sea level) to the geographical corner at 58º 55' 12.23'' W; 62º 12' 42.05'' S (Map 3).
BREEDING BIRDS
The seabird community of Ardley Island is diverse and of exceptional biological interest. Of particular importance are the breeding colonies of Pygoscelid penguins. Ardley Island also represents one of the few places where the three species of Pygoscelid penguins breed together sympatrically. Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua), whose number of breeding pairs has being around 4,000 in the last twelve breeding seasons. This is one of the biggest breeding colony of gentoo penguin censed of this species within the South Shetland Islands and probably in the Antarctic. However, now there are only around 300 breeding pairs of Adelie penguins (P. adeliae) and very few of Chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica) (Table 2).
Table 2. Breeding population of penguins on Ardley Island from 1994/95 to 2005/06
Antarctic season
Breeding population (pairs)

Chinstrap
Change (%)
Adelie
Change (%)
Gentoo
Change (%)
1994/95
45
 
1,095
 
3,772
 
1995/96
49
8.89
1,226
11.96
2,985
-20.86
1996/97
36
-26.53
923
-24.71
2,974
-0.37
1997/98
33
-8.33
1,173
27.09
3,146
5.78
1998/99
43
30.30
1,192
1.62
3,349
6.45
1999/00
34
-20.93
974
-18.29
3,911
16.78
2000/01
26
-23.53
880
-9.65
4,472
14.34
2001/02
22
-15.38
780
-11.36
4,444
-0.63
2002/03
35
59.09
771
-1.15
5,131
15.46
2003/04
29
-17.14
559
-27.50
4,957
-3.39
2004/05
13
-55.17
409
-26.83
4,798
-3.21
2005/06
9
-30.77
334
-18.34
4,635
-3.40

Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on Ardley Island for many years mainly by Chilean and German scientists, with brief studies made also by scientists from Russia, Korea and China. Other breeding species of particular importance are Southern Giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), Brown and South Polar skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii and C. maccormicki), Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), Black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica) and Snowy sheathbills (Chionis alba). 
German studies indicate that the Giant petrel breeding population has declined by about 80% in recent years and point to strong evidence that numerical fluctuations of these particular populations are a direct response to disturbances produced by large numbers of visitors, aircraft overflights and station constructions. Disturbed pairs have moved their breeding sites to less influenced areas. In the case of the Skuas breeding population, reflects anthropogenic and natural influences in the recorded fluctuations caused by variable food availability and weather conditions. The effects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site.
MARINE MAMMALS
Seals are usual visitors of Ardley Island. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed near the Area between September and November, on beaches and on the sea ice in Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). During December and March, some Elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals and Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) visit the Area to rest or to moult. 
Over the last few seasons, Chilean researchers have reported the occurrence of Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) in the vicinity of Ardley Island, probably preying on penguins, mainly in the eastern area of the protected area.
In the summer, humpback (Megaptera novaeangliae) and minke (Balaenoptera bonaerensis) whales can be seen from the beaches in the waters of Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay) off Ardley Island..
VEGETATION
The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive plant communities in the South Shetland Islands, notably the climax fell field ecosystem dominated by macro lichens as Himantormia lugubris and several species of the Gender Usnea. Such vegetation is extremely sensitive to human intervention and is very easily damaged. 
The presence of Antarctic grass Deschampsia antarctica reveals a significant increase in size and number of the recorded colonies. It is suggested that this population increases as a response to warmer and longer growing seasons, caused by regional warming.  
ii. Special and managed zones within the Area
There is a special zone in Ardley Island, outside the protected area, where tourist visits are permitted. Tourist visits shall be restricted exclusively to this zone. Groups shall be limited to a maximum of 10 persons at a time, accompanied by a qualified guide. Such groups shall have access only to a strip on the north coast of the island, as far as 300 m west of Braillard Point (58º 55' 12,23'' W; 62º 12' 42,05'' S, Map 3).
The guide shall make the group aware of this management plan and the code of conduct for the area.
The company shall inform the relevant authorities or their representatives in Antarctica at least 24 hours in advance of tourist visits and provide a list with the name and nationality of each visitor and the name of the group guide.
Access to the rest of the island shall be restricted exclusively to scientific activities specified in a permit. 
iii. Structures within and near the Area
There are two Chilean semi-permanent summer-only research refuges. Ripamonti I, in the northern coast of Ardley and Ripamonti II (former AWI hut), 200 meters south west from Brallaird Point on the south eastern area, situated inside the penguins’ breeding colonies. There are also two Argentinean buildings in the area that make up the Ballvé Refuge, approximately 50 meters east of Ripamonti I. 
An Argentinean radio beacon facilitates navigation, looking towards Maxwell Bay (Fildes Bay). 
All the described structures remain in the Area year-round. 
iv. Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
There are four Protected Areas in Nelson and King George Islands, close to Ardley Island,. The nearest area is Fildes Peninsula, ASPA No. 125, which lies about 2.0 km west and north-northwest of Ardley Island. The ASPA No. 128, West shore of Admiralty Bay, is located about 25.3 km northeast of Ardley Island. Also in King George Island, the ASPA No. 132, Potter Peninsula, is approximately 14.5 km east of Ardley Island. Finally, Harmony Point, ASPA No. 133, is located around 18.6 km southwest of Ardley Island. 
7. Permit Conditions 
Entry into the protected area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate National Authority. Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
It is issued only for scientific purposes or for essential management purposes, consistent with plan objectives, such as inspection, maintenance or review activities which must be undertaken in accordance with the objectives of the Management Plan and cannot be served elsewhere.
The actions permitted may not jeopardize the scientific and ecological values of the Area.
Any management activity will be developed in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
The actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan.
During the stated period, the permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried at all times by the scientific staff present within the Area.
At the end of the period, a report shall be supplied to the appropriate National Authority mentioned in the permit, including any activities undertaken that were not explicitly mentioned in the authorized Permit.
i. Access to and movement within the Area 
Any access to the protected area will be possible only with a permit issued by the appropriate national authority. Access to Ardley Island shall be by small boat or on foot. Movement within the protected area shall be only on foot.
Boat access
The northern coast of Ardley Island is the appropriate sector to land. Small zodiac boats may land in the Island. Recommended and preferred landing spots are the beach in front of Ripamonti I, in the Luis Point area, and the beach at Faro Point. Groups of 10-20 visitors are allowed to land at a time, depending on the breeding cycle stage of birds. Boat crew or other people in boats are not allowed to move on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing sites and around the refuges (specially managed area).
On foot
From Fildes Peninsula, it is possible to reach the island on foot, crossing the isthmus during low tide. Pedestrian activity should be restricted to the marked path (see Map 3), avoiding whenever possible areas with vegetation and close to the seabird breeding sites, except as specified in a permit for research studies within the protected area. Tourist activity may only be conducted on the strip designated as a specially managed area and only with the assistance of an appropriate guide authorized by IAATO.
Vehicle access
The use of any type of vehicles, including amphibious craft on land, jeeps or terrestrial vehicles of any type, are not allowed in the Protected Area. 
Overflights
Due to the presence of breeding seabirds on the island, landing by aircraft is prohibited within the protected area and any necessary overflight shall be conducted according to the height restrictions imposed in the following table:
Table 3: Minimum overflights heights within the Area, according to aircraft type

Aircraft type
Number of engines
Minimum height above ground


Meters
Feet
Helicopter
1
750
2460
Helicopter
2
1000
3300
Fixed-wing
1 or 2
450
1500
Fixed-wing
4
1000
3300
Aircraft landing at and taking off from Teniente Marsh airfield or from any other takeoff site or platform should avoid overflying the island. Exceptions will be made to these flight restrictions only for scientific purposes, in an emergency or for exceptional management purposes, which should be specified in the permit and in the appropriate report justifying the activity.
ii. Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time or place
Scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem or scientific values of the Area, or somehow diminish the value of the Area as a reference site.
Essential management activities, including monitoring.
The appropriate National Authority should be notified of any activities or measures undertaken that were not included in the authorized Permit, including the tourist visits.
iii. Installation, modification or removal of structures
No additional structures will be erected in the Area, except for essential scientific or management activities, and with a proper permit for a specified period. Any scientific equipment to be installed in the Area shall be approved in a Permit and clearly labeled, indicating country, name of the principal investigator or agency and year of installation. All such items shall be made of materials that pose minimal risk of harm to the fauna or of contamination to the Area.
Installation, maintenance, modification or removal of structures shall be undertaken in a manner that minimizes disturbance to flora and fauna. Removal of structures, equipment or makers for which the period specified in the Permit has expired, should also be considered in the Permit.
iv. Location and regulation of field camps
Camping should be avoided within the Area.
However, if such activity is considered necessary for essential purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping may be allowed at the vicinity of the existing refuges. No other locations shall be used for this purpose, in order to restrict human impacts and reduce their effects on the Area.
v. Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be into the Area
No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the corresponding Permit, shall be properly stored during the stated period, so that risks inherent to their introduction into the environment are minimized. If releases occur which are likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than that of leaving the material at the place.
Fuel, food and other material are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes related with the scientific or management activities for which the Permit has been granted and every precaution shall be taken against the risk of accidental introductions.
Any materials so introduced shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the stated period.
vi. Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by a Permit issued in accordance with Article 3 of Annex II to the Madrid Protocol. Where the activity involves taking or harmful interference with the flora or fauna in the Area, the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes should be used as a minimum standard.
vii. Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall only be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Removal of dead biological specimens or geological samples for scientific purposes must not exceed levels that affect the other species or values in the Area and only with the purpose of developing pathological studies.
Anything of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed unless the impact of removal is greater than leaving the material in the area. If this is the case, the appropriate National Authority should be notified.
viii. Waste disposal
All the non-physiological waste shall be removed from the Area. Domestic liquid waste may be dumped into the sea only as an exception, in accordance with Article 5 of Annex III to the Madrid Protocol. Preferably, waste should be temporally stored and removed from the Area at the end of the stated period.
The waste generated as a consequence of the activities developed in the Area should be temporally stored nearby the refuges, in a secure place against accidental loss. It should be properly labeled as Trash. At the end of the period, it should be removed from the protected area and from the Treaty Area.
ix. Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of limited samples of plant material and animals for with scientific purposes, for analyses or review, or for protection measures, as specified in a permit.
Any specific sites subject to long-term monitoring that are vulnerable to inadvertent disturbance should be appropriately marked.
To avoid interference with long-term research and monitoring activities or possible duplication of effort, persons planning new projects within the Area should consult with established national programs working at Ardley Island before initiating the work.
Parties conducting long-term research and monitoring programs should cooperate closely, facilitate communication among scientists working in the area, and regularly conduct joint assessments of their research lines and products.
To help maintain the scientific values found at Ardley Island, visitors shall follow strictly the guidelines in this Management Plan.
x. Requirements for reports
The principal holder for each permit issued shall submit to the appropriate National Authority a report describing the activities undertaken in the Area once the stated period has ended. Such report should include the information identified in the Visit Report Form, recommended by SCAR and enclosed with the Permit. The report should be stored with the National Authority in order to enable it to provide summary descriptions of the activities conducted in the Annual Exchange of Information or to provide the necessary information on human activities within the Area to all the interested Parties in the management of the Area; and further maintain a record of usage which may serve the review processes of the management plan, improve the scientific use of the area and contribute to its best environmental protection.

ANNEXES: Maps



Map 1. Ardley Island in relation to King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
(Map Database, Project 153, IGM-INACH, Mapping and GIS of South Shetland Islands)




Map 2. Ardley Island. Map showing Ardley Island and the main stations and constructions in the area, including the roads and main access points to the protected area.
(Map Database 1:2000, Project IGM-INACH No. 153, Mapping and GIS of South Shetland Islands. 2005)













 Map 3. Ardley Island. Detailed map of specially managed area, with the path from the isthmus and the visitor strip on the coast outside the protected area.
 (Map Database 1:2000, Project IGM-INACH No. 153, Mapping and GIS of South Shetland Islands. 2005)


