





Area Protection and Management. Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula






Area Protection and Management
Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at
MARION NUNATAKS, CHARCOT ISLAND, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA
Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection
 by the United Kingdom

1.  Introduction
The United Kingdom proposes the designation of Marion Nunataks, Charcot Island, Antarctic Peninsula as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) under Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Marion Nunataks are unique for the maritime Antarctic in that they appear to contain neither predatory arthropods nor Collembola (springtails), which are otherwise ubiquitous and important members of the terrestrial fauna of the biogeographical zone.  As such, the Area provides exceptional opportunities for the scientific study of terrestrial biological communities from the maritime Antarctic where key ecological components are absent.  The Area also contains the only Antarctic examples of two lichen species, and an exceptional development of three mosses that are encountered only rarely at latitudes south of 65 oS.
The Management Plan aims to protect the unique terrestrial ecosystem found in the Area and, in particular, reduce the risk of invasive species introductions from both local and global sites. 
2.  Management plan format
The management plan has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol and the Guidelines for implementation of the framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, appended to Resolution 1 (2000) of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting SXII. 
3.  Intersessional review
The draft management plan is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. The United Kingdom would be pleased to convene an intersessional contact group to discuss the draft plan for full consideration at CEP XI

