





Report of the Antarctic Treaty inspections undertaken jointly by Sweden, France and New Zealand in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Antarctic Treaty inspections undertaken jointly by Sweden, France and New Zealand in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Background
The right to freedom of access to conduct inspections is a cornerstone of the Antarctic Treaty (the Treaty) and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol).  Inspections demonstrate the open and transparent nature of the Antarctic Treaty System and are important in promoting the protection of the Antarctic environment, ensuring compliance, exchanging information and monitoring activities within Antarctica.
Furthermore the role of the inspection has been emphasised in various Treaty resolutions over the years, for example to inspect less accessible stations on the continent as well as encouraging co-operation amongst Treaty Parties to conduct joint inspections.
Introduction
Two stations were inspected – Amundsen-Scott South Pole (United States) and Concordia (France and Italy). 
The inspections took place between 14 and 16 January 2007 as a joint venture between Sweden, France and New Zealand.  The inspection team was made up of the following persons designated as observers in accordance with Article VII of the Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol:
Professor Anders Karlqvist
Director
Swedish Polar Research Secretariat

Sweden
Greger Widgren
Ambassador, 
Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Sweden
Dr Gérard Jugie
Director, 
Institut Polaire Français

France
Peter Smith
Manager Corporate Services, 
Antarctica New Zealand

New Zealand
Dr Gérard Jugie accompanied the team to Concordia but to ensure impartiality did not take part in the inspection of the station.
The inspection report has been sent to the Treaty Parties concerned for comment in accordance with Article 14(4) of the Protocol.  All responses received were of a minor drafting nature and have been incorporated into the inspection report.   
Rationale
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station was last inspected in 1988, before construction of the new station building, and Concordia Station has never been inspected.  Hence these two modern stations were both inspected for the first time.

Both new stations have several features in common.  They are in remote central locations of Antarctica, situated high on the polar plateau in extremely hostile environments.   They are science driven and science support is the dominating operational issue.  Furthermore the science undertaken at Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia is similar and complementary.  
Inspecting both stations with their many similarities provided us opportunities for direct comparison, which we consider greatly assisted the inspection process and will enhance the quality of the subsequent report and information exchange.
Conclusions
Based on our observations and findings we conclude that both Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations are complying to a high standard with the provisions and spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
Highlights
Our major observations were:
Scientific Research
Scientific research of global significance is a priority at Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations.
The most striking observation at both Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations is the high level of scientific activity that is taking place there.  Both stations are strongly driven by science of global significance and seek to address fundamental science questions in astrophysics and cosmology.
International Collaboration
The Concordia Station joint partnership model strongly demonstrates the spirit of collaboration envisaged under Article III of the Treaty and Article 6 of the Protocol.
Concordia is a unique station, built and operated by two nations together as equal partners – Italy and France.  Everyone we met on the station commented on the positive value of this collaborative venture.  Overall we were impressed by the way the two partners balanced their interests to jointly manage the station.  
The international dimension of activities at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station is also evident.  In this case it is primarily related to science and cooperative research programmes under NSF auspices.  For example this season the IceCube project is expected to include scientists from twenty-nine institutions from seven different countries.  We also noted the involvement of non-US personnel in the logistical operations of the Station and during the course of our inspection we met nationals from our own countries working there.   
Operational Pressures
Replacing and developing facilities in Antarctica is a significant challenge, not only because of the remote location and harsh environment but also because of the difficulty in predicting scientific research support requirements many years ahead.  
The future impact of the huge scientific attraction to these isolated sites is difficult to predict.  Also the types of research undertaken are usually technically challenging, which places significant pressures on the stations to meet the competing demands for operational and scientific projects.  
Operational Best Practice
Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations are the newest in Antarctica and we observed many examples of innovation and best practice in the operations at both locations.

Particular areas of high quality and best practice include building design and construction, recycling of infrastructure, waste management, energy management, water production and conservation, and logistics systems.   
Antarctic Treaty Inspection Checklist
Inspection checklists provide a useful internal review tool for station management to monitor their own compliance with the Treaty and Protocol
The practice of inspections in recent years has been to adopt the standard Treaty checklist as a basis to structure an inspection, which now also covers aspects of specific relevance to the Protocol.  We too found this a useful tool to capture most technical aspects of the stations and their activities.  
Also it has become common practice for the station management to complete checklists beforehand and this was the case for both Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations – both to a high standard.  
In addition to its original purpose to assist Treaty inspections, we view the checklist as an extremely useful tool that all stations should complete and maintain to monitor their own compliance with the Treaty and Protocol.   
Full Report
The full report of these inspections provides more detailed observations together with the standard Treaty checklists for each station prepared to a high standard by the station management.  
Acknowledgements
The inspection of these remote stations would not have been possible for this team without logistical support from the national operators in this part of Antarctica and we would like to express our gratitude to the United States National Science Foundation (NSF), Antarctica New Zealand (ANZ), the Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide (PNRA – Italy) and the French Polar Institute (IPEV) for their support.  
We would also like to thank the managers and personnel at Amundsen-Scott South Pole and Concordia stations for their hospitality and assistance during the course of our inspection programme. 

