





“Trinity Peninsula/Louis Philippe Land”
(Translation of place-name)




“Trinity Peninsula/Louis Philippe Land”
(Translation of place-name)

    1. In the Final Report of the XXVI ATCM, paragraph 73 of  Item 6, Report of the Committee for Environmental Protection, mentions the CEP recommendation of a revised list of Historic Sites and Monuments (CEP VI paragraphs 135-137 and Appendix 5) and records that a Delegation recalled the practice in matters concerning Antarctic geographic names.
    2. The Delegation concerned was the Delegation of Chile. The concern was related to the place-name applied to number 37 of the List of Historical Sites and Monuments approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting:
    3. “Statue erected in 1948 at General Bernardo O´Higgins Base (Chile), Trinity Peninsula, of Bernardo O´Higgins, the first ruler of Chile to envisage the importance of Antarctica. This monument is representative of pre-IGY activities in Antarctica and has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctica since it was during O´Higgins government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820”. 
    4. There is no concern or objection to the English text of number 37 of the approved List. The List carries a Note stating: “The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting neither approves, nor disapproves of the place-names used in the listing below”. The statement by the Delegation of Chile was made taking into account that the Spanish translations would be made after the end of the Madrid ATCM and concerned the linguistic practice where the name that differs more from the one used in the language first applied should prevail. In this particular case, Península Trinidad is used by the United Kingdom and other countries included Argentina, a Spanish-speaking country. It is not used by Chile, a Spanish-speaking country where the official designation of the northern portion of the Antarctic Peninsula has been “Tierra de Luis Felipe/Louis Philippe Land” since 1884 (Alejandro Bertrand, Mapa de Chile para el uso de todas las escuelas de la República, Santiago, 1884). It was used again in “Antártida Sudamericana” produced by Luis Risopatrón, in 1907, an official map used by Chile and Argentina in an unsuccessful attempt made that same year to agree to an Antarctic boundary delimitation.
    5. The original List, amended, corrected and improved by the new listing established in 2003, used the name “Trinity Peninsula” in the English version, and the name Tierra de Luis Felipe” in the Spanish version. In spite of the warning contained in the Final Report, the translators of the XXVI ATCM ignored it and, curiously enough, did not take into account the already existent Spanish version of the List of approved Sites and Monuments.
    6. At the XXIX ATCM, in Item 7b) of the CEP Report, mention is made of IP 92 Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised list of historic Sites and Monuments. Draft Guidelines for its Application, introduced by Chile. In that document, Chile mentioned again its discrepancy with the fact that he Spanish translation does not reflect the established practice in the translation of place-names in the case of Number 37 of the List, and further suggested that the name “Trinity Peninsula” could perhaps be replaced by “Antarctic Peninsula” both in the English and Spanish versions.
    7. The insistence in this argument is not capricious. Trinity Peninsula is probably the place-name with the most extended use at the present. However, it is distinctively a pragmatic decision adopted by the United Kingdom Antarctic Place-Names Committee in 1955. In 1884, when Alejandro Bertrand drew his map of Chile including the northern portion of the Antarctic Peninsula and linking Mount Haddington to the Andean mountains through a profile line drawn in parallel to his chart, he based himself on Chart 1240, Chart of the South Polar Sea, fourth or fifth issue, with James Ross’ track in the area, and Vicendon-Dumoulin´s Atlas Hydrographique which he consulted in Paris. When Luis Risopatrón drew his chart (1907) he could benefit from charts and reports produced by the Gerlache (1897), Nordenskjöld (1901) and Bruce (1903) expeditions. When the first hydrographic chart of the Chilean claimed sector was published by the Departamento de Hidrografía y Navegación in Valparaíso, 1947, the British Admiralty Chart 3205 (1937) had adopted, ten years before, the place-name Trinity Land, but the more restricted concept of Trinity Peninsula, as now defined, was not yet born.
    8. The aspiration towards the objective of “one feature, one name” should be maintained. A FIDS survey in 1945-47 named the central elevation on the tip of the Peninsula, rising to a height of 1370 m and running NE-SW, “Louis Philippe Plateau” (63º36´S 58º21´W) a feature thereafter incorporated into the 1962 issue of Chart 3205. The United States Board on Geographic Names shifted its allegiance from “Louis Philippe Peninsula” to “Louis Philippe Plateau” in 1965.
    9. Some geographic problems should perhaps be addressed before this pragmatic settlement consolidates. Chilean charts containing different names for parts of the plateau, British and other charts which do not fully reflect the geologic unity of the plateau; the fact that “Trinity Peninsula” and “Louis Philippe Land” have no natural geographic south boundary, still contribute to cloud the answer to the question:  Could Bransfield´s designation (“Trinity Land”, 30 January 1820) be more accurately identified with the line of the coast and Dumont d´Urville´s designation (Terre de Louis Philippe”, 27 February 1838) with the rising elevations of the NE portion of the Peninsula” ?
    10. In the meantime, place-names have their principles and rules, the Composite Gazeteer may accommodate severalk names under identical coordinates, and rules for translation of place-names in official documents must be complied with.

 Notes
     
    1. “Trinity Land” can invoke priority of discovery. Bransfield, on 30 January 1820, reported land lying ca. 63º30’S  60º00´W. He named his supposed discovery “Trinity Land” after the Trinity Board. While the above mentioned coordinates point to the NE part of the Antarctic Peninsula, his chart indicates the designation applies to the whole of the Land he saw trending to the eastward.
    2. Did he really sight land in that latitude and longitude? Nineteenth-century sealers considered  Trinity Island (63º48´S 60º45´W) and the nearby Tower Island (63º35’S 59º49´W) as a peninsula of the mainland. The American sealer John Davis roughly charted and understood the insular nature of this presumed land which he called “South Land Whale Island” in 1821-22. If Bransfield sighted a land it most probably was the composite rough profile of Trinity and Tower islands taken together.
    3. Gould (1925)  “The first sighting of the Antarctic continent.” Geographical Journal. Vol. 65, Nº 3, pp.220-225 (including a chart with Bransfield´s track),.  was skeptical of the possibility that Bransfield might have seen the N Coast of Trinity island, or pack ice adhering to the mainland, or the mainland itself, having greatly underestimated his distances due to the fog.
    4. Bransfield´s map showing “Trinity Land partly covered by snow”, now in the Hydrographic Office, pressmark S 92 Shelf Ae 1 (photocopies may be examined at the Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge, and the Royal Geographic Society, London) does not prove or disprove his case either as the drawing is uncertain at the N side and the “Hazy fog” seems to cloud his vision of the mainland to the S side of the arc he draws. His “Journal of the proceedings of the Brig William between the 19th December 1819 and 15 April 1820..” which could have perhaps assisted the assessment of his discovery with the reported position of the William before, during and after 30 January 1820, has not been found. W.H. Shireff´s unpublished report of proceedings to the Admiralty, preserved at the Public Record Office, is not relevant since it was dated 19 December 1819 and contains references to the William´s lost log for February, June and October 1819. Finally the chart drawn by W.H. Goddard to accompany the Memorial by Captain W. Smith, also preserved in the Hydrographic Department, pressmark S 91 Shelf Ae 1, confirms that the mainland was sighted and recognized it as land and not merely islands, but does not dissipate doubts concerning the sighting of the northern tip of the Peninsula.
    5.  We have an authoritative reading of that chart by Thomas Main Bone, Midshipman RN, considered a skilled draughtsman whose sketches formed part of Bransfield´s chart published by the Admiralty in 1822. Bone (1821) maintained that land was undoubtedly seen “in latitude 64º S and trending to the eastward”. 
    6. The Foster/Kendall charts (1829) of the western part of the South Shetlands, including the northern and western coasts of the Antarctic Peninsula contributed most to unify the results of these surveys under the name of Trinity Peninsula.
    7. On 27 February 1838 the N part of  the Antarctic Peninsula was further charted and named “Terre Louis Philippe” after Louis Philippe I, King of France, who had personally instructed Dumont d´Urville to include Antarctica in his voyage of exploration. 
    8. The entry for Trinity Peninsula in Hattersley-Smith  is a high proof of the scholarship and integrity of his work. As in all other entries, it traces the origin and development of the name-places (Trinity Peninsula and Louis Philippe Land) including all relevant charts. (Vide “The History of Place-Names in the British Antarctic Territory”, Vol 2, p. 574).




