





Safety Issues Relating to Passenger Vessels in Antarctic Waters




Safety Issues Relating to Passenger Vessels in Antarctic Waters
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Introduction
    1. The UK has raised the issue of safety of passenger ships in Antarctic waters on a number of occasions (e.g. ATCM XXVI/WP23; ATCM XXVII/WP03).  The UK has particularly highlighted concerns about the increasing trend towards larger cruise ships and the potential problems that such vessels could pose in Antarctica.   The UK again raised the issue at ATCM XXIX, where it was agreed that the matter should be revisited at ATCM XXX.  This paper sets out a series of recommendations of practical steps that the UK believes the ATCM should take towards further enhancing the safety of passenger vessels in Antarctic waters.
Background
Trends in Passenger Vessels visiting Antarctica
    2. In 2002, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) held an informal meeting about tourism in Antarctica, in Aspen.  Five years ago the number of non-Governmental passenger ships operating in Antarctica was 19, of which just 2 carried more than 500 passengers.  The Chairman’s report (ATCM XXV/IP30) from the Aspen meeting noted that “The size and carrying capacity of such large vessels – both in number of passengers and in the amount and type of fuel (e.g. heavy bunker oil), as well as in their capability for operating safely in Antarctic waters – led to concerns over possible accidents and the potential severity of resulting impacts”.  During the 2006/07 season, around 40 non-Governmental passenger vessels operated in Antarctica, of which 8 carried more than 500 passengers.
    3. Whilst there is not necessarily any greater risk associated with larger (for example, those carrying more than 500 passengers) vessels in Antarctic waters, provided they are operated responsibly, arguably the consequences of any serious maritime incident involving such a vessel, from both an environmental and search and rescue perspective, could be significant.  Such vessels are also less likely to be ice-strengthened.  Indeed, during the lengthy debates on the Liability Annex, the ATCM concluded that the most likely event to cause significant environmental impact (or damage) to the Antarctic environment would be a major maritime accident involving a grounding or sinking of a ship.
Existing Standards
    4. Against this background of an increasing trend towards greater number and greater size of passenger vessels in Antarctica, it is however important to note that safety standards are extremely high – there have been no incidents involving passenger vessels resulting in loss of life or significant environmental damage.  Nevertheless, the incident at Deception Island involving the M/S Nordkapp brings into sharp focus the potential for maritime incidents in Antarctica, and the likely difficulties that would be involved in responding effectively to an incident involving a vessel carrying a high number of passengers.
    5. All vessels in Antarctica are required to comply with the stringent international standards imposed by, for example the International Safety Management (ISM) Code, MARPOL 73/78 and SOLAS.  In addition, the vast majority of vessels – including all non-Governmental passenger vessels - operating in Antarctica are currently flagged to, or operated by, Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and are therefore required to comply with relevant ATCM Measures - as well as the provisions of the Environmental Protocol. 
    6. Ships operating within IAATO are also required to ensure compliance with additional standards, for example, having officers or crew members with ice experience on the bridge whilst in Antarctica.  IAATO also expects members to hire a staff team comprised of at least 75% of individuals with previous Antarctic experience (though this is for environmental, rather than safety reasons).  IAATO also co-ordinates the activities of all its member vessels through a ‘ship scheduler’, which records which vessels are in which regions at any one time.  Moreover, IAATO vessels also commit to provide requested assistance to each other, under the Emergency Contingency Plan arrangements (ATCM XXIX/IP091).
    7. Nevertheless, not all operators of passenger vessels are IAATO members.  In some instances, vessels carrying passengers have not attempted to co-ordinate with the IAATO ‘ship scheduler’ at all.  This means that at any one time, there is not a single source of information to identify how many, which, and where, ships are operating in Antarctica.  Should the need arise to co-ordinate a large-scale response to a maritime incident, this lack of logistical information, regarding vessels operating outside of IAATO, would be brought into sharp focus.
Ship Suitability
    8. The ATCM has already, to some extent, considered the issue of ship suitability in Antarctica.  At ATCM XXVIII, the ATCM agreed amendments to the IMO ‘Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-Covered Waters’ to extend the scope of the guidelines to Antarctica.  The ATCM transmitted the Guidelines to the IMO for their consideration (Decision 4(2004)).  The Guidelines were on the agenda of the IMO’s Design and Equipment (DE) Committee, which considered them for the first time in March 2007. 
    9. These Guidelines, however, are in the main relevant only to the design and construction of new ships.  They are also non-binding.  They do, nevertheless, make important statements about ship suitability in ice-covered waters.  Notably that “Not all ships which enter the Arctic and Antarctic environment will be able to navigate safely in all areas at all times of the year” (P-2.7).  
    10. For the Antarctic, the Guidelines define ice-covered waters as those which are ‘South of 60ºS and in which sea ice concentrations of 1/10 coverage or greater are present and which pose a structural risk to ships’.  The Guidelines recommend that:
    • Operations in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters should take due account of factors such as: ship class, environmental conditions, icebreaker escort, prepared tracks, short or local routes, crew experience, support technology and services such as ice-mapping, communications, safe ports, repair facilities and other ships in convoy.
    11. It is for the shipmasters to make decisions about the extent of ice-cover and the safety of the vessel.  Sea-ice data in Antarctica is available to all vessels (for example, through www.polarview.org) and IAATO vessels regularly communicate about sea ice conditions.  Nevertheless, the conditions in Antarctica can change very rapidly.  There are some areas of the Antarctic Peninsula in particular which act as a bottle-neck to ice movement and can quickly change from less than 1/10 ice cover to higher concentrations of ice.  In addition, the increasing number of ships operating in Antarctica – especially in the Peninsula region – means that ships are under greater pressures to meet the time slots for visiting key sites. 
    12. Given the recommendation in the IMO Guidelines that operations in Antarctic ice-covered waters (i.e. 1/10 ice-cover) take account of ship class and environmental conditions etc, the ATCM may wish to consider whether the ‘authorisation’1 of activities in Antarctica should take such factors into account, prior to a ship entering Antarctic waters.   For example, should consideration be given to restricting non ice-strengthened vessels carrying large numbers of passengers from visiting areas of Antarctica where statistically the environmental conditions are likely to be less favourable and historically the sea-ice is likely to be greater? Either way, it may be helpful – both for those planning activities in Antarctica, and for those ‘authorising’ activities – to have more information about those areas which have a statistical likelihood of sea-ice greater than 1/10.

The UK recommends that the ATCM consider developing a regional ice-map of the Peninsula, for each month of the austral summer, to identify those areas where sea-ice extent is likely to be greater than 1/10 ice-cover (using appropriate statistical parameters). 
 Search and Rescue Issues
    13. The Maritime Safety Committee (MSC) of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) approved ‘Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities’ (MSC.1/Circ.1184).  Member Governments and international organisations were invited to bring the guidance to the attention of all concerned.  The UK circulated these at ATCM XXIX (Final Report, para 147) and they are also at annexed to this paper.
    14. Given the unique governance framework for Antarctica, and the absence of a recognised Regional Control Centre (RCC), the practical recommendation in the guidelines for voyage ‘pairing’ seems especially relevant to the co-ordination of any required rescue in Antarctica.  This is included at paragraph 3 of the guidelines, and suggests the following enhancements for operations in remote areas:
        .1 voyage ‘pairing’, i.e., mutual exchange of information that may be available to the SAR Authority or the vessel operator with reference to other passenger ships operating in the same area, so that, if two or more passenger ships are operating in the same general area at the same time, each can be used as a SAR  facility in case of accident to another;
    15. For those ships operating within IAATO and co-ordinating through the ‘ship scheduler’, ‘pairing’ is already happening to an extent.  IAATO vessels are co-ordinated and committed to assisting each other (in accordance with the general SOLAS requirement that ships respond to distress calls and provide assistance, if able to do so).  However, as mentioned above, not all ships are co-ordinating.  Furthermore, the trend towards increasingly larger vessels will stretch capacity in Antarctica.  Given the potential need to move very high numbers of passengers from larger ships, there is a need to ensure that whilst such ships are operating in Antarctica, they co-ordinate in advance with other vessels that would be capable of providing SAR facilities in the case of a major incident. 

The UK recommends that the ATCM consider making this element of the IMO guidelines mandatory for ships operating in Antarctica.  This would mean that when Treaty Parties ‘authorise’ ships to enter Antarctica, they would be required to ‘pair’ with sufficient ships operating in the same general area, as would be required to provide a SAR facility in the case of a major incident. 
    16. The IMO guidance also highlights that consideration should be given to the carriage of enhanced life-saving appliances and the provision of additional life-saving resources.  There is no current requirement to carry enhanced life-saving equipment or appliances in Antarctica, for example cold water immersion suits (although in reality most vessels do carry these).   The IMO ‘Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-Covered Waters’ includes details of Personal and Group Survival Kits for the construction of new polar class vessels.  However, Personal Survival Kits would only be required for voyages expected to encounter mean daily temperatures below 0ºC and Group Survival Kits would only be required when a voyage was expected to encounter ice conditions which may prevent the lowering and operation of survival craft. Neither are likely, for example, for passenger vessel voyages in the Antarctic Peninsula during the austral summer.  Further consideration as to what kind of enhanced life-saving equipment and appliances would be appropriate for Antarctic passenger vessel operations would be desirable.

The UK recommends that the ATCM ask the IMO to elaborate on the recommendation for the ‘carriage of enhanced life-saving appliances’ as set out in the ‘Enhanced Contingency Planning Guidance for Passenger Ships Operating in Areas Remote from SAR Facilities’.  To this end, the IMO should be asked to develop a list of equipment that all passenger ships should be recommended to carry when operating in Antarctic waters.
Managing Ship Traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula
    17. Of all passenger vessels operating in Antarctica, the overwhelming majority operate in the Peninsula.  Currently, the vast majority of vessels – including all non-Governmental passenger vessels - operate under ‘authorisation’ from Treaty Parties, by virtue of the flag of the vessel, or the location of the operator.  In ‘authorising’ activities in Antarctica, Treaty Parties need to be assured that the activities are in line with the Environmental Protocol and other ATCM provisions.  Some of the provisions adopted more recently, however, such as Measure 4(2004) ‘Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area’ and Resolution 2(2006) ‘Site Guidelines for Visitors’ require a certain degree of co-ordination among vessels. For example, Measure 4(2004) would require that search and rescue plans are in place prior to the start of activities in Antarctica.  The Site Guidelines adopted under Resolution 2(2006) include restrictions on the number of vessels permitted to visit sites and the provision of only one ship visit at a time.
    18. As highlighted above, IAATO have funded and developed Emergency Contingency Plan arrangements and a ‘ship scheduler’ to co-ordinate traffic in Antarctica.  The ‘ship scheduler’ has more recently been transformed into an on-line resource through which operators book time slots for landing passengers at different sites, in accordance with the Site Guidelines and other IAATO requirements (for example, IAATO apply the requirement for one ship at each site at a time to all sites).    This is supplemented by further co-ordination by vessels on a daily basis once in the field.  Non-IAATO ships can – and do – submit their planned itineraries to IAATO for input into the ‘ship scheduler’ to facilitate co-ordination, but this is on an informal basis and those operators provide no financial support for the resource.  There are also an increasing number of Government ships wanting to land groups of visitors at popular tourist sites and this can result in pressures beyond those permitted in the Site Guidelines.
    19.   Given the increasing number of vessels operating in the Peninsula, the need for co-ordination of vessels can only increase.  IAATO should be commended for the continued development of their vessel co-ordination and management over many years.  Of particular note is the ‘ship scheduler’ which gives comfort to those ‘authorising’ Antarctic operations, especially where itineraries include visits to sites for which Site Guidelines have been developed, that those operating within IAATO are co-ordinated.  This resource has proved highly beneficial and its effectiveness would be further enhanced if all passenger vessels co-ordinated through the scheduler – especially those intending to land passengers at popular tourist sites – and contributed to its maintenance and further development.  

The UK recommends that the ATCM endorses IAATO’s management of ship traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula through its ‘ship scheduler’ resource.  Furthermore, the UK recommends that the ATCM – with agreement of IAATO - adopt a Decision to formalise this role of IAATO in delivering the management of vessel traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula.

 In addition, the UK would propose that a Resolution be adopted to recommend that Treaty Parties ‘authorising’ passenger vessel activities in Antarctica ensure that vessels co-ordinate itineraries through the IAATO operated ‘ship scheduler’ and contribute to the cost of maintaining and further developing the resource. This Resolution could also request IAATO (as the service provider of the management of vessel traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula) to incorporate all vessels operating in Antarctica into the ‘ship scheduler’ and - at the start of each season - IAATO make the scheduler available to all relevant ship operators and also to Treaty Parties.  Treaty Parties and ship operators should also be provided with detail of all vessels (such as communications, carrying capacity, overview of medical facilities etc) to facilitate day-by-day vessel co-ordination once in the Antarctic Peninsula.        
Hydrographic Surveying and Charting in Antarctica
    20. Finally, no paper on ship safety in Antarctica would be complete without reference to hydrographic charting. However, this is of course not specifically related to passenger vessels, but applies to all shipping in Antarctic waters.  At ATCM XXIX, the Parties acknowledged the increasing demand for hydrographic INT charts and the progress made so far in their production.  The International Hydrographic Organisation was invited to continue its efforts to increase the coverage of hydrographic information in Antarctica and the Meeting urged greater involvement in the work of the IHO’s Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA) by all Consultative Parties.
    21. As highlighted last year, the work of the IHO’s HCA should be commended and they should be supported to continue their efforts.  There remain vast areas of Antarctica which have never been charted, the effects of climate changes in Antarctica mean that more areas are sea-ice free, glaciers are retreating and ice-shelves collapsing, opening up more areas of uncharted waters.  Many of the existing charts also rely on data collected decades ago, and have not yet been revised with data from modern multi-beam or GPS systems. 
    22. In addition, many of the INT charts are of a scale too small for the identification of safe anchorage at the local level.  Many vessels rely on ‘mud maps’ developed over years of Antarctic operations, but without the level of information normally required for the production of hydrographic charts.  As the level of vessels visiting Antarctic increases, the pressure to explore new areas is increasing.  This pressure is out-running the existing capacity to conduct new surveys and to produce hydrographic charts.

The UK recommends that the ATCM reinforces its call for greater involvement in the work of the HCA by all Consultative Parties, especially with contributions to the prioritised survey plan during the forthcoming IPY.
Conclusions
    23. In the view of the UK, the recommendations in this paper represent a practical and pragmatic way forward to further underpin the framework already in place to mitigate risks to ships operating in Antarctic waters and to ensure the effective management of vessel traffic, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula.  The UK believes that the ATCM must address such issues in light of the continuing increase in vessel traffic and in particular in light of recent incidents involving passenger ships in Antarctic waters.  The UK looks forward to the discussion of these issues in New Delhi.




Polar Regions Unit
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, UK
March 2007
Annex
ENHANCED CONTINGENCY PLANNING GUIDANCE FOR PASSENGER SHIPS OPERATING IN AREAS REMOTE FROM SAR FACILITIES

    1. In accordance with the relevant provisions of the SOLAS and SAR Conventions and the ISM Code, contingency plans for passenger ships should be prepared for operating in areas considered to be remote from SAR facilities. Factors which may make an area remote from SAR services are set out in the Appendix and may include:

        .1 the number of people potentially at risk as the result of an accident in the area;
        .2 the total recovery capacity of SAR facilities available to reach the scene of the accident and recover those at risk within survival times (including all additional SAR facilities likely to be available, as well as designated SAR units); and
        .3 whether there is any shortfall between the number to be recovered and the capacity of those SAR facilities available.

    24. SAR co-operation planning arrangements should be enhanced for ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities (see Appendix), as follows:

        .1 the Company should give reasonable notice of the arrival of its ship in the remote area to the relevant RCC;
        .2 if not already doing so, the Company should arrange direct exchange of the ship’s SAR co-operation plan with the relevant SAR services;
        .3 the relevant SAR services may request a copy of the relevant part of the Company’s emergency plan, in addition to the basic SAR co-operation plan, in order to assist their own contingency planning; and
        .4 the Company should keep the RCC informed as to the ship’s position and intentions while the ship is operating in the remote area.

    25. The risks of remote area operation should be assessed and planned for. The following enhancements should be among those considered:

        .1 voyage ‘pairing’, i.e., mutual exchange of information that may be available to the SAR Authority or the vessel operator with reference to other passenger ships operating in the same area, so that, if two or more passenger ships are operating in the same general area at the same time, each can be used as a SAR facility in case of accident to another;
        .2 the carriage of enhanced life-saving appliances;
        .3 the provision of additional life-saving resources; and
        .4 other sources of assistance that may be available in the area.

Appendix
CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHAT CONSTITUTES AN AREA REMOTE FROM SAR FACILITIES

    26. The following criteria are considered relevant in determining what constitutes an area remote from SAR facilities:
        .1 the number of people at risk;
        .2 the nature of the risk and whether containment strategies can mitigate its effects, in particular whether the effects of the incident can be so contained as to enable those at risk to remain on board until rescued, or for a period prior to eventual evacuation, thus extending the time to recover;
        .3 the availability of SAR facilities and other resources which may be deployed in order to contain the incident and keep those at risk on board until rescued, or for a period prior to eventual evacuation, thus extending the time to recover;
        .4 the total recovery capacity of SAR facilities available to reach the scene and recover those who have taken to survival craft within the five day ‘time to recover’ parameter and/or within survival times;
        .5 any shortfall between the number to be recovered and the capacity of those SAR facilities available;
        .6 the distance (in time) between individual SAR facilities’ start points and the scene of the emergency;
        .7 the prevailing sea conditions, both on scene and encountered by SAR facilities proceeding;
        .8 the prevailing weather conditions, both on scene and encountered by SAR facilities proceeding;
        .9 any restrictions on SAR facility deployment which limit or remove their ability to respond even if theoretically within reach of the scene of the emergency;
        .10 the ability of those at risk to survive in the prevailing weather and sea conditions until they can be recovered (that is, for a maximum of five days according to the ‘time to recover’ parameter);
        .11 the ability of available SAR facilities to recover those at risk in the prevailing weather and sea conditions;*
        .12 any shortfall between the time taken to recover those at risk and the five day ‘time to recover’ parameter and/or survival times in the prevailing conditions;
        .13 availability and quality of communications; and
        .14 effective co-ordination of search and rescue response.



