





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 129, Rothera Point, Adelaide Island




Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 129
Rothera Point, Adelaide Island

    1. Rothera Point was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 9 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985), after a proposal by the United Kingdom. The Area was designated on the grounds that it would serve as a biological research site and control area against which the effects of human impact associated with the adjacent Rothera Research Station (UK) could be monitored in an Antarctic fellfield ecosystem.  These grounds are still relevant.
    2. The expiry date of the original Management Plan was extended to 31 December 2000 through Resolution 7 (1995). The Management Plan for SSSI No. 9 was revised through Measure 1 (1996) which made certain of its provisions mandatory. The Area was re-named and re-numbered as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 129 through Decision 1 (2002).
    3. The only substantial change to the provisions of the existing Management Plan has been a re-drawing of the Area boundary.  For safety reasons, to do with the difficulty in identifying the location of the coast during periods of sea ice, the north-western and eastern ASPA boundary has been re-designated as the 5 m contour.  The thin band of ground no longer within the Area consists of shingle beach and exposed boulders and is of no known scientific or environmental monitoring value.
    4. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
        (i) revised and updated maps showing the new boundary
        (ii) revised information on the description of the Area
        (iii) new provisions for the monitoring of heavy metal concentrations in gravel and soil every five years
        (iv) more comprehensive restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Area.
    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

