





Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan




Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
Antarctic Specially Managed Area 
Management Plan 

Joint Working Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection 
by Australia, China, India, Romania and Russian Federation

1.	Introduction
At CEP IV Australia informed the Committee (Information Paper 59) of its work with China and the Russian Federation on a management plan to support the designation of the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA).  
A draft management plan was submitted to CEP VIII (Working Paper 27, Rev 1) and following review by an Intersessional Contact Group, a revised draft management plan was submitted to CEP IX (Working Paper 8).
At CEP IX the proponents agreed to further review the draft management plan in light of India’s intentions to build a station in the Larsemann Hills (detailed in Working Paper 20 also submitted to CEP IX). It was agreed that a revised draft management plan would be made available for intersessional review via the CEP online discussion forum.
2. 	ICG comments
The proponents, joined by India, posted a revised draft management plan to the CEP online discussion forum in September 2006.
Comments on the revised draft plan were received from Ecuador, the United Kingdom and the United States. In addition to minor editorial and technical issues, comments related to the current location of Law-Racovita, and the location of India’s proposed station in relation to the Facilities Zone; the need to emphasise and more thoroughly describe the scientific importance of the lakes; the desirability of bunding fuel storage areas; and the need to minimise the number of access routes. These comments have resulted in modifications to the text of the revised draft management plan, in particular at Sections 2.1, 4.3, 5.1 and 6.1.
3. 	Plan submission 
Australia, China, India, Romania and the Russian Federation submit this revised management plan for approval by the CEP and the ATCM.
