





Monument to the Antarctic Treaty




Monument to the Antarctic Treaty
General Introduction
Antarctic Treaty Members have initiated their commemoration of the past International Polar Years and have programmed many activities on the occasion of the official launching of the International Polar Year on 1st March 2007. The central act of inauguration, at the Palais de la Découverte, in Paris, with the participation of ICSU,  WMO and the International Polar Year Joint Committee, was planned to coincide with similar activities in many other countries. The United States inauguration had taken place on 26 February sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the other National Academies. 
In Chile, on December 19, 2006, an international team of scientists and teachers sailed from Punta Arenas, in one of the first collaborative activities undertaken by the USA National Science Foundation-sponsored research cruise aboard the Swedish icebreaker Oden, with scientists from Chile, Sweden and the USA conducting scientific observations and classroom educators from the three countries interacting with students at home, through teleconferences which brought the excitement of polar research to the present generation. 
Scientists from the Chilean Antarctic Institute joined their French colleagues aboard the “Marion Dufresne” in its Southern Ocean campaign called “Pachiderme” , survey of coastal marine biological diversity, which ended its Chilean stage with great success on 28 February 2007. 
On 5 March 2007, the Chilean Executive Committee for the International Polar Year (IPY) issued a Declaration to commemorate the official start of its IPY activities. The Declaration underlines the importance of developing a greater public awareness of the educational, aesthetic, cultural and historic values of Antarctica, all together with its everlasting scientific legacy.
Such legacy is provided by the linkage of the First (1882-83) and Second Polar Year (1932-33) and the International Geophysical Year, as well as the Antarctic Treaty of 1959.
Proposal for the List of Historic Monuments and Sites
At ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh, 2006) Chile introduced IP 92 Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised List of historic Sites and Monuments. Measure 3 (2003). Draft Guidelines for its Application, which focused on the Revised List as a management tool and emphasised the need to publicise the historic values embodied in monuments. That document has been issued as  WP – and the examples provided in IP 92 have been appended to WP – with one exception: the proposal for a Monument to the Antarctic Treaty included in the present WP--.   
In this context,  Chile proposes the addition to the List of Historic Monuments and Sites of the “Monument to the Antarctic Treaty”, which was installed close to the Frei, Bellingshausen and Escudero Bases, at Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.
The Antarctic Treaty Monument (62º12´01”S  58º57´41”W  ) was designed and built by Professor Joseph W. Pearson, an American citizen, Lecturer in Biology and passionately interested in Antarctic Affairs. The monument occupies a central position in the inter-face of the above mentioned bases and the path towards the settlement designated as “Villa Las Estrellas”, and immediately attracts the attention of visitors to King George Island.
It was offered to Chile by the creator of the monument and inaugurated in 1999, with the presence of the Heads of the Bases concerned, on the occasion of the forty years of the signature of the Antarctic Treaty.
The structure is built in copper with twelve panels, each one honouring one of the Signatory States, all of them supporting a copper globe. 
P. Warren in his M.A. thesis “A proposal for the designation and protection of Antarctic historic resources.” (University of Washington, 1990) had mentioned the flaws in the attitudes of States which failed to consider historic sites and monuments as elements of the Antarctic Environment which required environmental impact assessments. In this particular instance, an Initial Environmental Impact Assessment  was made on behalf of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) and approved by the National Commission for the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment (CONAEIA).
The Chilean Antarctic Institute will place a plaque at the foot of the monument with the following sentence in commemoration of the successive International Polar Years:  “This Historic Monument, dedicated to the memory of the signatories of the Antarctic Treaty, Washington D.C. 1959, is also a reminder of the legacy of the First and Second International Polar Years (1882-1883 and 1932-1933) and of the International Geophysical Year (IGY: 1957-1958) which preceded the Antarctic  Treaty, and recalls the heritage of International Cooperation that led to the International Polar Year 2007-2008”.
A Draft Measure is attached.



























Measure A  (2007)

Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments
Monument to the Antarctic Treaty

The Representatives,

Recalling the requirements of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments, and that such sites shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed;

Recalling Measure 3 (2003), which revised and updated the “list of Historic Sites and Monuments”;

Recalling the Edinburgh Antarctic Declaration on the International Polar Year 2007-2008 (IPY) which supports the objective of delivering a lasting legacy from the IPY;

Desiring to add this Monument to the Antarctic Treaty and a plaque recalling the First and Second International Polar Years, The International Geophysical Year (IGY) and the International Polar Year 2007-2008, to that list;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

That the following monument be added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments” annexed to Measure 3 (2003):
 

Nº 82.  Monument to the Antarctic Treaty and Plaque.

Location:  62º12´01”S  58º57’41”W)
King George Island, South Shetland Islands.

Original proposing Party:  Chile

Party undertaking management:  Chile. 

