





Peculiarities of conducting inspections of infrastructure facilities of the Antarctic Programs




Peculiarities of conducting inspections of infrastructure facilities of the Antarctic Programs


In compliance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, Inspections of infrastructure facilities of the National Antarctic Programs and non-governmental types of activity in the Antarctic, are one of the most important components of control of rules and regulations, determined by the Antarctic Treaty system. The order of Inspections was stipulated in resolutions XIX-5, XX-1, which recommended the “Checklist” of Antarctic infrastructure installations to the Inspecting party.  In our opinion, such approach unified the requirements to the questions on behalf of the Inspecting party and also allowed any Contracting Party to conduct an independent preliminary audit of its infrastructure facilities in the Antarctic. In addition, any Contracting Party could prepare answers to all questions of the “Checklist” for its expedition personnel in advance in all formal languages of the Antarctic Treaty (English, Spanish, Russian and French), as determined by Article XIV of the Antarctic Treaty. This would eliminate in many respects the really existing language barriers between the Inspection group and teams of the Antarctic station, base or ship crew. 
In practice of Inspections the Inspection groups do not have specialists with good knowledge of the second formal language of the Antarctic Treaty while teams of the National Antarctic Expeditions do not have special professional interpreters. Knowledge of foreign languages at the Antarctic stations is as a rule at the everyday level, rather than at a special legal or other professional level. As a result, the Inspection group can wrongly interpret the answers of personnel of the Antarctic infrastructure facilities, which sometimes results in the incorrect conclusions of the Inspection.
The answers to the questions on the “Checklist” during the intersession period can be corrected by Management of the National Antarctic Programs in compliance with the work carried out at the Antarctic stations, bases and ships, the noted faults can be eliminated, etc. After correction, new answers can be sent directly to the Antarctic facilities to be used in case of Inspection. If the Inspecting party has additional questions to the “Checklist” questions and there are no persons at the inspected Antarctic infrastructure facilities with adequate knowledge of the language in which the Inspection is conducted, these additional questions can be sent to the corresponding National Antarctic Program within 3 days before the Inspection team visits the facility and correspondingly this National Antarctic Program should prepare answers to additional questions. In our opinion, this approach will increase the quality and efficiency of Inspection. 
An important aspect in preparation of the Inspection is a preliminary study of the national legal support for the Antarctic activity. It is known at present that any activity in the Antarctic after the Protocol of Environmental Protection has come into force should be carried out on the basis of special national procedures, which consider the possibility of its implementation. The existing order of such consideration is quite diverse. In some countries, any type of activity in the Antarctic is carried out on the basis of a preliminarily developed Environmental Impact Assessment of such activity. In other countries, this is done on the basis of a specially issued Permit; however the order of issuing a permit foresees a mandatory submission of the Environmental Impact Assessment. This is a more strict approach for permitting any type of activity in the Antarctic as it includes an additional submission of other documents (licenses for the right of conducting activities, certificates of the registration of legal entities, copies of insurance policies, certificates of personnel training, etc.) for the activities in the Antarctic area. Unfortunately, there are cases where producing a formal Permit for the given type of activity is considered by some Inspections as the absence of the Environmental Impact Assessment of the given type of activity, which does not have as a matter of fact any legal basis.
In addition, the Inspection Party should get acquainted in advance with the system of organizing national Antarctic investigations, adopted by the Contracting Party, the infrastructure facilities of which are to be checked. This will exclude possible address proposals for eliminating the noted faults. Thus in the practice of work of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE), which has in its Antarctic infrastructure 5 year-round operating Antarctic stations, 5 seasonal field bases, 2 marine ships and 5 units of aviation vehicles, the faults noted by the Inspections at these facilities should be addressed for elimination to the RAE rather than to personnel of Antarctic stations. In most cases elimination of drawbacks requires additional funds, and it will be the responsibility of new personnel, who will deliver necessary materials and equipment to the Antarctic. Acting personnel of Antarctic facilities can eliminate only the emergency cases without involving new technical means or engineering solutions. 
Russia considers it reasonable to take into account the aforementioned proposals in preparation for the next Inspections in the Antarctic.

