





On review of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora




On review of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 

Adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991 in Madrid (Madrid Protocol) and its subsequent coming into force in 1998 at XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Tromso, Norway were remarkable and important events of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Along with the earlier adopted Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972) and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980), the Madrid Protocol has become a tool providing coordinated actions of the International Antarctic community aiming at implementation of measures for protection and conservation of living resources of the Antarctic region, indicated in paragraph 1 f), Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
The adopted text of the Madrid Protocol with Annexes I – V were obviously a result of a certain compromise achieved by the Consultative Parties, when the developers of the documents had to agree with significant changes in the original texts for the sake of making a coordinated decision.
It is natural that the international and nature protection situation in the Antarctic Treaty Area has acquired new positive qualities at the present time with respect to the late 1980s-early 1990s. Probably due to these very circumstances, some Consultative Parties began discussing in 2001 at XXIV ATCM in St. Petersburg a review of Annex II of the Madrid Protocol. 
The Russian Federation states that an obvious progress was achieved for the past 6 years in preparation of amendments to the aforementioned Annex, which were formulated by Great Britain in WP-44 XXIX ATCM in Edinburgh. Expert analysis of the British proposals performed by the Russian biologists and ecologists during the intersession period revealed however some disputable moments, which do not allow us to fully agree with amendments of Annex II "Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora".
A major aspect of our objections is a definition of “marine species” proposed by the developers of the review - "any invertebrate, plant or any species of vertebrate other than native mammals or native birds at any stage of its life cycle, occurring naturally in the marine waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area". 
In the current text of Annex II there is no definition of “marine species”, and its provisions aim at  regulating the mechanisms and procedures for protection of the terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems of the Antarctic, including birds and marine mammals. Introducing a new additional definition to Article I of Annex II significantly changes the concept itself not only of this Annex, but of the entire Protocol. The point is that Article 4, paragraph 2 of the Madrid Protocol stipulates that "Nothing in this protocol shall derogate from the rights and obligations of the parties to this Protocol under the other international documents in force within the Antarctic Treaty system". Such document in force is the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, its Article I, paragraph 2 defining that the "Antarctic marine living resources means the populations of fin fish, molluscs, crustaceans and all other species of living organisms, including birds, found to the south of the Antarctic convergence". 
In addition, Article IX, paragraph 2(d) describing conservation measures of marine living resources envisages “the designation of protected species”. The differences in the definitions can create not only the terminology problems, but also the legal problems when similar issues are considered in the CEP and CCAMLR structures. At present functions for the designation of “marine protected species” are performed by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). In Article II, paragraph 2 of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources the term "conservation" includes rational use of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, its principles being defined in paragraph 3 of Article II of the aforementioned Convention. Inclusion to Annex II of marine species, and namely all sea fish and marine invertebrates will create a legal basis for a possible prohibition of all commercial fishery and hunting in Antarctic waters. 
In our opinion, the terms of reference of the Madrid Protocol and of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the managing bodies of the Antarctic Treaty system (Committee on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR) should be left without any changes.
The comments below are of an editorial character, however aiming to improve the legal aspect of the new wording of Annex II. 
In paragraph “c”, Article I instead of “freshwater vegetation” to use “terrestrial water body vegetation “ and in paragraph “d” instead of “freshwater invertebrate” to use “terrestrial water body invertebrate” since not only freshwater bodies but also brackish and salt drainless lakes exist in the Antarctic.  
In paragraphs "e" and "f" of Article 1 it is proposed to change “the appropriate authority" to the "competent authority". 
It is proposed to supplement paragraph "g" of Article 1 by derivatives from the notion "take" with "irretrievable taking" and "taking with return to nature".  
To paragraph "h" of Article 1 after the word "flying" write the words "below the specific altitude” and then continue by the text. 
In paragraph 2 of Article 2 it is necessary to give a definition of the notion "cases of emergency". 
In paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 3 after the word "taking", write the words "flora and fauna members", and after the words "harmful interference", write "with respect to these members" (then by the text). 
In Article 3, paragraph 3 b should be supplemented by words "taking of the native flora and fauna members can be performed only using humane methods and on the basis of appropriate permits in which the methods of taking permissible with respect to each species should be stipulated". 
Add to Article 3 paragraph 5 а "and also in the case of a direct threat to human life".  
In Article 4 paragraph 3, the text of the permits for importation to the Antarctic only of the animals and plants for laboratory experiments and the genetically modified organisms issued by the competent authorities, should specially stipulate the precautions to be taken with respect to these species.
    

