





Russian studies of acoustic influence on marine biota




Russian studies of acoustic influence on marine biota
Problems of harmful acoustic influence on the Antarctic marine biota have been in the focus of attention since 2003, when the document WP 34 prepared by Spain was presented at CEP VI. After that the ATCM structure repeatedly considered this issue, moreover a special expert meeting on this problem was held in Germany. As determined by specialists, the hydrobiological science does not have at present the required reliable evidence about the influence of acoustic noise created by ship mechanisms on the Antarctic marine biota. Such class of noise includes shipping, hydroacoustic fish reconnaissance and navigation instrumentation and equipment for seismic geological studies. In order to expand the existing understanding about this influence Russia proposes to consider some experience of similar studies carried out by Russian specialists for the Arctic Seas. 
The ice and hydrological regime of such sea as the Barents Sea, its biodiversity with a wide representation of different species of fish, sea birds and mammals, diversity of benthic life forms and intensive character of shipping carried out by transport, fishery, navy and geological prospecting fleets indicates some similarity between this sea and the Antarctic analogues, on the one hand, and shows a much greater intensity of the anthropogenic impact on marine biota, on the other hand. The studies of the Barents Sea region allow us to make a conclusion about the possible adverse acoustic impact on marine biota including Antarctic waters.
Seismic surveys appear to be the most significant factor by strength impacting the marine ecosystems. This is currently the most effective and precise method of geophysical studies applied for addressing a wide range of geological objectives. In the first half of the 20th century, seismic surveys were carried out using explosions of limited strength, however seismic activity in water using explosives was prohibited in Russia in 1968 (Decision of the USSR Council of Ministers No. 759). Seismic surveys are mainly carried out at present using sources of seismic pulses of two types: acoustic guns and electric power. The action of acoustic guns is based on a sharp release of compressed air of high pressure from the source chamber to water. The action of electric power sources (sparkers) is based on the electric-hydraulic shock occurring at a high voltage discharge in water.
The USSR carried out extensive complex investigations of the impact of elastic waves excited by different seismic systems on different species of fish and invertebrates in the 1970s-1980s. Work was carried out for many years in the Caspian, Barents and Black Seas. Detailed summary of these studies is presented in the Information-Reference Handbook “Influence on hydrobionts of elastic waves from seismic sources for marine geophysical surveying” (Vekilov et al., М.1995, “Neftyanik”, - 64 p.). This review analyzes the impact of seismic equipment on 16 species of sea fish, 11 species of freshwater fish and 14 species of plankton and benthic invertebrates. Studies included observations of the direct impact of acoustic pulses on fish placed in fish-ponds at a different distance and depth from the emission sources, a laboratory analysis of internal damage of fish, influence on food base of fish, etc. The implications of seismic pulses on the fertility of fish subjected to seismic impact and viability of their young in several generations was also investigated.
The experiments using an electric spark system with a power of 75 kJ showed that fish (scad Trachurus mediterraneous, and sand smelt Atherina boyeri) located at a distance of more than 2.5 m from the sources, did not have either external or internal damages and their subsequent behavior did not differ from that of fish in the control group. Temporary disorders of vestibular functions in fish that were restored in 1 – 1.5 hours were observed at a distance of 1.5 – 2.0 m. At a distance of less than 0.5 m from the source, 80% mortality of fish was observed. Based on these data, the safe radius for the electric spark systems of the indicated power was determined as 3 m.
Similar data were also obtained for seismic air guns; however the extent of their impact on fish was less compared to sparkers: the safe radius comprised 1-3 m, depending on the air gun power. With increasing power the intensity of impact on fish increased insignificantly:  the safe radius equal to 2 m corresponded to the air gun with a volume of 3 dm3 and the safe radius equal to 2.5 m corresponded to the air gun with a volume of 30 dm3.	
Long-term observations of the series of generations of roach (Rutilus rutilus rutilus) and bream (Abramis brama) obtained from breeders subjected to 2-6-fold impact of seismic pulses of the electric spark system with a power of 75 kJ at a distance of 1.5-2.0 m did not reveal life cycle deviations either in the breeders themselves or in their breed.
The impact of an air gun with a chamber of 5 dm3 in volume and the electric pulse source with a power of 70 kJ on roe of some fish of the Black Sea: anchovy Engraulis encrasicholus ponticus), scad (Trachurus mediterraneous), crucian carp (Diplodus annularis) and mullet (Mullus barbatus) was investigated. The safe radius in all cases was about 10 m.  Sufficiently high roe mortality was observed within a radius of 0.5 m from the electric pulse source: 7.1 % for anchovy; 25.0% for scad; 20.5% for crucian carp; and 19.4% for mullet.
A triple impact at a distance of 1-3 m from an array of air guns in the Barents Sea on the roe of cod (Gadus morhua) of the early and late gastrula stage did not have a noticeable influence on its further development.
The influence of pressure waves of an air gun with a chamber volume of 5 dm3 on different hydrobionts of the Baltic Sea was investigated at the AtlantNIRO (Atlantic Research Institute of Marine Fishery and Oceanography). The main study groups included plankton rotifers, copepods, myzids, polychaetes and mollusks. The impact of an array of air guns on zooplankton was investigated in the Barents Sea. The studies showed the impact of seismic pulses on zooplankton organisms to be tracked at a radius up to 10 m; the impact on zoobenthos is noted only at the location of air guns directly near the bottom and the impact on ichthyoplankton is tracked within 5 m from the source.
The data obtained by Russian investigators allow us to make a conclusion that the influence of pressure waves from non-explosive seismic sources on marine organisms is observed only in direct proximity from these devices at a distance of 3 to 10 m.
Hydroacoustic ship equipment. Fishing-boats, research and transport ships apply different hydro-acoustic equipment operating over a wide frequency range predominantly from 7.5 to 200 kHz with a power up to 236 dB relative to 1 µPa at a distance of 1 m). The use of navigation hydroacoustic instrumentation (echo-sounders) is a necessary component for providing safety of shipping. The hydroacoustic systems are an important tool for scientific studies of marine ecosystems giving understanding of the distribution and biomass of organisms. Their application decreases the volume of sweeping, which is fully in compliance with the aims and goals of the CCMLR. The available data in literature indicate that the probability of disorder in orientation and hearing of animals exists only in a small volume at a distance up to several meters directly beneath the sources. In some cases, an insignificant motion of fish schools was noted expressed in active going away from the ship. No other indications of the influence of fish reconnaissance and navigation hydroacoustics on marine organisms were observed. 
Shipping. Russian and foreign literature contains data on the reactions of fish schools and marine mammals to the noise of the approaching ship. They were usually expressed in a sharp change in the motion direction of a fish school and active going away from the ship. Thus, scad schools during fishery in the southeastern Pacific Ocean began to actively respond to the approaching ship at a radius of 250-280 m. Noise from shipping under the high-latitudinal navigation conditions can increase many times compared to noise from common shipping. At the time of the icebreaker’s motion through heavy ice the noise force can comprise 200 dB. Unlike the noise from seismic equipment, the ship noise has a long-term character continuing for the entire period of the ship stay in the region. In most Antarctic regions, the number of ships throughout the year is quite insignificant so the noise they create is hardly a problem. However in the Antarctic Peninsula area the number of tourist ships in the summer season sharply increases, which in addition try to visit a restricted number of areas, where the breeding grounds of mammals, nesting grounds of birds and colonies of penguins are located. The constant impact of these ships can become in principle a source of long-term impacts on the Antarctic animals.
The results of conducted studies showed that marine seismic activities could not create a threat for the Antarctic populations of marine organisms, since their action is very restricted in space and does not produce a significant influence at a distance of more than 3-10 m.
The hydroacoustic fish reconnaissance and navigation systems can provoke active leaving (avoiding) by marine organisms the ships but cannot produce a direct negative influence on them.
The risks connected with the use of all scientific hydroacoustic instruments including seismic transmitters, are less or comparable with the risks connected with shipping. 
In any case, to finally solve the problem of a possible adverse impact of acoustic noise on the Antarctic marine biota requires special studies. However in the first approximation one can also consider the results obtained for the other polar regions.

