





Draft Management Plan for the 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica





Draft Management Plan for the 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area
 Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
1. Introduction
Research on the evolutionary history of East Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS) plays an important role in reconstructing the past climatic evolution in global scale. This interest has recently been piqued with the growing awareness with the discovery of an active subglacial hydrological system, suggesting that it might not be as stable as had hitherto been assumed. The world’s largest glacial system first formed around 34 million years ago associated in part with the thermal isolation of Antarctica from the opening of the Southern Ocean though more from declining global CO2 levels, and during this period the ice sheet oscillated on Milankovitch frequencies. In those days the EAIS extended beyond the present continental margin during glacial times and retreating during interglacial times to expose a coastal terrain that supported low woodland forest. Around 14 million years ago the EAIS entered a more stable state, during which many believe ice persisted in central East Antarctica with the ice volume and ice extent varying modestly, say less than 1/3 of today’s 66 m of sea level equivalent. A proposal in the 1980’s that the EAIS might have reduced by a much greater amount (>2/3) to allow the ocean to flood central East Antarctica has been contested but continues to have some credence. This debate has become the focus of concern in the scientific community at present mainly because during the Pliocene the land-sea pattern and the climatic system on earth were already similar to those at present, and if even at that time such dramatic oscillation could happen to the Antarctic ice sheet, considering the predictions made by those in IPCC who believe in the future rising global temperature, we would have to worry about the catastrophic collapsing event which the Antarctic ice sheet may be subjected to once again within the coming 100 years. Regardless of that question a key constraint on our understanding of the EAIS behavior remains the lack of direct evidence of ice sheet surface levels for constraining ice sheet models during known glacial maxima and minima in the post-14 Ma period. 
The nunataks extend along the local equilibrium line separating the zone of net ablation from the inland zone of net accumulation. Because they form obstacles to ice flow, these nunataks are responsible for the existence of neighbouring blue ice regions where wind-induced ablation is more rapid than snow accumulation locally. The blue ice surface average elevation is ~2,000 m. The remains of the fluctuation of ice sheet surface preserved around the core area Harding Mount will most probably provide precious direct evidences for solving the above-mentioned key scientific issues. There are glacial erosion and wind-erosion physiognomies which are rare in nature and extremely vulnerable, such as the ice-core pyramid, the ventifact, etc. These glacial-geological features have not only important scientific values, but also rare wildness and aesthetic values and the disorderly human activities would cause perpetual, unrepairable damage to it. In the future, especially during the coming 2007-2008 IPY, human activities will tend to increase in this area. For instance, China has preliminarily planned to drill the subglacial sedimentary basin (subglacial lake), and Australia planned to carry out research on the deep structure of East Antarctica from broad-band seismic data around the Grove Mountains. Therefore, this area needs to be strictly managed and specially protected.
The management plan (draft） has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to Resolution 2 (1998) of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXII. It is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).  China would be pleased to convene or participate in an intersessional review of the draft management plan by the CEP before full consideration at CEP XI.
2. Description of Values
Located in the hinterland of Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica and on the right bank of Lambert Rift, the Grove Mountains (72°20′-73°10′S, 73°50′-75°40′E) is 400 km away from the Chinese Antarctic Zhongshan Station (69°37′S, 76°37′E) to the north, belonging to the inland nunataks group of EAIS (Map A). Mount Harding (72°51′-72°57′S, 74°53′-75°12′E) is located in the core area of the Grove Mountains that presents a ridge-valley physiognomies consisting of nunataks, trending NNE-SSW and its relative height to the surface of blue ice is 200 m (Map B).
The Mount Harding area designated as the site for the specially protected area (Map A) has the precious physiognomies of glacier erosion preserved in the ice sheet of inland Antarctic, which is of great scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values. The aim of this protected area is to preserve its scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values. 
Mount Harding in the central GMs is shaped as a crescent open to the northwest. Both the northern and southern ends are steep crests, protruding ~200 m above the recent ice surface. The central segment of the ridge-line between two summits descends progressively until it reaches the ice surface in a central col, with a relic ice tongue hanging on the lee side. A stagnant field of blue ice, tens of km2 wide, lies inside the crescent.. All of this, shining each other with the vast blue ice, formed the magnificent, beautiful scene of ice-eroded ice field geomorphology. 
A lot of remains of ice sheet advance and retreat are preserved in Mount Harding, which are the direct evidence of the changes of cold and warm in the global environment since Pliocene. In this area, the scientists found the rare extreme cold desert soil, the sedimentary rocks formed in the Neogene Period that are not consolidated completely, as well as the valuable spore pollen assemblages in those paleo-soils and sedimentary rocks. All of this tells us that there existed warm climate event in this area, probably resulting in a large-scale retreat of the EAIS, and its margin might be even beyond the Grove Mountains, 400 km south from its present coast of the EAIS. 
The  nature has created the majestic view and miracle of Mount Harding, and left a legacy of the vast various magnificent landscapes. Maybe the mysterious pool of ice-melted water recorded the life of prehistory that we do not know yet. The ice-core moraine links the sky and the earth together. The absolutely life-like ventifacts of various postures lying in the mountains may be the fossilized visitors from outer space who came to visit the earth. 
Perhaps there is no more beautiful ice field physiognomy elsewhere than that in Mount Harding and there is no more valuable record of the remains of the past evolutionary behaviour of ice sheet than that already found in Mount Harding. It is of the great necessary to protect the invaluable legacy granted by the god, especially at the moment, during which the more and more scientific research activities are to be carried out there, and people might swarm into the inland Antarctica for research, sightseeing and tour in the future. 
What deserves special protection in this area includes the integral geologic-geomorphic remains and a series of special physiognomy, such as ice-core pyramid, ventifacts, ice-cored moraine (end moraine and lateral moraine), cold-desert soil, sedimentary erratics, pool of melted water, roche moutonee, etc. 
3. Management Objectives
The purpose of establishing a specially protected area for the remains of ice sheet advance and retreat around Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica, is to:
    1. prevent unnecessary human interferences, over-sampling activities and environmental damage so as to fully meet the long-term scientific research, and to avoid the destruction or damage to the original icecap physiognomies such as nunataks, ice-core pyramid, ventifacts, blue ice cliff as well as sedimentary erratics and ice-cored moraine etc;
    2. Authorize scientific research activity while ensuring that the inland ice sheet physiognomies  are not destroyed and damaged, and they will not influence each other or that over sampling activities is prevented;
    3. Authorize other research activity that cannot be carried out in other regions of the world or the Antarctica, but are of the great scientific significance;
    4. Authorize other scientific activities consistent with the management objectives;
    5. Allow visits for managerial purposes in support of the objectives of the Management Plan.
4. Management Activities
    1) Copies of the Management Plan (attached with maps) shall be made available at the Zhongshan Station (China), Davis Station (Australia), Progress Station (Russia), and the map of the protected area should be put up at conspicuous positions in the stations mentioned above (special restrictions of access to the protected area, and the equilibrium line separating the zone of net ablation from the inland zone of net accumulation, as well as a series of the special physiognomies unique to the inland ice sheet of East Antarctica within the protected area should be indicated in the map).
    2) All the facilities to be set up and installed within the Area shall be specified in the Permit issued by the competent authority of the particular country. These facilities shall be for scientific and managerial purposes and their permitting country, year of installation, principal investigators or responsible persons shall be clearly indicated. When no longer needed, these facilities shall be removed in time and so shall other abandoned equipment or materials as far as possible.
    3) The investigators should finish their investigation report within six months after the research activities are concluded. A copy of such report should be submitted to the State competent authority in charge of polar expedition so as to make revision and re-examination of the Management Plan in accordance with the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty. The report should include all the contents of the accepted Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR as well as other information as required according to the country’s laws and regulations. The permit issuing authority should provide the information on these reports so that organizations such as SCAR, COMNAP and the interested countries may consult them.
    4) To ensure that the regulations in this management plan can be implemented, those in charge of the national Antarctic programs operating in this area and those interested in this area may seek for corresponding advice.
    5) Visits should be paid to this area regularly ( once every five years) so as to assess whether the objective of protection in this area is achieved and to ensure that various managerial measures are in place. 
    6) The Management Plan should be reviewed at least once every five years and, if necessary, updated or revised.
    7) In case the Antarctic ice sheet continuously retreats so that the new remains of advance and retreat of EAIS are exposed in the vicinity of the protected area and the extent of remains of ice sheet advance and retreat expands, the boundary of the protected area should be updated periodically so as to include the newly exposed remains of ice cap advance and retreat in the area. This should be taken into consideration in examining the Management Plan.
5. Time Limit of Protection
No time limit.
6. Description of the Area
6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary marks, general climate condition in summer and physiognomy
Geographical Co-ordinates
The Specially protected Area of Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, includes the open blue-ice zone from the moraine on the west side of Mount Harding to the east side of the Zakharoff Ridge as well as a number of nunataks, detritus zone, and moraine etc. within it (Map B). Its geographical co-ordinates are: 72°51′-72°57′S, 74°53′-75°12′E.
Boundary marks
The western boundary of the Area is the moraine on the west side of Mount Harding, with its northern end turning eastward to the open blue-ice detritus zone on the east side of the Zakharoff Ridge via the north flank of the northern ridge of Mount Harding and the northern end of the Zakharoff Ridge, turning southwards to the northern end of Davey Nunataks, and then heading westwards to the southern end of the West Lake moraine to close the whole area. The Area is irregular, and approximately rectangular in shape, with a width of about 10 km from east to west, a length of about 12 km from south to north and an total area of about 120 km2 (Map A).
General climate condition in summer
With an average altitude of more than 2000 meters in the Grove Mountains, the daily temperature range and strong wind frequency are greater than those at Zhongshan Station. When affected by the warm-moist current from the north, snowfall would appear constantly in this area, while under the control of the east current, the weather would mainly be sunny. The trend of daily wind speed change is greater than that at Zhongshan Station, where the maximum wind speed appears at around 05:00 am; the lowest records are seen from 16:00 and 17:00 in the afternoon, and minimum wind speed might appears at about 17:00 pm. Same as Zhongshan Station, the Grove Mountains area is influenced by the katabatic wind, but with a greater force than Zhongshan Station. From December 1998 to January 1999, the average highest and lowest air temperature in the Grove Mountains area were -13.1℃ and  -22.6℃ respectively, and the estimated average daily temperature range could be -9.5℃. In this area, in January in particular, the air temperature and snow temperature saw an obvious change during a day, where the average air temperature was -18.5℃, and the snow surface temperature was about -17.9℃, that is, the average snow temperature was higher than the average air temperature.
Physiognomy 
The nunataks within the area may be divided into two groups. The one in the west is the tall nunataks represented by Mount Harding, and the other is a small part of the area including the low linear nunatak chain on the Zakharoff Ridge. The stoss slopes of rocky nunataks show smoothly abraded bedrock, with surfaces sparsely erratic till patches. The lee and lateral sides of the nunataks show generally sharp bluffs, resulting from both ice flow scraping and collapse along sub-vertical crevasses of rocks. The nunataks leave pair of “wake zone” of superglacial debris tens km in length on the ice surface, marking the path of present local ice flow.
The upper parts of the higher nunataks are usually jagged ridge populating with well-developed ventifacts on the summits, facing the dominant wind from the SE. The scarcity of glacial erosive imprints, also meters of depth inside the hard rock delved by wind- force blowing out indicate that these higher slopes are ice free since rather long time. But the lower parts of slopes beneath ~100 m above ice surface have the features of recent glacial erosion such as fresh trimlines and erratics. Some of small nunataks are typical “roches moutonnée” resulted from the past ice flow overriding. We consider that this regional borderline between wind and glacial erosions could represent a former height of ice surface since certain phase, probably early Quaternary glaciations, and the later rises of ice surface did not exceed this limit.
Mount Harding is the largest nunatak in the Grove Mountains. On the west side of the crescent ridge there is a large stretch of lake shaped stagnant blue ice plain (Kuaming Lake, West Lake) and a dozen ice-cored pyramids (ice-cored cone) are visible at the juncture of the ice lake and the foot of the rocky nunataks. 
The geological and glacial phenomena or landscapes that deserve special protection include (Map C): 
Ventifact (photo 1, 2): As a result of long-term blow and erosion by fierce winds, there have developed a large number of ventifacts with peculiar shape around the southern summit of Mount Harding. These ventifacts are the typical wind-erosion physiognomy rarely seen on the earth and are subject to the perpetual damage by disorderly human activities.
Ice-core pyramids ( ice-cored cones, photo 3): Along the northern and southern banks of “Kuming Lake” are scattered a dozen ice-core pyramids. These ice-core pyramids are cone shaped with a height of 20-40 m and a base diameter of 50-80 m. The cone surface is covered with a layer of breccia-like rock masses and their interior is the pure blue ice. A huge rock often sits on the top of the cone, with the surrounding rocks becoming smaller gradually and the gravel bed gradually thinning. These pyramids are the best marks for directly measuring the pneumatolysis of blue ice and of great importance to the research on the material balance and evolutionary history of the EAIS. They are extremely vulnerable and any human climbing behavior will lead to their perpetual alteration and destruction.
Floating ice-cored moraine (photo 4): On the northwest side of the stagnant blue ice pool lie some of linear floating moraine. During the last ice sheet advance event, the glacier tongue surmounting the central pass of Mount Harding progressed north-westwards, carrying with it the rocks scraped on the way and overlying the pre-existing old ice surface . Later, during the ice sheet retreat, the glacier tongue left these moraine at its front edge. These moraine are about 100 m wide, 25-35 m high and kilometres long. On the surface of the moraine there is a gravel bed with a thickness of 50-100 cm, below which is the blue ice. As the gravel bed protects the underlying blue ice from pneumatolysis, there forms an uplifted dam relative to the surrounding blue ice surface. The gravel bed consists of not only rock masses from Mount Harding, but also “exotic rocks” transported from the central area of the EAIS, such as ophiolite, meteorites and sedimentary rocks. These exotic rock masses provide precious source material for studying the tectonics of the underlying base rocks of EAIS. It preliminarily suggests that the sediment particles of these moraine rocks (material) reflect a number of transport patterns, which are a mixed accumulation of the sediment transported from the ice sheet bottom, interior and supra zone and whose sedimentary environment is the front of ice sheet . These tillites (material) have the similar sedimentary and lithologic characteristics to the Pliocene stratum found in the nearby Prince Charles Mountains and along the Prydz Bay. As the Antarctic ice sheet hinterland is their sole source, their sedimentary environment and chronology are of crucial importance to the research on the evolutionary history of the EAIS. The spore pollen assemblages contained in the sedimentary erratics are the key evidence of the large-scale retreat event of the EAIS during the Pliocene. Any walking or climbing activities will very probably cause the irreparable damage to these moraine dykes.
Cold-desert soil: Several cold-desert soil patches were found on the southern slope of Mount Harding above the regional erosion limit of 100 m. The existence of such soils indicates also that the ice fluctuation has never been higher than this limit after the formation of soils because any higher rise of the ice would have scraped all of them away. These soils layers show widespread surface desert pavement and water laid structures with abundant water-soluble salts, indicating ion transportation in the frigid and arid environment. As melt-water is required for the formation of soils, while the highest temperature we recorded during austral summer in the Grove Mountains is less -10 ℃, the presence of these soils indicates a warmer climatic environment, presenting seasonal ice-thawing at least, once existed in the area. It is now believed that the formation ages of these soils are about 0.5-3.5 Ma, not 14 Ma or even earlier. Despite such large range of ages, it provides some exact evidences of constraining the local ice surface fluctuation after all.
Microfossil assemblages in the sedimentary erratics: More than 25 species of Neogene microfossil of plant have been identified from such outwash sedimentary boulders. These spore and pollen assemblages provide useful information on the evolution of the EAIS since they are derived from a suite of glaciogenic strata hidden beneath the EAIS. Most of the pollen and spores are originated from local sources as in situ assemblages, representing a continental flora. The composition of such assemblages we studied is similar to the Neogene Weddellian biogeocenose, including the major pollen types such as Penaceae, Podocarpus, Araucardiaceae, Chenopodiaceae and Artemisia. Therefore, the formation era of the spore pollen in the Grove Mountains is very probably the Pliocene. If the age of the spore pollen assemblage in this area can be fully demonstrated, it will definitely prove that during this warm climate event, the margin of the EAIS was located the south of the Grove Mountains, at least 400 km from the present ice sheet margin.
Pool of ice melted water (photo5): At the foot of the lee side of huge nunataks are often developed pools of ice melted water, large or small, each with an area from several dozen square meters up to a thousand square meters. The surface ice of these pools is extremely smooth and transparent, and the air bubbles is rich inside the ice  from the bottom. They are obviously refrozen after the blue ice (snow) near the nunataks melts. The highest air temperature in the Grove Mountains in summer is less than -10℃, therefore, the occurrence of the pool of ice melted water suggests the existence of a megathermal event, which is the rare and valuable scientific material for studying the climatic and environmental change. The ice surfaces of these pools and the continuous string of air bubbles therein are of extreme beauty, and very high wilderness and aesthetic values.
Blue ice cliff: On the east side of the protected area are distributed blue ice cliffs or blue ice precipices, with the length of several thousand meters. As the ice sheet movement is blocked by the subglacial mountains, the ice sheet surface undergoes strong fluctuation, thus resulting in these striped blue ice cliffs, which are usually 30-50 m high, with a slope of 40-70°. In addition, as a result of the blowing and eroding effect of violent winds, the very deep wind-eroded ravines are developed on the crosswind side of the nunataks and the ravine walls are splendid, vertical and smooth blue ice precipices with a height of 10-30 m, which have very high wilderness and aesthetic values.
Roche moutonnees (photo 6): Typical roche moutonnees are distributed on the east and south sides of the protected area. They are peculiar in shape, have a large number of footprints of ice flow on their surfaces, and possess very high wilderness, aesthetic and scientific values. When the Antarctic ice sheet surface rises, the moving ice layer overlies the rocks of the nunatak and the underlying rocks subjected to the scraping and abrasion of the ice layer develop into the roche moutonnees.
Paleo-sedimentary basin (ice sheet leading edge): By inference, below the blue ice basin on the west side of Mount Harding should be a paleo-ice erosion basin at the front edge of ice sheet in the Pliocene, which should contain the marginal sedimentary layer then. Then the margin of the EAIS receded into the area south of the Grove Mountains (receded southward for 400 km against the present margin), the glacial flow at the ice sheet margin had a strong eroding effects, thus resulting in a series of marginal eroded lake basins, in this area, which then received sediment. Subsequently, the ice sheet re-progressed to advance and cover these paleo-sedimentary lake basins. Exploration of these paleo-sedimentary lake basins may yield the precious sedimentary records on the paleo-climatic and environmental changes during the Pliocene in this area. It is estimated that liquid water may, most probably, still exist now in these paleo-sedimentary lake basins, in other words, they are probably a brand-new type of subglacial lakes.
6.(ii) Geological condition
These nunataks consist mainly of upper amphibolite to granulite facies metamorphic rocks, syn-orogenic to late orogenic granite, and post tectonic granodioritic aplite and pegmatite. The ages of deformation (~550 Ma) indicate that the GMs belong to a Pan-African orogenic belt related to the Prydz Bay zone [20]. The absence of active structures and earthquakes, and the lack of Cenozoic volcanism suggest that this region, along with Prydz Bay, have been geologically stable at least since  the Late Mesozoic Epoch. New geological evidence obtained from this area shows that in the inland East Antarctica there exists a huge “Pan-African” stage orogenic zone from the Prydz Bay, Grove Mountains to the Prince Charles Mountains, which should be the last segmented suture zone of the Gondwana land.
7. Permit
Entry into the Area is prohibited unless a Permit issue by an appropriate national authority.
Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
    1. Scientific research activities that cannot be carried out in any place other than this area; and the applicant for a Permit who needs to collect rock specimens or samples shall make an application. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate to the appropriate competent authorities that the specimens or samples already collected from other parts of the world so far cannot fully meet the needs of the researches (tasks) proposed;
    2. Managerial activities for the purpose of realizing the objectives of the Management Plan, such as inspection, maintenance and review;
    3. the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
    4. the actions permitted will not jeopardize the values of the Area;
    5. Climbing up the ice-core pyramids, walking on the floating moraine dyke and roches montannees is strictly prohibited;
    6. Those who are within the specially protected area must carry with them the Permit or its valid copy;
    7. The period of validity must be stated in the Permit;
    8. Report on the activities must be submitted to the national authorities issuing the Permit and in charge of polar issues.
7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Entry by land vehicles such as snowmobile should avoid destroying the local equilibrium line separating the zone of net ablation from the inland zone of net accumulation, paleo-soil distribution zone, ventifacts, blue-ice cliff, ice-core pyramid, and other geological and natural physiognomy of important scientific research and environmental values.
7(ii) Activities allowed to be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time and place
Scientific researches which have to be carried out in the Area (cannot be conducted in any other parts of the world or in other areas of Antarctica) and which must not damage the value of the Area.
Major management activities, including monitoring and control.
7(iii) Installation, modification and removal of structures
No structures shall be erected in the Area except those for conducting essential scientific and managerial activities or for the purpose of scientific research, as specified in the Permit.
7(ⅳ) Camping site 
For safety reasons, the camping sites must be selected in such a way as not to destroy or affect the special geological and natural physiognomy.
7(ⅴ) Permit holders must not collect or remove anything from the Area.
Materials shall only be collected or removed from the Area in accordance with the Permit.
7(ⅵ) Wastes disposal
All the wastes (non-human or human) shall be removed from the Area as far as conditions allow.
7(ⅶ) Necessary measures should be taken to ensure that the objectives of the Management Plan could be fully realized.
Authorized access to the Area to carry out scientific field research is allowed, including the collection of rock, soil, ice-snow, atmospheric and meteorite samples, or erection or maintenance of notice boards, or other protective measures.
7(ⅷ) Reporting requirements
After each Permit is issued, the responsible Permit holder shall prepare and submit a report on the activities conducted in the Area in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. The report shall be submitted to the competent authorities specified in the Permit as soon as possible, but no later than 6 months after the visit ends. Such reports shall be kept indefinitely and easily made available to the interested Parties, CCAMLR and COMNAP. If necessary, documentation of human activities within the area shall be provided to the above-mentioned parties.
8. Supporting Documentation
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD,2007): Australian Antarctic Program Approved Science Projects for season 2006/07, http://its-db.aad.gov.au/proms/public/projects/projects_by_program.cfm?season=0607&PG_ID=5.
Report on the 22th CHINARE Scientific Activity [2005/2006](2006), Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administraion.
Liu Xiaochun; Jahn Bor-ming, Zhao Yue, Li Miao, Li, Huimin;   Liu  Xiaohan(2006). Late Pan-African granitoids from the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica: Age, origin and tectonic implications.  Precambrian Research, 145: 131-154.
Zhang Shengkai, E Dongchen, LiFei, et al (2006). The establishment of GPS network in Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Science 17(2):111-116.
CHENG Xiao, ZHANG Yan-mei(2006). Detecting Ice Motion with Repeat-pass ENVISAT ASAR Interferometry over Nunataks Region in Grove Mountain, East Antarctic—The Preliminary Result, Journal of Remote Sensing 10( 1):118-122.
IPY-ACE core program, 2006
Dongchen E, Chunzia Zhou, Mingsheng Liao(2005). Application of SAR interferometry in Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. SCAR Report, 2005, 23: 42-46.
Dongchen E., Shengkai Zhang, Li  Yan, Fei Li (2005). The establishment of GPS control network and data analysis in the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. SCAR Report, 2005, 23: 46-49.
Aimin Fang, Xiaohan Liu, Xiaoli Li, Feixin Huang, Liangjun Yu(2005). Cenozoic glaciogenic sedimentary record in the Grove Mountains of East Antarctica. Antarctic Science 17(2): 237-240.
J. Taylor, M. J. Siegert, A.J. Payne, M.J. Hambrey, P.E. O’Brien, A.K. Cooper, & G. Leitchenkov (2004). Topographic controls on post-Oligocene changes in ice-sheet dynamics, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica, Geology 32 (3) :197-200.
Fang Aimin, Liu Xiaohan, Lee Jong Ik, Li Xiaoli, Huang Feixin(2004). Sedimentary environments of the Cenozoic sedimentary debris found in the moraines of the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica and its climatic implications. Progress in Natural Science 14(3): 223-234.
Huang Feixin, Liu Xiaohan, Kong Ping; Ju Yitai, Fang Aimin, Li Xiaoli, Na Chunguang (2004). Bedrock exposure ages in the Grove Mountains, interior East Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Research 16(1):22-28.
Fang Aimin, Liu Xiaohan, Wang Weiming, Yu Liangjun, Li Xiaoli, Huang Feixin (2004). Preliminary study on the spore-pollen assemblages found in the cenozoic sedimentary rocks in Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Quaternary Sciences 24(6):645-653.
Report on the 19th CHINARE Scientific Activity [2002/2003](2003), Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administraion.
X.H. Liu, Y, Zhao, X.C. Liu, & L.J. Yu, (2003) Geology of the Grove Mountains in East Antarctica-New Evidence for the Final Suture of Gondwana Land, Science in China (D), 46 (4): 305-319.
Zhao Y, Liu X H, Liu X C, Song B(2003). Pan-African events in Prydz Bay, East Antarctica, and their implications for East Gondwana tectonics. In: Yoshida M, Windley B F, Dasgupta S. (eds) Proterozoic East Gondwana: Supercontinent Assembly and Breakup. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 206: 231-245.
Liu X, Zhao Z, Zhao Y, Chen J and Liu X H（2003）. Pyroxene exsolution in mafic granulites from the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica: constraints on the Pan-African metamorphic conditions. European Journal of Mineralogy 15:55-65.
X.L. Li, X.H. Liu, Y.T. Ju & F.X. Huang(2003). Properties of soils in Grove Mountains, East Antarctica, Science in China (D)，46 (7) :683-693.
Qin Xiang(2003). A brief introduction to research on the snow and ice of the Grove Mountains, Antarctica, during the Third Chinese research expedition. Bingchuan Dongtu, 25 (4): 477-478.
Cheng Xiao, Li Zhen, Massonnet, Didier [chairperson], Yu Shao, Zhang Yanmei(2003). Blue-ice domain discrimination using interferometric coherence in Antarctic Grove Mountains. 2003 EEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium: July 21-25, 2003: Toulouse, France; International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2003, Volume 4: 2599-2601.
Fang Aimin, Liu Xiaohan, Lee Jong Ik, Li Xiaoli, Huang Feixin(2003). The significance of Cenozoic sedimentary rocks found in Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Research 15 (2): 138-150.
LI Xiaoli, LIU Xiaohan, FANG Aimin, JU Yitai, YAN Fuhua(2003). Pliocene sporopollen in the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica, Marine geology & Quaternary geology 23(1):35-39.
Johnston, Gary, Digney, Paul, Manning, John [editor](2002).Extension of the Australian Antarctic geodetic network in Grove Mountains. Third Antarctic geodesy symposium: July 18-20, 2001: Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation; SCAR Report 21: 34-37.
Whitehead J M & McKelvey B C(2002). Cenozoic glacigene sedimentation and erosion at the Menzies Range, southern Prince Charles mountains, Antarctica. Journal of Glaciology 48 (2): 207-247.
Liu Xiaochun, Zhao Yue(2002) . Geological aspects of the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica——New evidence for the final suture of Gondwana Land. Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin 35:161-166.
Liu X H, Zhao Y, Liu X C, Yu L Z( 2002). Geological aspects of the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Science in China (Series D) 32(6): 457-468. 
Yu Liangjun, Liu Xiaohan, Zhao Yue, Ju Yitai(2002). Preliminary study on metamorphic mafic rocks in the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Research 14 (2): 93-104.  
Mikhalsky, E. V. ,Sheraton, J. W., Beliatsky, B. V.( 2001).  Preliminary U-Pb dating of Grove Mountains rocks: implications for the Proterozoic to Early Palaeozoic tectonic evolution of the Lambert Glacier-Prydz Bay area (East Antarctica). Terra Antartica 8 (1): 3-10.
B.C. McKelvey, M.J. Hambrey, D.M. Harwood(2001). The Pagodroma Group - a Cenozoic record of the East Antarctic ice sheet in the northern Prince Charles Mountains, Antarctic Science, 13 (4) :455-468.
Liu X, Zhao Y and Liu X H(2001). The Pan-African granulite facies metamorphism and syn-tectonic magmatism in the Grove Mountains, East Antarctica. Journal of Conference Abstracts, Cambridge Publications, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6:379.
Sun Jiabing, HuoDongmin, ZhouJunqi and SunZhaohui (2001). The digital mapping of satellite images by free of ground control and the analysis of land form blue ice and meteorites distribution in the Grove Mountains. Chinese Journal of Polar Science 13(1).
Report on the 16th CHINARE Scientific Activity [1999/2000](2000), Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administraion..
Cheng Yanjie, Lu Longhua,Bian Lingen,Liu Xiaohan(2000). Summer weather characteristics on the Grove Mountain of Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Science11(2): 123-130.
Report on the 15th CHINARE Scientific Activity [1998/1999](1999), Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administraion..
Cheng Yanjie,Lu Longhua,Bian Lingen,Liu Xiaohan(1999 ). Summer weather characteristics of Grove Mountain area in East Antarctica. Chinese Journal of Polar Research 11(4): 291-300.
Cheng Yanjie, Lu Longhua and Bian Lingen (1999).Summer weather characteristics of Grove Mountain area in East Antarctica Chinese Journal of Polar Science 14(1):291-300.
Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas：Appendix to Resolution 2(1998).
Domack E, et al(1998). Late Quaternary sediment facies in Prydz Bay, East Antarctica and their relationship to glacial advance onto the continental shelf. Antarctic Science 10(3):236～246.
Barker P F, et al. (1998). Ice sheet history from Antarctic continental margin sediments: the ANTOSTRAT approach. Terra Antarctica, 5:737-760.
D.E. Sugden, D.R. Marchant, Jr. N. Potter, R.A. Souchez, G.H. Denton, C.C. Swisher III, J.L. Tison (1995). Preservation of Miocene glacier ice in East Antarctica, Nature 376(3):412-414.
D.E. Sugden, D.R. Marchani, & G.H. Destos, The case for a stable East Antarctic Ice Sheet the background, Geografiska Annaler, 75A, (1993) 151-153.	
9. Maps
Map A: Grove Mountains Area, Antarctica
Map B: Protected Area Around Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, Antarctica
Map C: Location of Nunataks around Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, Antarctica, and direction of Ice Flow.
Map A: Grove Mountains Area 
Mapping standards:
Projection: TM   Horizontal datum: WGS84  
Manufacturer: Antarctic Surveying and Mapping Centre, Wuhan University












































Map B: Protected Area around Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, Antarctica
Mapping standards: Projection: TM Horizontal datum: WGS84  
Manufacturer: Antarctic Surveying and Mapping Centre, Wuhan University































Map C: Location of Nunataks Around Mount Harding, 
Grove Mountains, Antarctica and Direction of Ice Flow









































Photo 1: Ventifact

Photo 2: Ventifact

Photo3: Ice-core pyramid

Photo 4: Hanging moraine dyke

Photo 5: Pool of ice melted water

Photo 6: Roches montannees




