





A Proposed Checklist for Inspecting Protected Areas in Antarctica




A Proposed Checklist for Inspecting Protected Areas in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand,
the United Kingdom and the United States of America.

Background
At CEP IX, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States presented a draft checklist for inspecting protected areas in Antarctica (ATCM XXIX /WP 33).  In discussing the matter, a number of Parties raised questions regarding the intended use of the checklist.  The Committee agreed however to revisit the matter at CEP X (paras 174 and 175 from the Final Report of CEP IX refer).  The paper is therefore resubmitted here for the Committees reconsideration.
Introduction
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty states “In order to promote the objectives and ensure the observance of the provisions of the present Treaty, each Contracting Party whose representatives are entitled to participate in the meetings referred to in Article IX of the Treaty shall have the right to designate observers to carry out any inspection provided for by the present Article”.
In addition Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, provides that inspections shall be arranged “in order to promote the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and to ensure compliance with this Protocol”.
In 1995, ATCM XIX agreed that inspection checklists would provide useful guidelines for those planning and conducting inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.  ATCM XIX therefore adopted Resolution 5 (1995) to which the following checklists were appended:
    • Checklist A Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations
    • Checklist B Vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Areas
    • Checklist C Abandoned Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations
    • Checklist D Waste Disposal Sites
ATCM XIX also noted that such checklists are not mandatory and should not be used as a questionnaire.
Checklist for inspecting Antarctic protected and managed areas.
Annex V to the Environmental Protocol deals with area protection and management in Antarctica.  Article 10 of Annex V requires Parties to make arrangements for exchanging information on protected and managed areas.  Article 10(1)(a) states:
“The Parties shall make arrangements for:
Collecting and exchanging records, including records of permits and reports of visits, including inspection visits, to Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and reports of inspection visits to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas:” (underlining added).
Further Article 12 of the Protocol sets out the functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) which includes the requirement for the CEP to “provide advice on (inter alia) inspection procedures, including formats for inspection reports and checklists for the conduct of inspections” (Article 12 (1)(h)).
Against this background, in November 2005, the US, UK and New Zealand undertook formal inspections of protected areas in the Ross Sea region.  A full report of those inspections was provided as a Working Paper to CEP IX and ATCM XXIX.
In order to assist those inspections, a draft checklist for inspecting protected areas was prepared and was tested in Antarctica by inspecting 5 ASPAs and one ASMA.  The draft checklist is appended to this Working Paper.
In drafting the checklist, we drew upon those questions that are already used in Checklist A (Permanent Stations) and Annex V to the Protocol (notably Article 5 of Annex V, which sets out the requirements for management plans).  Section 20 of Checklist A includes 8 points for protected areas in the vicinity of, or containing, the station in question.  But we have attempted to make the questions more generic so as to apply to all protected and managed areas irrespective of how close they are to stations or bases.
In carrying out the inspections during the 2005/06 season the draft checklist proved to be a useful tool.  The draft checklist provided a comprehensive summary of the issues for each protected area inspected as well as for the components of the ASMA that was inspected (the Dry Valleys ASMA).  Completed checklists for each site inspected also provided an adequate record for subsequent preparation of the final inspection report.
Proposal
We therefore propose that the CEP review the draft checklist and amend it as required.  We further propose that the CEP forward the draft checklist to the ATCM for approval so as to assist further protected and managed area inspections.
In doing so the CEP may wish to seek the ATCM’s views as to whether the protected area component of existing Checklist A needs to be modified or removed.
Draft Checklist
Antarctic Protected and Managed Areas

1.	General information

 1.1 Name and number of Protected Area
 1.2 Date of inspection visit
 1.3 Name(s) of Observers entering the Area
 1.4 Mode of transport to/from the Area
 1.5 Activities conducted by the Observers in the Area:

2.	Nearby stations and visiting vessels  

2.1  Nearest stations, bases and vessels
2.2  Are copies of the Area management plan held on the station or vessel?
2.3  Who is responsible for ensuring compliance with management plans?
2.4  Entry by station or vessel personnel to the Area within the past year (issue of permits and reason for their issue)
2.5  Are there any problems with station or vessel personnel or visitors not observing the restrictions of the Area? 
2.6  Are other protected or managed Areas in close proximity?

3.	Assessment of Area Management Plan

3.1  Description of values to be protected
3.2  Are the values for which the area was designated still relevant?
3.3  Are the values of the Area being protected effectively?
3.4  Are the management aims and objectives appropriate?
3.5   Is the period of designation appropriate?
3.6  Do maps and photographs show the boundary of the Area clearly and the key features it contains? Are maps and photographs easy to use and up to date?
3.7  What are the geographical coordinates of the Area? Are they correct?

4. 	Management activities

4.1  Are appropriate management activities being undertaken to protect the values of the Area?
4.2  Is any monitoring of the Area being undertaken?
4.3  What measures are in place to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan are being met? Do they need to be revised?

5. 	Natural features, equipment and installations

5.1  What natural features are in the Area?
5.2  Are boundary markers in place, and if so what condition are they in?
5.3  What scientific research is being carried out in the Area?
5.4  Are any markers or equipment installed?  Are these clearly marked or labelled?
5.5  Are there any restricted zones and are they still appropriate?
5.6  Are there any structures, including refuges or huts, within or near the Area?

6.	Permit conditions and human activities

6.1  How is entry to, and movement within, the Area controlled? Do visitors entering the Area understand the Management Plan and have appropriate permits? 
6.2  What activities are allowed in the Area?
6.3  Have EIAs been prepared for the activities taking place?
6.4  Have structures been installed, modified or removed from the Area?
6.5  Where are field camps allowed? How are field camps being managed?
6.6  Are vehicles being used in the Area? Have they caused any disturbance to wildlife or damaged vegetation and soils?
6.7  Are vessels being used in the Area? Is there any evidence of marine litter, oily waste or other marine pollution in the Area?
6.8  What restrictions are in place on materials and organisms, which can be brought into the Area? Are non-native organisms present?
6.9  Is taking or harmful interference with flora and fauna taking place?
6.10  Is there any disturbance or removal of soils or natural features?
6.11  Is material being collected or removed from the Area and if so what sort of samples are being taken?
6.12  How are wastes being removed and disposed of? Is sewage or grey water being disposed of onto ice-free land or into streams or other freshwater systems?
6.13  Is there any evidence of increased environmental impacts caused by human activities in the Area?
6.14  Is there any evidence of conflicts between human activities in the Area? 

7.	Recommendations

7.1  Are further management measures needed to protect the values of the Area?

8.	Any further comments or information




