
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 018
Agenda Item: 13
AUSTRALIA
Original: English









AUSTRALIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAM 2003-04





























Australia’s Antarctic science program 2003-04
    1. The 2003-04 Antarctic season commenced in September 2003, with a collaborative sea ice research program involving scientists from Australia, Belgium, China, Germany, Japan and the United States.  The project was conducted in pack ice north-east of Casey station.  The sea ice study included experiments designed to validate the interpretation of data collected from recently-launched satellite sensors.
    2. In mid-December 2003 the first simultaneous land-sea research program on the marine ecosystem of Heard Island and surrounding Southern Ocean commenced.  Land-based researchers worked with marine scientists on board the Aurora Australis studying the interactions between the island’s five key predators - king and macaroni penguins, black-browed and light-mantled sooty albatross and fur seals - and their prey.  The study aimed to develop an understanding of the foraging habits and diet of the marine species to assist in developing environmentally sustainable fishing limits in the commercial fishery adjacent to the Heard Island and McDonald Island (HIMI) marine reserve.
    3. The research has produced underwater video footage of a part of the Southern Ocean that had never been seen before.  Through a specially-designed video system, researchers captured pictures of a diverse array of animals including Patagonian toothfish, mackerel icefish, octopus, spectacular gardens of feather stars, sea anemones and soft corals on the sea floor.
    4. Scientists on Heard Island studied biological and physical responses to climate change.  This season glaciologists found that in the past three years, Brown Glacier has retreated 50 m.  The lower slopes of the glacier also were found to have lost as much as 11 m in thickness.  Even at higher altitude, where changes are less obvious, the glacier surface was found to be lower, by up to four metres.
    5. On the Antarctic continent a busy program of research continued in the fields of atmospheric science, meteorology, geosciences, human biology and medicine, biology and glaciology.  The season benefited from the use of two twin-otter aircraft to support the science program in many remote locations.
    6. The Amery Ice Shelf-Ocean Research (AMISOR) project led by Australian scientists in collaboration with scientists from the United States and China completed another field season.  The team used a recently developed hot water drilling system.  Measurements including sea water temperature, salinity and currents were obtained from instrument strings and from an experimental video system.  This season the longest ice core retrieved was 147 m. It is hoped that a 200 year climate record will be achieved from these ice cores.
    7. Further to the east, south east of Casey, Australian scientists undertook studies in the ITASE program.  Bad weather and season delays curtailed the amount of work originally planned but the field party obtained a 147 m core, from which a fine-scale picture of climate over the past 200 years should be obtained.
