XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 042
Agenda Item: CEP 
ITALY
Original: English

 






PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATION ON “STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT”, THE CASE OF EDMONSON POINT AREA, ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA.
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATION ON “ STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT”, THE CASE OF EDMONSON POINT AREA, ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA 






Introduction

With the ratification of the Madrid Protocol (1991), Italy has taken the responsibility of the protection of the Antarctica environment and its depended and associated ecosystems, in particular in the area of Terra Nova Bay, and the  Wood Bay in the Ross Sea region.

The Ross Sea Region represents an invaluable area for the whole scientific community, being in fact over the last 40 years, the site of a considerable multidisciplinary international scientific effort, in particular for the New Zealand , United States and Italian scientific programmes (Ainley, 2002)
Antarctica New Zealand recently produced “ Ross Sea Region 2001: A state of the Environment Report“. Observation to this report from other Parties concluded that many potentially valuable data are not easy to get or are systematically available to assess the extent and the importance of human pressure at a regional level and to identify the need for a regionally based approach to environmental management.
Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol for Environmental Protection outlines that areas, including marine areas, may be designated as ASPA to protect areas of outstanding or unique historic, biological, geomorphologic, aesthetic, scenic or wilderness value or any combination of such values.
With reference to many sentences that characterize this article on Protected Areas, one point can be stressed where it says: 

Area which should be kept inviolable so that it may be used in the future for purposes of comparison with localities  that have been disturbed by human activities”.

The proposal for a Regional Management plan finds validity in a strategy for a global environmental assessment  for an environmentally interesting area that could became a ASMA ( Antarctic Specially Managed Area). In the case of Edmonson Point the area could comprise the whole Wood Bay zone from Cape Washington to Coulman Island, where many sites are unique for its flora and fauna characteristics and where many species, not recorded elsewhere in the Antarctica, are endemic.
In addiction to this and in order to support our proposal for a Regional Management Plan, more scientific considerations on values to protect, not only in Edmonson Point main area but on a larger scale including the whole zone of Wood Bay, in the following are reported, as preliminary evaluation, more scientific details on the main characteristic of the zone.

The Terra Nova Bay surroundings result of particular importance to marine birds and mammals during the Antarctic summer. Three Adélie Penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colonies are located in the Terra Nova Bay surroundings: at Inexpressible Island and Adélie Cove to the south and Edmonson Point to the north, in the Wood Bay. A large Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colony consisting of 19,364 pairs (Woehler, 1993), the second of importance in Antarctica, is located at Cape Washington, a deglaciated area which lie in the middle and physically divide the two bays. Other seabirds species such as Snow Petrel (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's Storm Petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) and South Polar Skua (Catharacta maccormicki) inhabits the coastland during Antarctic summer. The ice edge limiting the polynya is a feeding area also for marine mammals: a group of about 20 Orcinus orca as well as about 10 Balaenoptera bonarensis cruising along the fast ice edge of the polynya of Terra Nova Bay next to Cape Washington were regularly sighted during 98/99, 00/01 and 02/03. Antarctic summers. More than 200 Leptonychotes weddelli were estimated to rear pups around Terra Nova Bay, and more than 100 in the Wood Bay; Hydrurga leptonyx was sighted foraging on penguins at Inexpressible Island and Adélie Cove.

Environmental characteristic and outstanding values of the Wood Bay zone

The Wood Bay is one of the few pristine bays of the Victoria Land coast. The whole bay has been untouched and remains without any kind of human settlement in spite of the heavy anthropic pressure recorded in this sector of the Antarctic continent since the beginning of the last century.


If we consider Cape Washington as belonging to the next Terra Nova Bay, in the Wood Bay there are four main deglaciated areas; namely Edmonson Point, Baker Rocks, Harrow Peaks and Key Island. Harrow Peaks and Kay Island are of a particular biological importance mainly for being inhabited by two colonies of Snow Petrels. However because of its invaluable richness in terms of vegetal and animal life, Edmonson Point is certainly the most biologically important ice-free area of the Wood Bay.

Edmonson Point comprises three ice-free coastal areas; respectively the northern, the central and the southern (Fig. 1). These three areas are separated by small glaciers which are branches of the glacier descending from the Mount Melbourne into the Wood Bay. Even if divided by small ice-tongues the three areas can be considered as belonging to the same geographical unit ("comprensorio"). If measured on a straight line its total length is in fact only 7 Km and the northern and central sector are divided by a distance of about 1 Km of icy area.

Because of the environmental value of the Edmonson Point area, the institution of a protected area (ASPA) has been proposed by Italy. This protected area actually includes only the central and the northern areas and excludes the southern one which appears smaller in size by not minor concerning its environmental value. The three areas are in fact highly homogeneous in all respects and should be considered as a whole.

The nature of the soil is the same in the three areas and consists of  dark volcanic rocks originated by the past volcanic activity of Mount Melbourne. The landscape has been modified by the glacial and periglacial activity, resulting in a mosaic of small valleys, hills and morains, incorporating streams and several fresh-water ponds and small lakes. This characteristics, together with the organic materials derived from the presence of the seabirds, makes this environment exceptionally suitable for a rich "plant" community which includes numerous species of mosses, lichens and algae. The vegetated areas of Edmonson Point are certainly unique in the Victoria Land for their sizes and luxuriantly and places with similar characteristics are extremely rare in the Antarctica.
Even if the central area is the richer in vegetation, lichens and mosses are widespread in the whole area, including the northern and the southern sectors. In particular in being smaller the southern area is probably the more fragile in terms of conservation of its vegetation.

Seabirds are characterised by the Adélie Penguin  rookery of about 2000 pairs in the central area. The extent of the surface occupied by ornithogenic soil lets state that the actual size of the colony is much smaller than in the past. An abandoned rookery has also been localised in the southern area. Because the occupancy of the breeding sites by penguins are strongly affected and regulated by the dynamic of the sea ice, it seems feasible that the rookery of Edmonson Point could increase in number as a consequence of a melting of the sea ice actually occupying the Wood Bay for most of the Summer period.
Satellite telemetry studies have also shown that penguins travelling to and from the sea departing from the colony in the central area have to pass in front of the southern area in order to reach the closer feeding areas located at the edge between the pack ice and the sea. Such feature suggests a close link between the central and the southern areas of Edmonson Point (Fig. 2).

The three areas are colonised also by an other seabird species, the South Polar Skua , a predator usually associated with the colony of the seabirds which represents an important source of food for it. However at Edmonson Point the South Polar Skuas breeds in an exceptionally high number of pairs in all the three areas. Considering the "source-sink" theory of the population dynamic, it seems likely that the Edmonson Point population could represent a "source population" that produces birds which spread in other reproductive areas. Such reason suggests a particular attention in the conservation of this skuas population in all the areas of Edmonson Point.

Seals are the other group of animal which reproduce at Edmonson Point. In particular Weddell Seals  give birth to their pups in the ice in front of the beaches of Edmonson Point. After the birth of the puppies seals suckles them for a long period during the summer. During this period the seals with their pups show a linear distribution, they are in fact regularly spaced and form a line in front of the beach of Edmonson Point. When sufficiently grown pups can be left alone by their mums and so they remain on the ice close to the beach while the adults are feeding under the ice.

Because of the importance of the pack-ice as structural feature of the Antarctic ecosystem, it seems a conservation need not to limit the protection to the terrestrial coastal ice-free areas only. The marine and the terrestrial ecosystems are in fact intimately connected. Birds and mammals are depending from the existence of suitable areas on the land where to reproduce but their life cycle remain primarily marine. Even during the reproduction they need a continuous access to the sea that make sensible the protection of their breeding inland sites but also of the sea areas in front of such a breeding spots.



Conclusions


The outstanding ecological and scientific values present at Edmonson Point are well reported and explained in the proposal of a New Protected area and into the annexed Management Plan.
Italy, just in consideration of the growing scientific activities and probably future logistic activities in Edmonson Point area and his surroundings would like to emphasize on the risks of unavoidable impacts.
Italy would like to point attention on more important environmental issues with regard to the future of the area.
The discussion is opened also on final touches of the Management plan of Edmonson Point ASPA that at moment not considers the southern sector of Edmonson Point area.
In the view to find cooperation with other countries active in the area on a possible environmental regional plan we project to propose a general discussion which could be done with the establishment of a work table.



Ainley D.G. 2002. The Ross Sea, Antarctica, where all ecosystem processes still reamin for study, but maybe not for long. Marine Ornithology, 30(2):55-62.
Woehler E.J. 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic penguins. SCAR, University Printing Service, Cambridge, pp 76 pp.


