May 2004


Tourism in Antarctica
(Information Paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany)


The rise in tourism in the Antarctic area in recent years has revived the discussion among Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties about the need for binding rules. According to the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), in the 2002/2003 season the number of tourists increased 16% to 13,263 compared to the same period the previous year. During the decade from 1992/1993 to 2002/2003, the number of tourists has doubled. This increase went hand in hand with a rise in the number of cruise passengers and an increased focus on trips to the Antarctic Peninsula.

Cruises are recording a considerable upswing worldwide. It cannot be ruled out that in spite of the high price of such voyages, the number of cruises to Antarctica will continue to increase. Already now, last-minute and discount tour operators are offering trips to the Antarctic area. In addition, more and more individuals are organizing trips that fall into the category of "adventure tourism". Additional concern is caused by the commencement of tourism flights to this region and the accommodations sector that is created as a result of this activity.

Thus the question arises as to what extent the Antarctic Treaty, the Madrid Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the relevant national implementing legislation, as well as the numerous guidelines, recommendations and procedures that are observed on a voluntary basis, are sufficient in order to guarantee the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems for which these arrangements provide. Also, a solution must be found for the problem that some cruises are organized by tour operators who do not adhere to the voluntary rules on tourism in Antarctica.

Germany is very keen to ensure the continued protection of the Antarctic environment. The Federal Republic of Germany made the commitment to protect the Antarctic environment with its accession to the Antarctic Treaty in 1979 and by signing the Madrid Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991. On 22 September 1994 it adopted an act to implement the Madrid Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and thus created the prerequisites to reach the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty at the national level.

From the German point of view, tourism flights and accommodation in Antarctica are not in line with the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The impact of individual tourism must also be critically examined. In Germany, individual tourism, in particular yacht tourism, is subject to the same legal requirements as cruise tourism. Recently, there has been an increase in advertising, mass sports and art events, which have a very negative image. By contrast, the German Federal Government believes that cruise tourism that is conducted in accordance with the rules, and which is of great economic importance, is in line with the objectives as defined in the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, provided it adheres to the relevant international and national provisions.

In principle, the existing agreements and the many and diverse self-regulating forces of Antarctic tourism have until now worked very well with regard to cruises. Therefore the Federal Government believes it is sufficient to solve problems that have recently arisen, or that are likely to arise in the future, due to an increase in and expansion of tourism by adapting and revising the existing provisions.

In discussions at the last two Consultative Meetings, Consultative Parties and various organizations made highly valuable contributions that not only reflected the complexity of the problems at hand, but also resulted in very constructive solution proposals. Germany considers the continuation of this open and targeted dialogue to be very useful, and would like to contribute to it by making the following observations:

1.	Signature and efficient implementation of the Madrid Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by a larger number of states

Germany welcomes the ratification of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by Canada with effect as from 13 December 2003 and calls upon all non-Consultative Parties, in so far as they have not already done so, to follow this example. Although all 27 Consultative Parties have ratified the Protocol, the level of national implementation differs widely. In particular in the field of tourism, individual states have established very different standards. The German side therefore expressly welcomes the British proposal to adopt a resolution calling upon the Contracting Parties to bring their legal and administrative measures with regard to tourism in line with the requirements of the Protocol (XXVI ATCM/WP-023-UK). In this context, we also support the Australian proposal to harmonise guidelines on “non-government activities” (XXVI ATCM/WP-013-AUS).

2.	The aim of integrating tour operators that are not yet IAATO members

Over the course of many years, IAATO has developed a large number of important and valuable guidelines. This responsible commitment deserves great recognition. The Federal Government believes that such voluntary rules are suitable for guaranteeing the protection of Antarctica from undesirable and harmful tourism activities. Therefore it is important that also tour operators that are not yet involved in IAATO become members of the Association, and the Contracting Parties should try to convince the respective tour operators to join it. In the process, it must be guaranteed that the rules that currently apply are not watered down in order to attract as many operators as possible.

3.	Wider implementation and further development of existing rules

The protection of Antarctica from harmful or undesirable activities as envisioned by the Antarctic Treaty is at present guaranteed by a differentiated set of regulations consisting of the Treaty itself, the Madrid Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and its Annexes. These regulations also apply to tourism activities. As regards tourism activities, area protection and management, as provided for in Annex V of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, play a special role. Since this Annex only came into effect on 24 May 2002, it is essential that the instruments it makes available are made better use of and further developed. Here, too, comparable standards should apply for all Contracting Parties. However, the Federal Republic of Germany does not regard this Annex as a final solution and is therefore open to any further-reaching measures with regard to area protection and management. 

Among the large number of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) decisions, Recommendation XVIII-1 of 1994 is of crucial importance. From the Federal Republic of Germany’s point of view, this set of regulations has basically proven its worth. What is now needed is to adapt these rules to the changed conditions of Antarctic tourism. For this reason, the Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the British initiative to amend this Recommendation (XXVI ATCM/WP-026-UK). In addition, it supports the development of site-specific guidelines.

    4. Adventure tourism

Special attention must be paid to so-called “adventure tourism”. Although it is not so much a threat to the Antarctic environment, it can place a considerable burden on scientific activities in Antarctica, as well as on the carrying out of tours organized by tour operators. The Contracting Parties should therefore adopt guidelines that call upon all those responsible for organizing adventure tourism to take certain precautions with regard to technical equipment, rescue missions in the event of an emergency, the provision of medical care, insurance and liability.

5.	Improvement of information and data analysis

Although many valuable data are made available by tour operators and presented by IAATO in an annual report, there is broad agreement that an integrated, comprehensive system is needed. The Federal Republic of Germany therefore supports proposals that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty create an electronic database. The Secretariat could be given a mandate to collect, collate, analyse and disseminate information.

    6. Ship safety

The safety of ships is an important aspect of tourism in Antarctica. Shipping traffic generally must meet high safety standards in Antarctica. The Federal Republic of Germany therefore considers the application of the Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic Ice-covered Waters as elaborated for arctic waters by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to be a decisive contribution towards enhancing this safety, also with regard to all Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties.


    7. Monitoring

In view of a lack of relevant studies, it is very difficult to assess the present and future impact of tourism in Antarctica. In the 2001/2002 period, Germany conducted a study in Hannah Point, a region that is highly frequented by tourists. In the meantime, tourism has further increased at that site, and as a result its impact must be reassessed. This example alone clearly demonstrates the importance of conducting long-term studies. In addition, it is absolutely necessary to evaluate further sites that are visited by many tourists and to establish uniform indicators for such studies. The Federal Republic of Germany will continue to actively participate in this process.
