XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 033
Agenda Item: 13
INDIA
Original: English

 






INDIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAMME 2003-04












INDIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAMME 2003-04
INDIA’S ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PROGRAMME 2003-04
Indian Antarctic Research Activity
In India “National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean research (NCAOR)” of Department of Ocean development, Government of India, is the nodal agency to undertake, organize, co-ordinate and provide the logistics support to Antarctica scientific research. This is a multi-institutional scientific research programme where India’s premier institute participates. Many scientists from other countries also participated in the Antarctic research programme of India.
The Antarctica research programme is concentrated in the fields of but not limited to:  Earth science, Geophysics, Meteorology and Atmospheric Science, Glaciology, Environmental Science, Human Physiology and Medicine, and Engineering and Communication. NCAOR made efforts to collaborate with National Antarctic Agencies of Germany, Iran, Peru and Poland. This year Antarctic Research Programme commenced in December 2003 and following experiments were either completed or ongoing;
Meteorology & Atmospheric Sciences
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) Programme is specifically aimed at preparing a data archive of meteorological parameters over Antarctica to understand the aspects of Indian weather in general and monsoon behavior in particular. Continuous recording of the various surface and upper air meteorological parameters including synoptic hours observations is being carried out.  Also real time transmission of main synop message (4 times a day) over GTS is transmitted for use by the weather forecasters all over the world. Recording of surface ozone and measurements of vertical distribution of ozone in the atmosphere through weekly ozonesonde ascents at Maitri is being carried out. Radiation budget studies – Direct and diffuse radiation observations by radiometersonde ascents is being carried out. The recording of the (a) atmospheric total ozone, (b) ground UVB and (c) concentration of SO2 and NO2 and vertical profile of O3 and NO2 in the atmosphere at Antarctica is being continuously recorded
Study of Green House Gases, UVB radiation and aerosol loading in the Antarctic atmosphere is being carried out by National Physical laboratory, New Delhi,India to understand the interaction and surface climatology of Antarctica. 
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai, India conducted experiments to find out the statistical occurrence of storms and sub storms with intensification of auroral electro jet currents. 

Earth Science and Glaciology 
Geological Survey of India undertook study of elucidation of lithology, structure, metamorphism and magnetic history of central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica with a view to understand the central evolution of this region and assembly of Gondwana and Rodinia Super continents. GPS aided ice dynamics studies are carried out on ice to observe the movement pattern of ice sheet in collaboration with Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai, India. Around 20 semi permanent stations in the Schrimacher Oasis and rocky outcrops in the vicinity of Maitri Station is setup to measure crustal displacement and to estimate the strain field and GPS data is collected to monitor the Glacier movement to the south of Schrimacher Oasis and to study the ice-shelf dynamics.

A permanent GPS station at Maitri is installed and Continuous GPS monitoring between India and Antarctica on interplate motion and the crustal deformation between India and Antarctica is being carried out. Besides crustal uplift after deglaciation and elevation changes in Antarctica is also studied with the objective to establish the time evolution of baseline length between Hyderabad and Maitri to precisely estimate the crustal deformation between India and Antarctica and to understand the serious tectonic and geodynamical processes that do take place in the Indian Ocean.  
Absolute gravity measurements are widely used to address the different geophysical problems for example crustal deformation studies in conjunction with GPS for complimentary verification, determination of Geoid, Glacial rebound and determination of actual sea level rise. During the summer 2003-04 an absolute gravity (Asia’s first which is owned by India) station is installed at Maitri and observations were recorded by National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad, India
Environmental Science
An environmental laboratory was setup during the XIX expedition is augmented with the modern analytical instruments and it is shifted to a permanent place inside the Maitri station. Air quality monitoring is carried out around he Maitri station and the samples of water and wastewater are collected for physico-chemical analysis. Efforts are made for efficacy improvisation of Rotating Biological Contactor through lab study and analysis. This research programme is undertaken by NCAOR.
Sample was collected of different types of diatoms, pollen, spores and dinoflagellates. First time in Antarctica and probably in the world, sediments core from the lakes are collected using the helicopter to understand the paleo-wind direction and changes during late Holocene by identification of characteristic pollen recovered in the lake sediments, this study is conducted by NCAOR.
The NCAOR in collaboration of Jagiellonian University, Poland carried out study of algal diversity of Schrimacher Oasis.
Human Physiology & Medicine 
Sleep disturbances are common in Antarctica. It is classically accompanied by headaches and light depression with irritability and increased sensitivity to social or physical stimuli. Melatonin hormone is known to have sleep inducing properties and controls the regulation of circadian rhythm to study the seasonal variations of sleep pattern of Indian and Russian expedition members during summer and winter months in Antarctica. Study is conducted during the summer 2003-04 to evaluate the circadian and seasonal variation in plasma melatonin concentration and its relation in sleep and maintenance of circadian rhythm of other physiological variables in Antarctica along with study of association of altered photoperiod with circadian rhythm of plasma melatonin concentration and body temperature. The Defense Institute Of Physiology And Applied Sciences, New Delhi, India, conducts this study.
The cold climatic conditions possess adverse environment and leads to different health hazards. Ayurveda, has been using food supplements, dietary elements, herbs and minerals (Rasayanas and Vajikaran) for increasing physical endurance and mental performance.  These substances have been described in modern medicine as Adaptogens.  The study was aimed at evaluating the following drinks and food supplements to combat the hazards of cold climatic conditions. 1) Specialized form of Tea “Kahava”, 2) Ayush Poshak – Modak.  These two items contains various ingredients that possess different actions like Thermoregulations, Antioxidants effect, Adoptogenic activity, Nutritive effect, Appetizing action and also significant effect on respiratory system.  And the observations during the summer period 2003-04 indicated this combination is  suitable to combat effects of cold climatic conditions at Antarctica. The Central Council For Research In Ayurveda And Sidda, New Delhi, India, conducted for the first time this research work on tradition Indian Ayurvedic therapy in Antarctica.


