Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation

for

Czech Scientific
Station in Antarctica
Construction and Operation

Czech Republic

January 2004
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

CONTENTS                                                                                           page

1.    Non technical summary                                                                      5
2.    The CEE process                                                                            6
2.1   Aim of a CEE                                                                               6
2.2   Process for preparing the Draft CEE                                                       7
3.    Basic data on the project                                                                  7
3.1   Context and reasons for the station's construction                                         9
3.2   History of the project and alternatives of construction                                    9
3.2.1 Alternatives of construction - description                                               12
3.3   Description of the proposed activities                                                    15
3.3.1 Location of the station                                                                15
3.3.2 Scientific activities proposed for Czech Antarctic station                            15
3.3.2.1 Research programme                                                                  16
3.3.2.2 Aims of the research programme                                                      17
4.    Brief description of the station design                                                   21
4.1   Accessibility of the construction site                                                  22
4.2   Assumed extent of the construction site, building-up concept and 
      structure of buildings                                                                    22
4.3   Technical structure of the station                                                        23
4.4   Buildings of the station                                                                 23
4.4.1 Brief description of the buildings                                                       23
4.4.2 Generation of energy                                                                  27
4.4.3 Means of transport                                                                     29
4.4.4 Transport requirements and other infrastructures                                      29
5.    Description of the initial environmental reference state and prediction 
      of the environment state in absence of the activity                                       30
5.1   Atmosphere                                                                               30
5.2   Soil                                                                                      31
5.3   Water                                                                                     31
5.4   Environmental geofactors                                                                31
5.5   Fauna and flora                                                                           32
5.6   Protected areas and historical monuments                                                 34
5.7   Areas of mineral resources                                                               34
5.8   Other characteristics of the environment                                                 35
6.    Direct impacts of the planned activity                                                    35
6.1   Atmosphere and climate                                                                  35
6.2   Water                                                                                     35
6.3   Coast                                                                                     36
6.4   Soil, land and bedrock                                                                   36
6.5   Risks connected with introduction of alien species                                       37
6.6   Risks connected with planned methods of energy production                                37
7.    Waste                                                                                     38
7.1   Waste management plan                                                                   38
7.1.1 Waste from the station's construction                                                    38
7.1.2 Waste resulting from the station's operation                                             39
7.1.3 Waste water                                                                               41
8.    Response to the contingencies and their monitoring                                        41
9.    Noise, vibrations                                                                         42
                                                                                                 2
10. Radioactive and electromagnetic radiation 42
11. Indirect impacts 42
12. Inevitable impacts 44
12.1 Impacts on flora and fauna 44
12.2 Impact on ecosystems 44
12.3 Impacts on the anthropogenic systems, their components and functions 45
12.4 Aesthetic impacts on landscape 45
13. Description of the operational safety risks 45
14. Minimization of the environment impacts 46
15. Description of the proposed measures to prevent, eliminate, 
         minimize or compensate environmental impacts 47
16. Description of methods and data used to forecast impact 47
17. Outline of monitoring programme 47
18. Gaps and uncertainties affecting the CEE 48
19. Conclusions 48
20. References/sources 51

ANNEXES

Annex No. 1 Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with locations of sites assessed in 
        connection with the intention of the station's construction 53

Annex No. 2 Satellite photograph of James Ross Islad with the research interest area marked 54

Annex No. 3 Northern part of James Ross Island - 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the 
        final location 55

Annex No. 4 Aerial photograph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin) 56

Annex No. 5 Built-up plan of the station objects on the Site No. 4 57

Annex No. 6 Temperatures, wind direction and wind speed on James Ross Island (J. Strelin) 58

Annex No. 7 Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project 59

Annex No. 8 The influence of station's operation on air quality -dispersion study 60

Annex No. 9 Acoustic study 70

Annex No. 10 Report on project of the Czech research station in Antarctica ATCM XXV, 
        IP 93 88

Annex No. 11 Scott Trac 2000 R - technical documentation 115
3
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

ACRONYMS

ASMA     Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
AT       Antarctic Treaty
ATCM     Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
CADIC    Centro Austral de Investigaciones Científicas
CCAMLR   Commission for the Conservation Antarctic System
CCAS     Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine LivingSeal Reserves
CEMP     CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme
CEP      Committee for Environmental Protection
CEE      Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
EIA      Environmental Impact Assessment
EI       Equivalent inhabitant
HU       Hokkaido University
ICG      Intersessional Contact Group
IAA      Instituto Antártico Argentino
IAATO    International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators
MU       Masaryk University
UAC      Ukraine Antarctic Centre
SPA      Specially Protected Areas
SSSI     Sites of Special Scientific Interest
HSM      Historic Sites and Monuments
MPA      Multiple-use Pnanning Area
                                                                          4
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

1. Non-technical summary

The objective of the Czech Republic to build a small, seasonal, research station in the Antarctic stems from experience gathered through activities of Czech scientists in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula and South Shetlands, and from the need to establish a logistic background for development of complex and long-term research.

After comments on the first proposal of the station site presented at XXIV ATCM in St. Petersburg, 2001, and based on two reconnaissance trips to the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetlands, and South Orkneys, a new location was proposed at the northern coast of James Ross Island. This area was the destination of another reconnaissance journey in March 2003. The aims were as follows:

1. Selection of a suitable building site,
2. Evaluation of its suitability from the point of view of landing and disembarkation, construction of buildings with application of the design and technological solutions proposed for the former location (Turret Point),
3. Evaluation of the site from the point of view of possible disturbing the existing ecosystems with regard to minimization of this impact,
4. Identification of a suitable fresh water source,
5. Assessment of the site and the environs from the point of view of research potential corresponding to the existing scientific programme.

Thanks to IAA colleagues and their close cooperation with the Czech party, 8 locations at the northern coast of JRI in the section from the Lewis Hill to St. Martha Cove were evaluated and as generally most suitable the site NW of Brandy Bay, under spot 64 m, was selected.

The environmental impact assessment of station technical project, construction and operation resulted at this stage in the following conclusions:

1. The station construction and its foundation would not disturb significantly either the surface or subsoil or vegetation at the selected site.

2. Proposed energy generation and effort to use maximum of renewable energy resources (wind, solar energy, thermal pumps) would minimize fuel combustion emissions to a level which should not significantly influence the station’s environs.

3. Discharge of non-toxic liquid waste to the sea would be directed to an area with sufficient flow, thus it is not supposed to increase singnificantly concentration of pollution along the coast.

4. Toxic and incombustible waste would be transported out the Antarctic area pursuant to Madrid Protocol.

5. Sources of acoustic emissions (diesel generators, waste incinerator, wind generators) would not be as considerable as to disturb significantly birds and mammals in the surroundings.

6. Continuous vegetation does not occur in the proximate surroundings of the selected site and thus it could not be affected by the station construction and operation.

7. In the vicinity o f the selected site no bird-nesting areas or areas of large concentrations of pinnipeds exist, thus they could no be affected by the station construction and operation.

8. Occurrence of flora and fauna in the station environs would regularly monitored pursuant to Madrid Protocol requirements. Results of the monitoring would be processed, interpreted and if necessary, measures for the station operation would be adopted.

5
2. The CEE process

2.1 Aim of a CEE

This draft CCE follows the requirements in Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Annex I provides for different impact categories (less than, equal to and more than minor or transitory) and establishes a basic principle to carry out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for planned activities. The proposed activity needs to be preceded by a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE), if the predicted impacts are to be more than minor or transitory. This will include specific measures, monitoring and auditing to minimize the environmental impacts of the project within the limits predicted in the CEE.

2.2 Process for preparing the Draft CEE

Information about the project of Czech scientific Antarctic station was submitted at ATCM XXV in Warsaw (September 2002) on the meeting CEP V and is published as Information Paper No. IP 93 on the website: http://www.npolar.no/cep/Content/cep archive/CEP V Documents.htm. As the Annex No. 10 is the IP 93 attached to this CEE

Draft CEE for the project of the Czech Antarctic station was compiled for the occasion of ATCM XXVI (CEP VI), which was held in Madrid in June 2003; the draft was transmitted to CEP in November 2002. Second, revised version of the draft was submitted to CEP in April 2003.

It was stated in the Final Report of the CEP VI (see the website http://www.aeci.es/26atcmadrid/documentos/VIcpa.htm) that the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) appointed by the reviewing of the document, assessed the first version of the Czech CEE as not entirely in compliance with the demands of the Annex I of the Protocol in its report presented in the Information Paper ATCM XXVI/IP 106. In the case of the second, revised version, some members of CEP stated that it was submitted with a delay.

It was also noted that the Czech Republic is a non-Consultative Party and has not yet ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the AntarcticTreaty (see Chapter No. 3.1), and is therefore not bound by it or by the agreed processes of the CEP. However the Committee commented the Czech Republic on its clear commitment to act "as if" it had ratified and suggested that the draft CEE be revised and resubmitted for consideration by CEP VII.

The Czech Republic respected this view and included all comments, which were obtained in spring from ICG and the United Kingdom and in autumn from the German Federal Environmental Agency, into the recent version of CEE which is to be submitted in January 2004.

6
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

3. Basic data on the project

Applicant:
Masaryk University in Brno, Faculty of Science, Žerotínovo náměstí, Brno, authorized by the 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic.
Contact person: Prof. Pavel Prosek, PhD., prosek@sci.muni.cz, Tel. +420 541 220 421, Fax. +420 542 123 301

Project designer:
Investprojekt spol. s r.o. Zlín, bř. Jaroňků 4079 , CZ - 760 01 Zlín
Contact person: Ing. Alois Suchánek, E-mail: suchanek@psg.cz, Te. +420 577 436 324

CEE Editor:
Vlastimil Kostkan, Werichova 14, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic, Kost@prfnw.upol.cz
CEE co-authors: Alois Suchánek, Pavel Prošek, Zdeněk Venera, Libor Ládiš, Kateřina Karlová,
Marek Vach, Pavlína Samsonová

Starting period of construction:
End of 2004

Finishing period of construction:
End of austral summer 2004/05. Full operation should start in austral summer 2005/06 2005.
Suggested lifetime of the station is 20 - 30 years.

Comments to Draft CEE should be addressed to:
Vladimír Dadák, Ministry of the Environment of the Czech Republic, Vršovická 65, Prague 
10010, Czech Republic, dadak@env.cz, tel. 267122751 (776-600335), fax 272743767

Zdenek Venera, Czech Geological Survey, Klárov 3, Prague 110 00, Czech Republic 
venera@cgu.cz, tel.+420 257 089 500

copy to:
Vlastimil Kostkan Werichova 14, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic, Kost@prfnw.upol.cz
Translation: Cynthia Rieben (USA), Kateřina Čechová (Czech Republik)

3.1 Context and reasons for the station’s construction

The Czech Republic has become an active participant in the scientific research of the Antarctica 
and in the protection of its environment.
 
• The Czech Republic intends to participate in international organizations which co-ordinate 
the scientific research and the environmental protection of the Antarctica.

• The Czech Republic intends to achieve a consultative status in the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

• The Czech Republic is going to prepare and sing agreements concerning the co-operation in 
scientific research in the Antarctic with other countries in case of joint interest.

7
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

- The systematic activities of the Czech scientists in the Antarctic would open possibilities to establish the Czech National Institute for Antarctic Research.

- The financial budget given by the Czech government is not high enough to provide an systematic research under conditions offered by countries which possess stations in the Antarctica.

- Together with the research, which is in the present time linked with the Ukrainian station Vernadski and the Peruvian station Machu Picchu, and in compliance with the designing of new station, given below institutions in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment of the Czech Republic exerted themselves at solving the legalization of the relationship of Czech Republic to the environmental protection of Antarctica, particularly consistent with The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Czech delegation notified the session of CEP IV, V and VI on the occasion of ATCM XXIV, V and VI about these steps. The Czech Parliament passed in all readings the governmental proposal of the Czech Antartic Law in 2003, which was subsequently signed by the president of the Czech Republic.

A plan for the construction of an original Czech scientific station was set up following many years' activities of Czech scientists in the Antarctic area, in particular during the last seven years, and also following the recommendation of leading international scientific institutions, notably Scott Institute of Polar Research, Cambridge University. The station should be located in such a place that would enable by its accessibility a seasonal function, i.e. providing conditions for several-months' systematic work. At the same time, the location must be easily accessible during summer for transport of persons and material as well as for emergency cases, e.g. acute diseases, etc.

Due to the above-mentioned facts and the tradition of Czech research activities in Antarctica during the fifties and sixties (astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology, geology), and also following the experience of research programmes in the nineties, a group of Czech scientists from several institutions decided to formulate a plan for the construction of the first official Czech Antarctic station, which is a necessary condition for future successful development of research activities.

Among the leading institutions that have participated in research programmes in the polar areas, we can mention especially the Institute of geography, departments of plant physiology and anatomy, department of zoology and ecology and also the department of analytic chemistry by the Faculty of Science of Masaryk University in Brno, where continuous and consistent research of polar areas has been carried out. Botanical Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, the Department of the Environment of the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering of Czech Technical University in Prague and other scientific institutions permanently cooperate on the projects. The operation of the station should also extend international collaboration. All aforesaid institutions have systematically supplied technical means, i.e. monitoring stations for various geographic measurements and researches, devices for the measurements of the properties of the environment of flora and the parameters defining the living conditions of flora and fauna as well as for the research of the most universal conditions of global climate and the problems of common aspects of the environment.

Besides the above described professional readiness of the Czech scientists acquired mainly during several expeditions to Spitsbergen, to the Canadian Arctic and to the Antarctic, the construction of the official Czech station is also supported by the knowledge of the function of several polar stations, their technology and logistics.

Based on our own knowledge of and experience with terrain research, the site of Turret Point on King George Island in the South Shetlands was assessed as the first alternative. An advance team visited this locality in austral summer 2000. For this locality, a detailed construction plan of the
8
station was drawn. Terrain research aimed at the station's location and the accessibility of the subjects of research program interest was carried out, as well as a model dispersion study on the influence of the station on air quality, and a noise study. The locality was investigated with respect to the occurrence of organisms and the site's importance as a potential bird nesting area, or as a locality for resting and breeding of pinnipeds.

Trying to locate the station with respect to its minimum environmental impact, we also considered the use of old and currently not-operating stations of other countries that could be reconstructed or replaced by a new station at a previously used site. Consequently, we also considered the possibility of carrying out research projects at new localities, as well as near the former stations Danco and Rothera. This possibility was rejected, and our attention shifted to the area of relatively little-researched islands to the east of Antarctic Peninsula. Based on consultation with and recommendation of BAS specialists in Cambridge, we assessed Brandy Bay on James Ross Island as another potentially suitable site. Then, after specific terrain reconnaissance and the recommendation of (IAA) in Buenos Aires, seven further sites on this island were assessed.

This documentation on environmental impact evaluation of the proposed structures is, therefore, a summary of theoretical and terrain survey of the Turret Point location on King George Island. It also comprises a brief analysis of the possible utilization of old and currently not-operating stations within the interest area.

3.2     History of the project and alternatives of construction

In the late eighties, when the eastern political block started to collapse, Czech scientists started to work in polar research. Masaryk University Brno and former Czechoslovak Academy of Science organized several research expeditions to the Spitsbergen area. Later opportunities to participate in international research projects quickly increased. Czech researchers took part, for example, in research projects on Elesmere Island in the Canadian Arctic, in the South Shetlands, and elsewhere. Currently, several projects have been conducted in the Arctic and Antarctic. Our activities cover a wide spectrum of scientific disciplines focused mainly on terrestrial and freshwater ecology and biology, meteorology, climatology, geology and physical geography.

In this time started also the discussions about possibility to construct a Czech national research station in Antarctica.

There were successively considered several places for the location of the station: Turret Point at the King George Island, some of the British stations on the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula (Danco Island, Livingston Island, Signy Island) and on the northern coast of James Ross Island.

Since their stay at the Polish H. Arctowski base in Admiralty Bay on King George Island the Czech scientists were familiar with the environment of the South Shetlands. This fact and experience with terrain research sway the idea to built the Czech station at Turret Point in the north-eastern part of King George Island. An advance team visited this locality in austral summer 2000/01. The locality was investigated with respect to the occurrence of organisms and the site's importance as a potential bird nesting areas, or as a locality for resting and breeding of pinnipeds. Terrain research aimed as well at the station's location and the accessibility of the subjects of research program interest was carried out. For this locality, a detailed construction plan of the station was drawn (see 10No. 9).

The Czech government via the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports started to finance the station's design and construction in 2001. Professor Pavel Prosek of Masaryk University in Brno became the head of the project. The project was introduced at the ATCM XXIV held in St. Petersburg, Russia in 2001. A discussion concerning the project arose because some Antarctic
9
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Treaty Parties did not recommend the construction at Turret point. The main reason for their 
concern was the current existence of a number of stations on King George Island. British and 
Ukraine delegations kindly offered their help with the survey of further localities around the 
Antarctic Peninsula that could be suitable for the station's location.

In October 2001 were a group of Czech scientists invited by British Antarctic Survey (BAS) to 
Cambridge to discuss the problematics, and they were offered several sites where BAS had carried 
out research. Danco station (Danco Island in the Anvers Islands Area) appeared the most suitable 
due to the possibility of logistic co-operation. Prof. Prosek and Ing. Suchanek (chief engineer) 
visited the island with a Ukraine vessel at the beginning of 2002. They concluded that the proposed 
island area is not suitable because the deglaciated area, which would be available for research 
activities, is highly limited.

Dr. Z.Venera and Dr. J.Elster were invited by BAS to participate in the R.R.S. Ernest Shackleton 
research cruise from the Falkland Islands to Rothera Station and back. During the trip, they 
discussed the construction of a Czech scientific station with Captain Stuart Lawrence, other 
members of the vessel's crew, and Rothera Station workers. They also studied various maps and 
literature at Rothera Station and in the ship's library. Finally, James Ross Island near the north-
eastern edge of the Antarctic Peninsula was proposed as a locality suitable for the station's location. 
Large area of the island is deglaciated and comprise a wide spectrum of various freshwater and 
terrestrial habitats. BAS and Instituto Antártico Arentino (IAA) organized and organize several 
geological research programmes on James Ross Island but no research station has been constructed 
there. The only structure in this area is the Argentinian refugio near Brandy Bay. Because the 
Ernest Shackleton vessel hat to return quickly to the Falkland Islands to meet the time schedule, the 
group did not manage to visit James Ross Island.

Because of the need to have another (reserve) site for the station's location, we asked BAS 
representatives to extend Dr. Elster's stay on board the Ernest Shackleton for the journey to the 
South Orkney (Signy Island) and South Georgia. The geographical and natural conditions of the 
South Orkney, especially Signy Island, were discussed again with Captain Lawrence, and written 
sources were studied again.

Information about the intent to build the Czech scientific station on the northern coast of James 
Ross Island, inclusive of the constructional and energetic design of the station's buildings, was 
presented at XXV ATCM (CEP V) in Warsaw in 2002 and was accepted without any comments or 
suggestions (IP 93 - see Annex No. 10).

Based on the gathered data, another expedition to the area was organized for March 2003 to 
survey the proposed part of Brandy Bay on James Ross Island. It was led by Prof. Prosek - 
climatologist; other members included Ing. Suchanek - construction engineer, Dr. Kostkan - 
biologist and chief editor of CEE and Dr. Vashenko - geophysicist and the deputy head for logistic 
operation of the Ukraine Antarctic Centre (UAC) This expedition was organized with the kind help 
of Prof. Marschoff - the head of IAA, in close collaboration with specialists from this institute, 
namely Dr. Strelin - geomorphologists and the employee of IAA and Centro Austral de 
Investigaciones Cientificas (CADIC), and Dr. Torielli - geologist and geomorphologist, the 
employee of Universidad Cordoba, who have been working on James Ross Island for many years 
and have sound knowledge of the area. The team of geologists and geomorphologists, who are 
specialized in the field of permafrost and which consists of researchers from IAA and HU, operates 
at James Ross Island (especially at the territory of Ulu Peninsula) already from 1998 and spends 
regularly summer seasons there. Their knowledge of the landscape and the environment is extensive 
and detailed and may be considered as very reliable.

                                  10
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

After the air transport to an Argentinean base Marambio, deplaning on the site should have taken 
place. However, the plan had to be changed due to limited chances of helicopter utilization during 
the supplying operations at Marambio and Esperanza stations as well as poor accessibility of the 
locations at the end of austral summer by Twin Otter, which van land on glaciers. Therefore, upon 
their return to Buenos Aires, the expedition members carried out a week’s theoretical analysis of 
James Ross Island together with IAA experts. The source materials were supplied mainly by the 
above mentioned Argentinean colleagues, and by Dr. Juan Manuel Lirio - geologist and IAA 
employee who has been working in the area as well.

There were analyzed satellite and detailed aerial photographs of James Ross’ northern coast, 
geological and geomorphological maps and photo-documentation of the terrain of the island’s north 
coast. Besides the aforesaid data, the terrain experience of IAA experts proved valuable, especially 
their knowledge of climatic conditions of individual parts of the island, geological conditions, 
accessibility for disembarkation, construction and provision, of location, yield and quality of water 
sources, orientation of locations with respect to solar and wind sources of energy etc. After a 
week’s workshop, altogether eight locations on the coast of the northern part of the island were 
selected.

The general selection of considered localities (Turret point, Danco Island and James Ross Island) 
was conducted on the basis of the convenience for the construction and function of the station and 
from the point of view of impacts on the environment. Altogether 5 positive and 7 negative factors 
for assessment were defined and arranged into the matrix. These factors are listed in the following 
outline and their application is presented in the Annex No. 7.

Positive factors:
· Suitability for the scientific programme
· Seasonal accessibility from the sea (sea ice)
· Suitability of the site for construction
· Exposure to wind and solar radiation (using of both as renewable energy source)
· Proximity of water sources and water quality

Negative factors:
· Risk of snowdrift and snow accumulation
· Risk of soilflow
· Loading capacity of the assumed footing bottom
· Bank character with respect to disembarkation needs
· Potential negative impact on fauna
· Cumulation of stations in the area

The result of the solution of the matrix is the enunciation of the maximum convenience of the 
point No. 4.
                                                                                                          11
3.2.1 Alternatives of solution - description

Alternative "0"

The alternative without a station's construction will neither support the full extent of activities of Czech scientists nor utilize the experience of Czech science because of the relatively high costs of possible renting a capacity at other countries' stations. The scientific programme proposed for the first Czech research station is strictly oriented at obtaining data on the changes in the sensitive Antarctic environment caused by current alterations of the Earth's climate that may be caused by or in connection with human activities. The assumed "benefits", i.e. knowledge of processes caused by such changes in the Antarctic environment, can contribute to efficient protection of this continent and the surrounding islands in the future.

The provision for a long-term, wide-spectrum research program concentrated on James Ross Island and directed at the study of the island's environment and the gradual changes following its partial deglaciation, cannot be achieved with a seasonal terrain camp supported from sea, but only with a stabile station, which would allow for undertaking the proposed research programs. To secure the research from other station is not possible either, because there is no such station in the immediate nearness of James Ross Island. The area is so far from any scientific bases that their use for an intense research on James Ross Island is not possible. Therefore, these alternatives were not mentioned in Draft CEE at all.

The next alternative would be to carry out research on the land via ambulatory disembarkations supported logistically from a permanently anchored ship of from Argentinian Marambio Station.. such an alternative is not feasible due to its demanding character, low effectiveness of the ship's utilization and considering loading of mentioned station.

The last alternative - so called "do nothing alternative" - is mentioned and consider as the current state of events. Such an alternative would, however, mean to forsake any intention of research activities on James Ross Island. This fact contradicts the interest of the Czech Republic to carry out a scientific research of the island. In the given alternative, to assess the development of the environment would be enormously complicated because the island has been deglaciated very shortly and very fast, gradual succession takes place there, and, under such conditions, further development in fact cannot be assumed. The locality has an exceptional value for such research.

The succession after gradual deglaciation and the influence of climate fluctuations will continue even without the station's construction. As these processes have not been sufficiently researched and described, we cannot satisfactorily predict how they will continue in the conditions of James Ross Island.

Zero alternative will not supply to the environment any benefits or improvements in the current state. It will prevent long-term changes in terrain and inanimate parts of nature on a local scale (hundreds of square meters of land). Because all non-zero alternatives locate the station outside vegetation oases or breeding grounds of birds and mammals, there will be no significant difference between the influence of any non-zero alternative compared to zero alternative.

Site Turret Point, King George Island

The first proposed alternative fulfilled all requirements with respect to scientific goals at the locality, construction, and logistic needs. From this point of view, it is a locality with high scientific potential, good accessibility from the sea, suitable subsoil and water sources. At the construction's location, there are no significant vegetation oases or breeding grounds of vertebrates. However, there is a small colony of Chinstrap Penguin in the distance approximately 450 m and a few nests of Southern Giant Petrel in the distance about 800 m. West part of Turret Point is a site of occurrence
of pinnipeds after breeding period. The disadvantage of this locality is a possible development of cumulative effect of the station’s influence on King George Island because another eight stations have been located there until present. Construction of the station at this site could case an increase in landings on Penguin Island and disturbing of big penguins rookery. Turret Point site played an important role during the project’s preparation because it served as a model situation for the spatial distribution of structures, their interconnection, safety and technical solution. Based on the knowledge of this locality, first models of some negative influences (noise, emissions and immissions) were prepared and later applied on further assessed localities on James Ross Island.

## Site Danco Island

The basic, but finally the only, advantage of this locality is the existence of an old, currently not-operating British station. The operation of the Czech station would only mean an extension of the former load (mainly the influence on landscape character). The limited non-glaciated area and size of the area have almost no importance for the assumed scientific activities. Therefore, the assessment of the station’s construction at this location was abandoned after a brief analysis.

## Site on James Ross Island

The scientific importance of this locality is in its novelty because of the non-existence of a permanent station on James Ross Island. So far, all research oriented toward geology, geomorphology and paleontology has been carried out during shot-term expeditions equipped with tents or utilizing the currently not-operating refuge at site San Carlos Point.

However, it is a highly precious area both from the point of view of climatological, geological and geographical sciences, and biological sciences. The relatively large deglaciated area in the northern part of the island is quite young and de-glaciating continues here. Therefore, we can study the processes following de-glaciating and subsequent (mainly peri-glacial) phenomena, which are connected with pedogenesis and later colonization by living organisms.

So far, there is no station on the island and, therefore, no risk of cumulative effects. Due to a present scarce biological colonization, there is little risk of substantial interventions to biological systems. The mutually compared localities differ mainly in their construction and transportation opportunities; some were not recommended for their extreme microclimatic conditions (wind exposure), or other later described negative phenomena.

Because the area has not been utilized yet, we were able to analyze tens of kilometers of ragged coast and consider the advantages and disadvantages of the station’s locations. Altogether eight localities were assessed this way (most have not had geographical names and were, therefore, marked as sites 1 − 8). A information about location of this sites is given in Annex No. 3.

1. The estuary of a nameless stream on the north-west coast below Lewis Hill. It is a locality without significant adverse phenomena for the construction and without significant adverse effects upon the environment. Its drawback is difficult accessibility (steep terrain and long distance) of deglaciated parts of the island which are essential for the research activities. The location’s orientation prevents the suggested distribution of structures in the east-west axis and, therefore, full utilization of solar energy collectors. The consumption of oil to run diesel-powered generators would probably increase.

2. South-west coast of Brandy Bay - estuary of a stream from a freshwater lake. This site was long considered the most suitable for the station’s location. Thanks to the knowledge of the site by Argentinean geologists, it was refused in the end, because most of Brandy Bay’s coast is covered all year round with high snowdrifts. The area above the only free access to the coast (stream’s estuary) is not quite solid  and threatens slope movements of sediments. Furthermore, 
13
the local climatic conditions are often very poor, and they would limit the construction and future operation. Brandy Bay itself is a relatively calm place used by research vessels as an emergency shelter against strong pounding of waves and floating ice in Prince Gustav's Strait during storms. On the contrary, little water motion in the bay could cause trouble with the dispersion of wastewater in the shallow littoral zone.

3. Inner Brandy Bay near Aberneth Flats. Almost all the coast is filled with small-grain fluvial sediments; it is unstable and flat, very low and often flooded from the land during rapid thawing. In the aerial photographs, it is evident that the flat coast is to a large extent flooded at high tide. Such a character of the beach eliminates disembarkation from the sea.

4. The estuary of a nameless stream on the north coast below elevation point 64. This site is well accessible from the sea with an opportunity for a ship's retreat from storms to nearby Brandy Bay. The sea does not freeze over here even in austral winter which allows early spring provision of the station. On site, there is a vast and geologically stable area for the station's foundation, with a source of water and the opportunity to orient the structures in east-west axis for the utilization of solar energy and also in the west-wind direction for wind generators' operation. Slowly upward-sloping terrain allows, across the saddle Crame Col (200 m a.s.l.), an easy access to the whole north promontory of James Ross Island. At this site, no environmental phenomena that would prevent the construction were detected. Because of its overall suitability, another dispersion study was carried out for this site, using the same emission features of the structures as in the case of Turret Point. A noise study was not compiled because the area's extent in relation to the noise-affected part is not significantly different from Turret Point site and the results can be duplicated.

5. The east coast below Bengtson Cliffs. It is a site with a small area for the location of structures and with an unsuitable orientation towards east (solar collectors). The location below cliffs would limit the prevailing west winds and reduce the effectiveness of wind generators.

6. A more south-ward located site, similarly to 3.5. on the east coast below Bengtson Cliffs. Its characteristics are similar to the above mentioned; the main adverse phenomenon is, however, the unstable material for the structure's foundation.

7. and 8. Two sites on the east coast, relatively deep in Croft Bay. Both alternatives were refused for the sea's freezing over which lasts until late spring (November to December) and is the key limiting factor for the station's construction and provision.

Based on the analysis of all localities with respect to the above mentioned implications, location "Site No. 4" on the north coast of James Ross Island was selected as a priority site for the assessment and construction of the station.

Besides above given alternatives, other localities have not been considered. In the region which is relevant for the construction of a new station (South Shetlands and northern sector of Antarctic Peninsula) are the positive location factors limited by the extraordinary high density of already existing stations, existing areas with various levels of protection (South Shetlands) or by natural conditions which limits the research programme (South Shetlands and north-western coast of Antarctic Peninsula). The northern part of James Ross Island seems to be the only area for the location of the station and the research with respect to these facts and to character of the environment

The direct field survey at the constructional site selected for the station will be performed owing to the support of Dirrección Nacional del Antártico and Instituo Antártico Peruano in February 2004, therefore after the deadline for the submitting of CEE at CEP. That is why the results of the
survey will be compiled in the form of detailed supplements and comments to the previously 
submitted CEE document.

3.3.  Description of the proposed activities

3.3.1 Location of the station

James Ross Island, "Site No. 4" - a coastal locality on the Ulu Peninsula to the NE of Brandy 
Bay near a mouth of two freshwater streams below spot height 64 m (see Annex 3 and 4).

Based on the technical concept of the station's construction, its proposed location and the 
assessment of its possible impact on the environment, we can assume that:

1. the station's construction (i.e. the proposed way of founding), would not significantly disturb 
neither the location's terrain, nor its substrate or vegetation cover

2. the production of electric energy and the effort of optimal utilization of renewable sources of 
energy (wind, Sun radiation) would minimize the emission of combustion gases into the 
atmosphere (operation of diesel-powered generators, incinerator unit and small portable 
gasoline-powered generators) to such a level that would affect neither the station's 
environment or its surroundings

3. harmless liquid wastes would be discharged into the sea at a place with sufficient exchange 
of water, and, therefore, their increased concentration by the coast should not be expected

4. toxic and non-combustible wastes would be transported, in accord with the Madrid Protocol, 
outside the AT area, and disposed of there

5. the sources of acoustic disturbance to the surroundings (power generators, incinerator, wind-
powered generators) would not be as significant as to disturb the occurrence of birds and 
other animals

6. there is no coherent vegetation cover in the station's vicinity, and, therefore cannot be 
affected by the station's construction or operation

7. in the station's vicinity, there are no significant nesting grounds of birds or places of 
increased concentration of sea mammals which might be significantly affected by the 
station's construction or operation,

8. following the provisions valid in the AT area, the occurrences of plants, birds and mammals 
would be monitored, their changes continuously assessed, and remedial measures taken if 
needed.

3.3.2 Scientific activities proposed for the Czech Antarctic station

Czech terrestrial research programme is proposed as an interdisciplinary long-term ecological 
project. The programme is established on previous research experience of Czech scientists in the 
Arctic and the Antarctic, and it covers the following scientific fields:

· PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY (geology and geomorphology, climatology, hydrology, glaciology and 
pedology)

· GEOLOGY (volcanology, sedimentology, structural geology, petrology, quarternary geology, 
paeontology)

· CHEMISTRY (analytical and physical chemistry, geochemistrybiochemistry of low 
temperatures)

· BIOLOGY (terrestrial ecology, wetland ecology, limnology, soil biology, microbiology, botany 
(algology, lichenology, bryology, stress physiology), zoology (vertebrate ecology, 
entomology), paleoecology and taxonomy
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

The mentioned interdisciplinary long-term ecological programme is motivated by the fact that until now there are not sufficiently recognized the internal bindings of the Antarctic subsystems (rocks, moraines, soils, water, ice, snow and the atmosphere on one side and biota on the other), mainly from these points:
- transport and transformation of substances and energy in system frame (regime of supply from outside, losses - outwards, transfer and conversion - inside of the system)
- effect of external factors upon the system
- responses of biota occurring in the system to the environmental conditions and dynamics of their changes

3.3.2.1    Research programme

The topics of proposed research programme are based on the present Czech scientific activities in Antarctica and will be focused on the dynamics of ecosystem processes in the ice-free coast of Antarctica. Terrestrial ecosystems in Antarctica offer unique possibilities for complex, multidisciplinary research on ecological processes taking place in the Earth's biosphere and its subsystems. The relative simple biotic structure of Antarctic ecosystems (population, communities and trophic interrelations), the abiotic setting (glacially and periglacially modified rocky ground surfaces, a moraine substrate and a relatively arid climate) and the relatively straightforward quantification of the main controlling factors (solar radiation and energy, air temperature, ground temperature, water and nutrient availability) combine to allow the recognition of the mechanisms of primary succession, diversification and organisms' adaptive processes more easily than in more complex systems. The structural and functional simplicity of Antarctic ecosystems, together with their totally undisturbed nature and strong defense mechanisms against invasive species and the exploitative activities of the mankind, make them ideal model regions for basic ecological research. Associated with this structural simplicity is the limited ability of the biotic elements to minimize the oscillation of abiotic factors. This means that these ecosystems may function as very sensitive indicators of changes in the environment, including the much discussed global changes in the climate.

Within the context of this concept, a connection between these themes and the subtopics of the Southern Ocean CIRCLE Initiative (Southern Ocean Climate Interactions Resources and Carbon Links to Europe) project is envisaged, specifically in the following areas of research: i) climate variability and ii) ecosystem dynamics and resources.

Czech scientific institutions that are oriented towards more permanent scientific activities in Antarctica (see below) have systematically prepared themselves for these activities. This includes experience gained during their work at the stations of other nations, especially that of Poland, Peru, Brazil and Ukraine but also by acquiring the technological necessary for such research. In addition the standard equipment, primarily meteorological measuring systems and devices for monitoring physical processes in soil and fresh water, this includes automatic monitoring systems measuring the physical and chemical properties of the environment of flora and fauna in the coastal oases (especially climate, microclimate, hydrology, hydrochemistry and pedology). Technology for monitoring the impacts of the simulated conditions on living organisms both in situ as well as under laboratory conditions has also been acquired.

Masaryk University in Brno, and in particular the Faculty of Science, has played and continues to play a leading role in research in the above mentioned areas. In a majority of cases, this research has been carried out with the support of grants or projects of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. At the Faculty of Science, research into physical geographical and                                                 16
botanical aspects of Polar Regions has been carried out in an integrated and multidisciplinary 
manner. Among the departments to have participated in this research are the departments of 
geography, plant physiology and plant anatomy, zoology and ecology and analytic chemistry. Since 
1999, these departments have been involved in a five-year research programme, funded by the 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic, entitled "The Ecology of an 
Antarctic Coastal Vegetation Oasis."

There are a number of other institutions that continue to cooperate with this research. These 
include the Botanical Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic in Průhonice 
(including its branch in Třeboň), the Faculty of Biological of the South Bohemian University in 
České Budějovice, the Czech Geological Survey, the Department of the Environment of the Faculty 
of Mechanical Engineering at the Czech Technical University in Prague and several other 
specialized institutions.

It should be emphasized that the Czech Republic will warmly welcome presence and scientific 
activities of researchers from other countries. The project of the station is conceived as a 
prerequisite for high level research which must be linked to current international scientific 
programmes carried out in Antarctica.

3.3.2.2 Aims of the research programme

The proposed programme follows on from the current research programme entitled "The Ecology 
of Antarctic Coastal Oasis" (1999-2003) carried out by the Faculty of Science of Masaryk 
University in Brno that will be completed in 2003. This new programme will expand the current 
programme with new approaches to issues of biodiversity and processes in Antarctic ecosystems. 
Thanks to interdisciplinary cooperation, new detailed information about the structure and function 
of biotic elements and, more importantly, geographic (climatic, geologic, geomorphologic and 
glacial) and edaphic factors in the environment will be acquired. This will allow the quantification 
of important ecosystem processes (especially the flows of energy, mineral element cycling and 
adaptive trends). Three working groups will be participating in this research: (1) physico-
geographic (climatologic, geomorphologic, hydrologic, glaciologic), (2) biological and (3) 
chemical.

The programme is conceived as multidisciplinary and is motivated by a desire to acquire the 
most comprehensive knowledge of the functions and development of coastal Antarctic ecosystems 
from the points of view of both the inorganic setting and biotic structures. Within this research, the 
following fields will play a crucial role:
- physical geography (the study of physical factors in the environment)
- biology (the study of the structure and function of autotrophic elements in the ecosystem)
- analytic chemistry and geochemistry (the study of environmental chemical factors in Antarctic 
ecosystems).

The overall suitability of James Ross Island for the research program of the Czech scientific 
station is much better that of King George Island, even though there are minimum opportunities to 
study vertebrates (the assumed research program does not propose such a survey anyway - see Part 
Biology in this chapter). In particular, it is due to the extent of the deglaciated area, which allows 
for more intense geological, geomorphological, geochemical and physical geographical research as 
well as for the observation of the gradual colonization of deglaciated areas by living organisms.

The research areas are briefly characterized in the following sections:
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Geography

Climatology

In keeping with what has been presented above, research will, in addition to the standard research programme of the meteorological station, focus on a comprehensively conceived study of the microclimate and topoclimate of ice-free and glaciated areas. This will include (1) monitoring the quantity of energy present and the energy exchange regime (radiation and heat) between various types of ground surface, the subsoil and atmosphere with the following aim: recognizing the energy potential of the environment of soil microorganisms (soil climate) and plants (microclimate); (2) studying the intensity of infrared and ultraviolet radiation; and (3) monitoring and analyzing the influence of the physical relief on the local climate, which may help explain the causes of the spatial distribution of various biotopes and specify the concept of meso-scale air stream modification.

Standard climatic data (both our own and from other sources) will be analyzed from the perspective of dynamic (circulation) causes. The aim is to follow climate change and oscillations in the climate in the region in question and its further impacts (the extent and dynamic development of sea ice, oscillations on the margins of continental ice shield), including changes in environmental conditions for ecosystems in ice-free areas.

This analysis supplemented by limnological research (the analysis of lake sediments) and the results of proposed drilling into glaciers on James Ross Island, may also contribute the resolution of questions related to the specific variability of climate and its geomorphological, oceanographic and biological impacts in the northern part of the Antarctic Peninsula.

Both the specific location of James Ross Island on the edge of continental and maritime influences, and the distinctive relief of the island, result in the need to observe the transformation of air mass overflowing the island under the influence of these factors. In connection with the climatic change, our attention would be paid to the analysis of climatic time series of the wider area of the island in confrontation with the regime of atmospheric circulation and the extent of sea ice surface. In connection with the geomorphologic and biologic program, attention would be paid to the study of microclimate and soil climate, and their energy factors. As a part of these activities, the regime of all radiation flows would be monitored, including FAR and UV.

Geomorphology

The great speed of glacial and periglacial glacial geomorphological processes significantly limits conditions for the survival of polar ecosystems that exist as a "thin layer of life" between an atmosphere with a "refrigerated" climate and the permafrost with its 'freezer" soil climate. Activities in this area will therefore focus on recognizing the processes of parent rock weathering, the transportation of weathering products and their subsequent sedimentation with a special emphasis on periglacial processes in the substrate (the influence of flowing water, the results of changes in its state and aeolian influences). These are not only sources of information for recognition the dynamics of different types and intensities of periglacial processes on deglaciated and glacial processes on ice-covered surfaces but also on the potential spread of vegetation communities but also and on primary sources of nutrients for the biota.

The basis for much of the field research activities in the areas around the station will be mapping carried out with the assistance of modern geodetic and topographic technology. The output will be high-definition maps presented in both analogue and digital forms.

In relation to the Quaternary geologic research, the geomorphologic research would concentrate on the study of recent geomorphological processes in the active layer of permafrost, both in rocks
18
and regolith, and the confrontation of the regime of energy fluxes among the subsystems of the ground layer of atmosphere, ground surface, its bedrock and microclimate, or local climate.

Geology

The geological setting of James Ross Island and the surroundings provides a large potential for further research which is based especially on current results of British, Argentine and US geologists. The main proposed topics are as follows:
· volcanology, geochemistry and tectonic setting of extension-related alkali basalts in a position of back-arc basin,
· sedimentology and palaeontology of Cretaceous sediments of the Gustav Group,
· quaternary geology focused on recently exposed glacial sediments, evolution and extent of glaciation in the Cenozoic with implications for palaeoclimate,
· dynamics of soil formation under extreme climatic conditions and chemistry of water-rock interactions in weathering,
· structural geology, petrology, and isotope geochemistry of the Peninsula batholith in the area of Trinity Peninsula, including low-grade Triassic metasedimentary country rocks.

From geologic point of view, the research would cover mainly the Quaternary geologic and geomorphologic survey of the western coast of James Ross Island and the opposite eastern coast of the Trinity Peninsula in relation to the discovery of the glacial striation and lodgment tills on the floor of the Prince Gustav Channel, the study of the emplacement of the Antarctic Peninsula batholith in the area of the Trinity Peninsula using structural geology and magnetic anisotropy, and the survey of metamorphic and deformation history of the accretion by structural methods including the electron back-scattered difractography and fission track studies in the area of Graham Land and, in particular, the Trinity Peninsula.

The research will be carried out by the Czech Geological Survey and Charles University Prague in collaboratorion with foreign scientific institutions.

Biology

The biological group will focus on questions of population structure and the basic eco-physiological functions of terrestrial vegetation in coastal Antarctic ecosystems. Biometric, gasometric, fluorometric and spectral methods of observing the physiological activities of autotrophic organisms will be applied in the field. Measurements will be carried out in permanent monitoring plots where mosses, lichens and algaes occur. In contrast with the earlier research programme oriented primarily on Antarctic lichens, greater emphasis will be placed on the study of the functions of specific Antarctic mosses and seaweeds. Field measurement of eco-physiological characteristics will carried out in combination with experiments in controlled laboratory conditions simulating the climate of Antarctic coastal oases. This will enable the analysis of the productive potential of the vegetation cover and the adaptation of individual elements to stress factors (ultraviolet radiation, low temperature, high wind speed and dehydration). This information, together with microclimate data, information on the soil climate and the characterization of the seasonal variation of the environment's physical parameters, will be further used for the creation of a mathematical model of primary production and decomposition of organic materials. An important aspect of this research programme will also be the monitoring of the cycling of mineral elements in the terrestrial Antarctic ecosystem, especially nitrogen and phosphorus. An analysis of the proportion of stable isotopes in individual sections of the ecosystem will be carried out in order to better understand the sources, transportation and usage of nutrients.

19
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Surveys of the flora and fauna of selected areas of the Scotia Arc have shown that some species 
are separated according to an East (BAS). It will be important to survey of new sites t distinguish 
these divides and determine the importance of different factors (food availability, climate and 
geographical isolation) to the colonisation of recently de-glaciated terrestrial habitats also on James 
Ross Island. This study will also provide evidence as to whether or not continental and maritime 
species have a common ancestry and provide information on plate movement since the break-up of 
Gondwanaland. Biogeographical surveys of this type will consequently help to determine the origin 
of Antarctic species.

Deglaciated area of Ulu Peninsula offer very good possibilities to study the time dynamics of 
successive process of colonisation on mentioned area by plants, especially in soil substrata an on 
the ground surface. Monitoring of this processes and ins quantitative analysis will be next topic of 
biological part of investigations.

An integral part of the spectrum of biological research will be monitoring the presence and 
abundance of flora and fauna and limnological research focused on the analysis of lake sediments. 
Booth will be focused on obtaining information on the dynamics of development in terrestrial and 
lake ecosystems as influenced by external environmental conditions.

Biological investigations will be then focused on four basic spheres. The first would deal with 
trophic relationships (grazing pressure) between zooedaphon and phytoedaphon on the land and in 
wetlands, the second with stress-physiology of cyanobacterial, algal, lichen, and moss communities. 
The third would deal with the changes in communities in relation to the climatic change, and the 
fourth with the process of the colonization of deglaciated areas of various age by living organisms.

Chemistry

The chemical group will focus on processes connected with the release and transportation of 
biologically significant chemical elements and the transformation of organic substances in the 
Antarctic coastal oasis ecosystem. Attention will also be placed on the dynamics of the element 
cycle within the ecosystem with the use of the chemical analysis of humus samples, the soil 
organomineral layer, mosses and lichens. Samples will be taken from plots located in polar oases 
with different levels of development in order to allow a description of the significance of the 
availability of these elements and the dynamics of their metamorphoses in polar oases with various 
topoclimates and developmental histories. Capillary zone electrophoresis and Maldi TOF MS mass 
spectrophotometry will be used for the separation and analysis of the components of the humus. 
The main emphasis will be placed on the determination of humid acids and oxyhumolites, their 
chemical structures and distribution in a vertical substrate profile. In order to ascertain the degree of 
similarity and dissimilarity of these elements in the Antarctic oases with those in other ecosystems, 
a comparative analysis of samples from other continents will be carried out. The results thus gained 
will be used to explain the soil formation processes in Antarctic coastal oases on the ice-free coast 
of Antarctica.

The significance of the station for scientific research is primarily in the fact that there is no 
research base on James Ross Island even though this part of Antarctica is, from the scientific point 
of view, extremely attractive. It is due to its geological structure and corresponding paleontological 
localities (highly significant on global scale as well). Concerning climate, it is an area where 
oceanic and continental influences meets. The interaction or prevalence of one or the other manifest 
in significant fluctuations of climate with quite a high frequency within years. We can assume that 
such climate changes reflect also in the living nature.

Spatially significant vegetation oases in Brandy Bay area and surrounding elevations offer very 
good opportunities for the study of the dynamics of ecosystem development in relation to the 
20
changes in external conditions (energy and matter balance, water sources, relief, microclimate or 
local climate, etc.), and for ecophysiological studies and detailed analyses of the functions of stress 
physiological responses or genome alterations caused by the environment not only with respect to 
Antarctica but also to other continents.

From the logistic point of view, the station can represent a strategic point, or starting point for 
seasonal terrain activities of other scientists. In an extreme situation, it can serve for an emergency 
accommodation or as a starting point for potential rescue operations.

When designing the station's research program during the years 2002 and 2003, the possibilities 
of a scientific cooperation on James Ross Island were discussed with some international Antarctic 
institutions. In August 2002, the BAS represented by their chief experts was consulted concerning 
the possible cooperation in the fields of geology (Dr. Carol Pudsey, Phil Leat), biology (Dr. W. 
Block, Dr. C Ellis-Evans, Dr. R. Worland), and meteorology (Dr. Phil Andersson, Dr. J. Turner). 
The IAA was consulted concerning the cooperation in geology, geomorphology, and pedology (Dr. 
E. Marschoff, Dr. J. Strelin, Dr. C. A. Toriclli), and UAC concerning meteorology (Dr. G. 
Milinovsky, Dr. V. Vashenko). At the same time, the presented spectrum of topics and institutions 
cannot be considered as closed. The studies of the island's environment represent a system, which 
develops dynamically in accordance with both the progress of the above-mentioned disciplines and 
the level of the knowledge of individual components of the island.

4. Brief description of the station design (see also Annex No. 
10)

The Czech Scientific Station is proposed as a small seasonal (summer) base for 15 people 
including the technical personnel. The station would be used for about 5 months (November – 
April) each year.

Based on the presumption of a seasonal operation of the station, it was not necessary to fit all 
systems into one structure. This basic presumption was then reflected in the station's conception as 
a complex of several smaller single-story structures, which are less prominent and aesthetically less 
obtrusive. Division of the station into several smaller structures simplified the design from the 
technical point of view, and at the same time minimized the interventions to the substrate and its 
disturbance. The founding of the structures is area, and excludes massive transport of material and 
concreting (wooden grates are used, and in the case of the main structure they are secured by freely 
laid stone). At the same time, this solution allows for rapid return to the original surface character in 
case of the station's dismantling. Therefore, the use of station for personnel and professional 
activities were separated from the technical and provisioning activities. This solution also 
significantly decreased the risk of fire and solved the problem of emergency accommodation in 
such an event.

The foundations of all structures must be laid on relatively solid subsoil. The building site of the main structure, sized app. 11 x 26 m, will be located in an 
area with a flat and slightly lengthwise sloping profile, east-west (E-W) longitudinal axis 
orientation, and with a minimal need for landscaping. A site at risk to flooding must be avoided in 
order to prevent damage to the station but also to avoid the risk of washing out of harmful 
substances, in particular from flooded generators and fuel storage.

The longitudinal E-W axis of the main structure reflects the need for a direct orientation of the 
front towards the sun for maximum accumulation of solar energy. The placing of other structures 
follows the requirements and functions of the main structure. We assume that the conditions for 
21
placing the container design structures will be favorable, and the existing subsoil will be, after slight adjustments, acceptable.

When designing the technical concept of the station and Draft EE, we strictly followed Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol and its other parts, in particular Appendixes I, II, III and IV. We refer to these parts of the Madrid Protocol in various parts of the presented document.

4.1 Accessibility of the construction site

All the alternative construction sites, mainly at Turret Point - King George Island and locations on James Ross Island, are accessible only from the sea. The particular building site, and the system of constructions and individual components of the structure, must be chosen with respect to this fact. Such a prerequisite corresponds to logistic requirements for the landing, transport and basic assembly on site, and the station's provision during its operation.

The construction site must be situated with respect to landing needs, such as anchoring the transport ship as close to the coast as possible, finding a suitable place on the beach where disembarkation could be directed and from which the material could be easily transported to the construction site. Based on the gathered data, the north coast and Brandy Bay of James Ross Island as well as Turret Point on King George Island appear suitable. At other localities, the major obstacles were, for example, steep or unstable terrain, sea level frozen till late spring, and so on.

Experts, especially from Polish, Ukraine, Argentinean and Chilean institutions, were consulted on the specific conditions of landing operations and subsequent transport of the material to the construction site.

The surface layers of the substrate within the area of the proposed construction are formed mainly by regolith (Tertiary sediments). These are partially transported from the slopes by solifluction. Recent fluvial sediments occur in the valley bottoms of both streams. The ground of construction site is a remnant of a low abrasion terrace formed by beach boulders with a filling of fine sand. Thin subsurface layers of raw humus up to 2 cm thick can occur only in sporadic and incoherent places of vegetation (mainly moss, or eventually lichen). There is no moss vegetation at the proposed construction site, and, therefore, we cannot talk about an impact on soils.

According to verbal evidence (Jiří Komárek), attached blue-green algae of genera Leptolyngbya sp., and Phormidium sp., and phyllamentous green algae (diatoms) of genus Hydrurus sp. were found in streams of a similar character on King George Island and Galindez Island (Argentinean Archipelago).

4.2 Assumed extent of the construction site, build-up concept, and structure of buildings

The proposed construction site will cover an area of approximately 78 x 30 m. There is a need to reduce the concentration of structures with respect both to their location in the terrain and operation safety. The aim is to separate the structures with a potential mutual hazard, such as fire and safety risks, and also to separate the structures whose operations are not mutually related. The conception of the arrangement of buildings respects these requirements.

The main operation and accommodation building is proposed as a solid structure with three basic functions:
- provide for scientific and other sorts of work
- provide for accommodation, essential human and social needs
22
- serve as the center of a technical complex that will provide thermo-technical and hygienic conditions

Due to the transport and function conditions, other structures are proposed as conventional cargo containers. However, these containers will have a more durable surface finish than usual, with pre-assembled technology and equipment for special functions. The structures will be interconnected only by cable lines where it is purposeful. Marked unpaved paths will connect the structures.

### 4.3 Technical structure of the station

The basic conditions for the preparation of the project, production, transport, and construction on site must be adjusted with respect to the assumed possibilities of the station's construction and its seasonal character. The structure itself is divided into construction buildings and operational sets due to methodical and concept complexity reasons. Modification is possible if needed. Other information concerning similar objects and built-up plan of the station are presented in Annex No. 5 and No. 10.

### 4.4 Buildings of the station

SO 01 Operation and accommodation building
SO 02 Waste treatment
SO 03 Generators storage
SO 04 Engine room of power supply equipment
SO 05 Diesel generator
SO 06 Cold stores
    06/1 Intermediate storage
    06/2 Fuel storage
    06/3 Spare parts storage
SO 07 Water intake and distribution
SO 08 Waste water treatment
SO 09 Watercraft storage
SO 10 Launching ramp
SO 11 External cable distribution system
SO 12 Parking garage for wheeled/crawler vehicle

### 4.4.1 Brief description of the buildings

### SO 01 Operation and accommodation building.

The building is intended as a main building of the station and is designed as a one-story structure, fully erected from the K-Kontrol construction system. The system comprises sandwich panels consisting of two OSB chipboards with an inner insulation layer of self-extinguishing polystyrene. Due to climatic conditions, the building is designed as a simple structure of minimal height above the ground. The thermo-technical properties, transport and erection aspects, and the need for minimized heat losses influenced the choice of the construction type. Floor and roof panels are 320 mm, external walls 265 mm thick. The panel will be 170 mm thick where a solar collector wall will be installed. Statically, the building will be a quasi-three-wing structure with two inner longitudinal supporting walls. The structure will be compact because of its box arrangement of horizontal and vertical elements that are firmly interconnected. The building has a rectangular ground plan 10 530 x 26 530 mm. It is covered with a pent roof of an approximate 5% slope.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

With respect to the prevailing wind direction, the proposed location in the terrain maximizes the catchment area of solar energy by orienting the longitudinal axis E-W with the higher frontage facing north. Typologically, the layout follows requirements of the proposed operation rather than cardinal points. The E-W orientation maximizes the catchment area of solar collectors. With respect to the station's location in the coastal wind exposed area, the foundation of the building is proposed adjacent to the terrain to minimize drought under the floor. Foreign experts recommend the use of wooden pier grillage.

The building will be assembled of pre-fabricated elements slightly adjusted on site. It will be erected on a conditioned floor area. In the panels, the fillings of the openings – windows and doors – will be prepared and pre-tested for assembly. The roof of 320 mm thick sandwich panels will be covered with rubber foil, mechanically anchored, and glued to the base. Strips of roof covering will be approximately 5700 mm long. The roof will drain to the ground without gutters.

Surface finish of the outer walls is proposed in alternatives. Coating the outer walls with waterproof plywood 6 mm thick on lath grill is preferred. It would only protect the building against corrosion by saltwater spray during wind exposures, and mechanical abrasion by over-frozen snow and wind during the winter. Its expected lifetime is approximately 10 – 15 years. Then, it would be renewed. The surface would be painted with a basic color acrylate paint of a glazing type. When the outer treatment gradually wears off, such a solution enables an easy repair. All proposed painting systems are based on water diluted materials, and carbohydrate-diluters-free materials.

The heating system would use hot air. A system of air conditioning equipment provides the heating of air by heat recovery from hot air collectors, heat pump, and by recuperation of heated air from the interior around the exhaust of the ventilation system.

Sanitary installations of a standard kind of predominantly plastic fixtures will be used. Plastic pipelines will be insulated with cavity blocks. The interior sewerage will be also made of plastic. All piping will run on the surface for easy inspection. The sewerage outlet from the building will contain control shafts with covers.

Electrical installations – lighting and distribution systems for appliances. In the building, the internal power supply system will include a distribution net for lighting, sockets, and the main switchboard. The station will be supplied with electric energy in combined ways.

The laboratory equipment will contain, besides typical workbenches, a bench with a stainless-steel worktop, a fume chamber, a desk for scales, and supplementary furniture. The instrumentation will vary according to the needs and character of scientific work.

Other furniture will be standard. To specify complete furnishings, interior documentation is prepared as a separate part of the project.

Built-up area       280 m^(2)
Built-in volume     1 033 m^(3)

SO 02  Waste treatment

The structure is located with a direct relationship to the main building of the station. It is accessible through a technical entrance from the eastern front, directly from an entrance ramp. The structure comprises a modified cargo container 20 feet long (6055 x 2438 x 2591 mm). It will contain waste management facilities following the requirements of waste treatment, disposal or modification prior to the transport of waste from the area in accordance with the Madrid Protocol of AT. Due to its location, the structure will be consequently used to produce hot service water. The system of hot waste processing is based on the solar warm-water collectors with the primary circuit filled with antifreeze. The container will contain equipment for solid waste disposal – incinerator 
24
OG 120 SW, a product of TEAMTEC Norway. Such incinerators are currently in use in the area.
The container will provide storage, manipulation and treatment of incinerable wastes, and storage
of wastes to be removed from the Antarctic area.

Built-up area     14.78 m2
Built-in volume   38.30 m3

SO 03 Generators storage

It is a modified cargo container 20 feet long. The structure will serve for storing generators
during the wintering break. Wind-generators, means of small manipulation machinery and spare
parts for the complex of generators will be stored there. The structure will be connected to the
system of electric distribution, lighting and sockets. The container will be provided with a wind-
powered generator.

Built-up area     14.78 m2
Built-in volume   38.30 m3

SO 04 Engine room of power supply equipment

The engine room comprises of a 20 feet long standard cargo container. It will be equipped,
already in the Czech Republic, with all necessary machinery for the production and distribution of
electric energy. It will contain main switching room of the electrocomplex of the station, location of
transformers, accumulators and spare parts of this technical system. The container will be thermally
insulated and it will carry a mast for wind-powered generator.

Built-up area     14.78 m2
Built-in volume   38.30 m3

SO 05 Diesel generator

The structure consists of a cargo container 20 feet long with both permanently mounted and
mobile diesel generators for the production of electricity. The generators will be anchored to the
floor of the container, and complementary elements for the completion of a diesel power plant will
be placed within the container. From the inside, the system is insulated with a sandwich layer of
thermal and acoustic insulation to reduce noise immission to the surroundings and the
accommodation structure. The container will carry a wind-powered generator.

Built-up area     14.78 m2
Built-in volume   38.30 m3

SO 06 Cold stores

These storage structures complement a cluster of single-purpose technical container structures.

SO 06/1 Intermediate storage

It serves as storage for the reserves of preserved food that must be kept in a cool place. Large
packages of foodstuffs are stored on shelves or loose in the container. During the primary transport,
part of the container will contain durable dry food. The remaining space will be used for the
transport of harmless material. This is a standard container without thermal insulation and it will
carry a wind-powered generator.

Built-up area     14.78 m2
Built-in volume   38.30 m3
                                                         25
SO 06/2 Fuel storage

It serves as storage for diesel oil and gasoline.

The cargo container is adjusted to correspond with safety and ecological requirements for the storage of oil products. The container has a double floor that creates 200-liter retention reservoirs. They are distributed throughout the container's floor and covered with pore-grill-boards of zinc-coated steel. Steel drums with a volume of 200 liters will be stored on the floor. The structure is situated furthest from the accommodation building but at the same time closest to the disembarkation site on the beach with respect to necessary manipulation during periodic fuel supply. The structure will carry a wind-powered generator.

Built-up area      14.78 m^(2)
Built-in volume    38.30 m^(3)

SO 06/3  Spare parts storage

It will serve as a storage for spare parts and material that will be used according to the needs of the station, and eventually for storing treated and wrapped waste to be transported out, etc. The structure will contain dismantled ready-to-assemble shelves to be assembled if needed. It is assumed that the container will be also used for storing packaging material (such as wooden profiles, cardboard, etc.) for eventual treatment as mixed waste for incineration. A wind- powered generator will be mounted on a corner of the structure.

Built-up area      14.78 m^(2)
Built-in volume    38.30 m^(3)

SO 07  Water intake and distribution

For common hygienic needs as well as for cooking, water from natural sources will be used. All other stations obtain water in the same manner. Bottled water, imported from the non-Antarctic area, will be used for drinking and supplementing the physiologically required daily amount of mineralized water. Water will be drained from a local natural freshwater stream - a glacial stream that runs down the glacier's forefront south-east of the station's location and meanders to the sea so that it flows around the proposed construction site and flows into the sea on a SW beach, north of a nameless cliff. The main part of the structure will be an accumulation basin of approximately 3 m^(3). It will be obtained by deepening the streambed to approximately 80 cm. In the deepest place, a zeolite filter will be installed in a perforated PE-vessel. When wintering the station, the pump will be dismounted, the basin emptied using sluice gates and the filter will be washed and stored.

Backwater surface      app. 3 m^(2)
Distribution length    app. 50 m

SO 08 Waste water treatment

The structure serves for the basic treatment of sewage water from the operation structure. Since the waste water will have a character of biological sewage only, without chemical admixtures, its disposal is rather easy. Wastewater disposal will conform to the requirement of draining the sewage below sea level in order to provide an instant dilution and avoid impact on the station's freshwater systems. The proposed route of the wastewater pipeline uses gravity to drain the untreated materials. With respect to the need to minimize the solid particle content, the re-pumping and grinding of sewage will be carried out.

The total amount of domestic sewage will be 2.25 m^(3) per day.
The total length of the pipeline will be approximately 200 m.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

SO 09 Watercraft storage

The structure serves to store watercraft, i.e. two inflatable boats of GRANT RAID MK III type. 
During storage, one of them will be hung under the container's ceiling, the other will be placed on 
an undercarriage on the floor. A wind-powered generator could be installed on this container.

Built-up area    14.8 m2
Built-in volume  38.30 m3

SO 10 Launching ramp

The construction of the ramp will allow for a sufficiently safe and controllable facility for 
floating watercraft as well as conditions for the unloading of supplies (foodstuffs, fuel, etc.) at the 
beginning of the working season and at the abandonment and preservation of the station. The 
structure's fundation is a  levelled plain of the existing terrain that allows access to and from the 
coast; it could be levelled merely with local coarse gravel and aggregates to the flattest possible 
surface. With respect to the construction of the launching cart, it is not proposed to create a guide 
rail (unless inevitable) as the cart would move on the conditioned surface only. The exact position 
and dimensions of the ramp will be determined on site. The following data are preliminary.

Built-up area    - trimming of the ramp plain 150 m2
                 - plank platform           20 m2

SO 11 External cable distribution system

The system concerns the external cable connection among the individual structures. With respect 
to the character of the station's operation, which assumes only pedestrian traffic of people with 
knowledge of local conditions, the external cables will be laid in trenches as shallow as the terrain 
will allow. The cable routes are proposed along the walkways indicated by marking.

SO 12 Parking garage for wheeled/crawler vehicle

The standard 20 ft container without any special alterations or fittings with lighting equipment 
and flanges for an incidental installation of the wind mill.

4.4.2  Generation of energy

The station is conceived of as being an insular system. This means resources that are either 
locally available (water) or that work using solar and wind power cover all needs. These sources 
are backed up by energy systems for production of electric energy or heat using diesel 
generators with a defined 100% reserve capacity. Each aspect of the infrastructure is divided up 
into blocks, each of which will now be described.

Electric energy production

The part of the infrastructure deals with the creation, distribution and consumption of electric 
energy. It will utilize two sources, namely wind energy as the primary source and diesel generators 
as the secondary source.

A significant part of the proposed electric energy consumption of 20-25kW can be covered by the 
wind-generated power (windmills). Provided that the wind speed conditions on the selected site 
(Annex No. 6) will be similar to those on the South Shetlands, we may expect approximately 60% 
of the time during the Antarctic summer that there will be exploitable wind velocities with a 
dispensable power of 1400 kWh per wind generator.
There are proposed eight wind generators with a nominal capacity 1400W each. These will provide 50-60% of the seasonal consumption of electric energy. The wind aggregates will supply electric energy to the distribution system through a block of batteries and converters and from there to the distribution systems 3PEN AC 50Hz 230/400 V/TN-C, 3 NPE AC 230/400 V/TN-S and 2DC 48V. The distribution systems are separated with respect to the type and importance of the appliances hooked up to them. Eventual ecological hazards connected with the use of wind electrocity generators are evaluated in Chapter No. 6.6.

The electric batteries fulfil an important task in compensating the disproportion between the supply and consumption of the electric energy during normal operations. If there were to be a serious failure of the electric energy supply, the capacity of the full loaded batteries is to be designed to supply full coverage of the expected average consumption for two hours (in this case approximately 10kWh). The two hours is considered sufficient time to for contingency to the failure, refilling fuel into the tanks or starting-up of the backup source. Ni-Cd batteries with a nominal voltage 24 V are suggested because of their particular characteristics.

The whole of electric energy supply system is backed-up using liquid fuel sources, ensuring a supply of is in the event of a total lack of wind-generated electricity energy. Two Honda EXT 12 diesel generators (one in reserve for extreme conditions) have been preliminarily selected as a generator with a sufficiently stabile capacity of 10kW. This generator uses low viscosity oil, is 3 x 230/400V, has fully body-supported body with a sound damper, a transport cart and a pulley and is equipped with automatic regulation and remote starting. The total weight is 380 kg.

For instantaneous mobile sources of electric energy, portable petrol generators with manual start-up and capacities up to 6 kW (which is not a problem in this case, as petrol must be in the fuel store for the ship's engines) will be used.

Heat supply

The production of heat will be based on the expected and/or real consumption. An external temperature of -15°C was chose for calculation purposes. The heat loss from the structure is 8.4 kW. According to meteorological data from surrounding stations, the average temperature during the summer from beginning of November until the end of March oscillates around +1.5°C. If the average temperature inside the object is 23°C, the temperature difference to be covered by heating will be on average 21.5 K. This corresponds with an average heat loss 4.52 kW. Under such conditions, the consumption of heat energy for heating for the 120 days of the Antarctic summer amounts to 13,020 kWh.

For heating, two independent sources are available, namely: electricity and solar energy. The original idea to use for heat production a heat pump was abandoned owing to potential problems connected with the maintenance and defect repairs at the place of instalation.

Solar energy absorbed by solar collectors and will be used for water heating (12 m^(2)) and air heating (36 m^(2)). The second one is intended to support the heating of the residential building. This means that solar energy will serve in the daytime as the preferred method preheating of air circulating through the hot-air heating system. The hot water produced by solar energy is to be used preferably as water for hygienic needs.

28
4.4.3 Means of transportation

Two rubber Zodiac inflatable boats will be used as means of transport (Zodiac PRO II 470 + steering bracket and Zodiac Grand Raid MARK III, outboard gasoline engines MERCURY 60EO and 40MH). The wheeled-crawler vehicle is suggested for the transport of material within the area of the station and for the transport of people and material during field survey. The vehicle is produced in the licence of British company Leyland (Hillcat 1 100 - see: www.teamleyland.demon.co.uk/hillcat.htm) with the model designation Scott Trac 2000 R (see No. 11 - Technical documentation) by Slovak producer CSM Tisovec Ltd. (www.csmtsisovec.sk).

4.4.4 Transport requirements and other infrastructures

The transport of building material for the construction of the station as well as its complete interior equipment (all material will be transported in the standard 20 ft containers) have been preliminary agreed and will be realized in three previously agreed stages:

1. from the Czech Republic to western-European harbour,

2. after the reloading in selected western-European harbour (most probably Rotterdam) by standard cargo ship to one of harbours in south Argentina,

3. after the reloading to a ship with the ice rank (transport have been preliminary agreed with the company NAVALIA, S.R.L. Ushuaia) to the place of destination on the northern coast of Jamess Ross Island ("site No. 4").

The transport from the ship to land will be realized on pontoons, the discharge of the containers will be made onto a retaining wall (gabion). With respect to the diminishing the damage of the coast in the place of the discharge, the containers which are going to be the permanent part of the station (SO 02 to SO 12 see chapter 3.4, 3.4.1) will be transported to the place of installation on the special removable chassis with rubber wheels. Remaining containers will be discharged onto the pier.

The transport of personnel to and from the station will take place during personnel's arrival (November - December) and departure from the station (March - April). The transport will originate from the territories of Chile and Argentina . These countries supply their scientific and military stations and bases in the area. and operate also on commercial bases with standard ships of ice rank. The limited transportation volume during the station's operation (app. 2 containers per year) will not represent a more significant increase in shipping in the area than a few more naval miles twice a year by icebreakers that have been already using current shipping lanes to supply the existing stations. Tourist agencies run services from Chile and Argentina approximately every two weeks, and, therefore, the transport of people can utilize the existing capacities without increasing the traffic volume in the area above the current state.

The station relies on ship transport (two Zodiacs - see below) and partially on continental vehicle (see Part No. 4.4.3 and Annex No. 11). The use of aircraft is not proposed and in connection with the station's construction, no facilities necessary for such transportation will be developed. If there were an emergency situation, injury or acute illness at the station, the persons could be evacuated either by a helicopter from the flat coast adjacent to the station without a need for landscaping, or by a special plane that can land on the snow-covered glacier approximately 10 km in the island's inland (again without a need for landscaping).

The supply by sea will require the construction of a slipway for the transport of material, mainly containers, from the coast to the storage using a slide and a winch. During a common operation, two containers per year will be transported, one of them 6 m long containing fuel, the other 3 m long containing foodstuffs and material for research activities. For the transport of containers from the
coast to the storage, a launching ramp will be used, comprising a leveled terrain (aggregates, coarse 
gravel), complemented by a portable wooden bridge across the stream. This bridge will be stored 
during winter.

The transport of material at the station will utilize two-wheeled carts, a dolly and a universal 
winch-operated cart with up to 1000 kg loading capacity. The cart will serve mainly for the 
transport of watercraft from the storage to the coast and back. Local transportation will be provided 
by two inflatable boats (see Part No. 4.4.3) with 110 kg of weight and 1270 kg carrying capacity.

## 5. Description of the initial environmental reference state and 
prediction of the environment state in absence of the 
activity

The construction and operation of the station will directly concern the built-up area and part of 
the coast adjacent to James Ross Island. With respect to the extent of the construction and its use, 
only local environmental impacts might be assumed, and their intensity would differ according to 
the affected components described in detail further in the documentation.

Because except for the proposed station there is no other influence on the environment state of the 
site, we can expect that in absence of the assessed activity the environment state in future would 
response only to actual environmental conditions.

### 5.1 Atmosphere

At the "Site No. 4" James Ross Island, nobody has carried out standard systematic 
meteorological surveys. Physical parameters of the atmosphere, as one of the environmental factors 
that affect biota, environment and especially the type and dynamics of recent geomorphological 
processes, have been measured only occasionally. Such activities comprise, for example, the 
measurements taken within the IAA and HU activities in the northern part of Ulu Peninsula. In the 
graphic scheme (Annex No.6), it is obvious that the advection of air prevails from the SW-W 
direction at an average speed app. 7 m.s
-1
 with maximum wind gusts exceeding 25 m.s
-1
. During 
such campaigns, the quality of air was not measured.

The air will be affected by emission from the above described sources (incinerator, diesel 
generator, portable gasoline generators, outboard motor MERCURY 40 MH – 30 kW a MERCURY 
60 EO – 45 kw) Characteristics of the atmosphere, climate and emission are presented in separate 
annexes. The characteristics of noise and immission impacts at James Ross Island (Site No. 4) 
compiled by help on orthophotomaps (based on aerial photographs made by Dr. Strelin) are 
presented in Annex No. 8 and 9. In both dispersion and noise studies, the least favorable values 
were used, i.e. the most reflective terrain for noise, and the dead calm situation for maximum short-
term immission. In both cases, negative impacts reach only tens of meters and do not affect any 
biological objects in the station’s surroundings.

Keeping in mind the real ventilation (mean wind speed approximately 5 - 6 m.s
-1 
- see Annex No. 
6) and prevailing air advection from the western quadrant of the horizon, it is possible to expect the 
occurrence of the real nitrogen oxide concentrations considerably lower than is inferred by the 
theoretical calculations.
5.2  Soil

There are no soils in the propre sense of the word at the area of the Antarctic Peninsula. There is only sporadic occurrence of lithosols, regosols and gelic regosols (gelisols). The deglaciated surface is formed of material of various structure and texture with respect to its origin and development (glacial moraines, old beaches, erosion of bedrock of different origins on slopes of varying gradient and exposure, aquifers, etc.).

Rather thin layers of crude humus horizons are present at James Ross Island within the patches covered by vegetation mainly by growths of algae, lichens and mosses out of the area of the intended construction site, where is present the substrate typical of raised and stabilized beaches (i.e. pebbles in the matrix of finer material partially reworked by wind transport). Larger vegetation oases, which are the basis of soil formation if such a process potentially happens due to the changing climate, can be identified in aerial photographs. Because the construction must take place on a coarse-grained gravel foundation without fine particles and little aquiferous permafrost (risk of solifluction and slope movements in summer), neither soil in the real sense of the word nor its initial stages will be occupied. Due to technical reasons, the construction will involve mainly coarse pebble and boulder debris of a morainic and/or fossil beach character.

The subsoil is permanently frozen (permafrost). In summer, the active layer thaws a few decimeters deep, therefore, the structures' foundations are not laid in the subsoil but placed on beam constructions (grillages).

The initial stages of pedogenesis will be monitored, especially with respect to their initiation stage and possible local influence, mainly due to the increased input of immissions from incineration (incineration unit, and power generators).

5.3  Water

In the given locality, water will be taken from the melting snow in the amount of 2.25 m³ per day. It will be quality drinking water, demineralized (precipitation water), without biological compounds. The discharged waste water of the same volume (2.25 m³ per day) will affect the littoral zone of the sea.

5.4  Environmental geofactors

James Ross Island is formed by a sequence of Upper Jurassic to Lower Tertiary marine clastic sediments and tuffs. Its sedimentary basin developed as a back-arc basin in the period of the Pacific, Phoenix and Auk plates'subduction under the Antarctic Peninsular microcontinent. The sediments are roofed with volcanic formations dated from Miocene up to present. A morfologically prominent feature is the central volcano, Mt. Haddington (1628 m a.s.l.), and coastal volcanic plateaus. Lava fluxes up to 200 m thick and up to 30 km long reach the periphery of the island and erosion of their fronts characterizes the cliffs along most of the coast. The volcanic sequences are dominated by basanites, tephrites, alkali basalts, and tholeiites. Only the northern part of the coast is formed by Mesozoic sedimentary rocks and, therefore, slopes slightly. The rocks are created by marine, in particular Cretaceous, less common Tertiary unmetamorphosed sediments. Prolific paleontological localities of vertebrate and invertebrate faunas item micro- and macrofauna has been described especially in Santa Marta and Lopez de Bertnado Formation (Marambio Group, upper Cretaceous – Santonian, Campanian). The main described fossils: ammonites, belemnites, bivalves, gastropods, corals, fish, dinoflagellate, bryozoans, fosil wood.

31
About 80 % of the island surface is covered with ice. Only the northernmost part of the island (Ulu Peninsula) is significantly deglaciated and represents one of the areally vastest ice-free areas within the northern part of the Antarctic Peninsula. The systems of elevations, lining Brandy Bay in the southwest and northeast, have a specific geological structure reflected in their morphology. The slope areas are formed by softer Cretaceous sediments and rise approximately up to 300 m above the sea level. Summit flats are formed by Tertiary volcanic rocks with body of intrusive rocks.

The slope areas are intensively shaped by periglacial processes, summer erosion and accumulation activities of melt water and eolic processes. Stream channels, saturated by melting of snow patches or spatially less significant ice caps, erode intensively in the upper parts of the slopes. Transported material accumulates in the lower valley parts and conditions braiding of the streams. Valley slopes are shaped mainly by erosion processes combined with solifluction. The solifluction-stretched slopes are at the valley bottoms secondarily eroded by stream channels. On the summits of interfluve ridges, the dominant role is played by the gravitational movement of regolith (in places saturated by melt water) in the active layer of permafrost. Periglacially shaped flat interfluve ridges are in the lowest parts stretched toward the sea. Besides valleys with braiding rivers, they represent a significant feature in a gently rolling landscape of the coastal zone. Such a landscape character contrasts with steep erosional valley slopes, which develop due to the undercutting of foot slope by stream channels (especially during spring thawing) and solifluction during the thawing of the surface active layer of permafrost. In such a terrain, flat, almost horizontal surfaces of low abrasion coastal terraces protrude partially as another typical morphological feature. The construction of the Czech station is proposed on one of them (below spot height 64 m, area of app. 180 x 100 m).

5.5     Flora and fauna

Flora

Living flora is sparse and patchily distributed within the considered area of Cape Lachman, James Ross Island. Although a full botanical survey has not yet been made, the richness of lichen and moss flora might comprise at least 9 moss and 34 lichen species as estimated by Smith (1993). There is also a report of liverwort Cephaloziella varians found at several sites on the northern part of James Ross Island (Bednarek-Ochyra et al. 2000). According to the most recent compendium (Ovstedal and Smith 2001) summarizing lichen specimens found and determined by several lichenologists over the last century, there are the following lichen species at the James Ross Island (listed alphabetically):

Acarospora qwynn, Arthrionia glebosa, Aspicilia sp., Buellia aff. aethalea, Buellia papillata, Caloplaca aff. anchon-phoniceon, Caloplaca cerina, Caloplaca cirrochrooides, Caloplaca aff. diphyoides, Caloplaca iomma, Caloplaca psoromatis, Candelariella vitellina, Collema coccophorum, Dermatocarpon polyphyllizum, Flavoparmelia gerlachei, Fulgensia desertorum, Gyalidea antarctica, Lecanora atromarginata, Lecanora flotowiana, Lecanora mons-nivis, Lecidella sublapicida, Lecidella sp., Lecidoma demissum, Lepraria neglecta, Mycobilimbia lobulata, Mycobilimbia sp., Notolecidea subcontinua, Peltigera didactela, Peltigera rufescens, Pertusaria corallophora, Phaeorrhiza nimbosa, Placopsis parellina, Psoroma buchananii, Rhizocarpon geminatum, Rhizocarpon superficiale, Rinodina endophragmia, Ropalospora rossii, Staurothele gelida, Umbilicaria aprina, Usnea sphacelata, Xanthoria elegans.

Except for the above-listed lichen species, it is expected that other species frequent in maritime Antarctica and northern parts of Antarctic Peninsula are abundant at the considered area. Among them, e.g. Haematomma erythromma, Xanthoria candelaria, Usnea antarctica, Usnea aurantiaco-atra might be pointed out. Moss species Sanionia uncinata, and Bryum sp. are considered to live there as well. Recently, no information is available on species richness of terrestrial algae and cyanobacteria in this area.

32
The station's locality itself is not covered with any vegetation, and, according to Dr. Strelin, the 
closest vegetation oases are located hundreds of meters toward the center of the island. Therefore, 
they would not be affected by the construction.

References:

Bednarek-Ochyra, H., Váňa, J., Ochyra, R., Lewis-Smith, R.I. (2000): The liverwort flora of Antarctica. Polish 
Academy of Science, Institute of Botany, Cracow, Poland 236 p.

Lewis-Smith, R.I. (1993): The vegetation of Cockburn Island, Antarctica. Polar Biol., 13: 535-542

Øvstedal, D.O., Lewis Smith, R.I. (2001): Lichens of Antarctica and South Georgia. A Guide to their Identification and 
Ecology. Studies in Polar Research Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 411 p.

The actual Site No. 4 of the construction is not covered with any vegetation, and, therefore, 
the status of species protection is not assessed. According to the oral communication with Dr. 
Strelin from IAA, the closest vegetational oases are located approximately in the distance of 
hundreds of meters towards the center of the island. No floristic research has been carried out so 
far, and there is not any evidence as to what species may occur there. At the beginning of the 
monitoring, and especially during the station's scientific program, the places with the occurrence of 
flora would be mapped, the species determined, including the status of their protection. The 
protection of vegetation oases against trampling and other side effects of the station's operation is 
dealt with in Chapter No. 17.

The station's construction and operation might locally disturb or kill the stands of these plants. 
Nevertheless, the impact is local, ranging within hundreds of square meters. At low temperatures 
and a short vegetation period, these changes have a reversible but rather long-term character.

Fauna

There is no nesting colony of birds nor colony of pinnipeds in the area of north part of James 
Ross Island. The species observed, always as individuals, by Dr. Strelin and Torrielli (verbal 
evidence) in the vicinity of Site No. 4 were: Adelie Penguin (Pygoscelis Adeliae, Gentoo Penguin 
(Pygoscelis papua) and Macaroni Penguin (Eudyptes chrysolophus), Snow Petrel (Pagodorma 
nivea), Willsons Petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), Blue Eyed Cormorant (Phalacrocorax atriceps), 
South Polar Skua (Catharacta maccormicki), Kelp Gull (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic Tern 
(Sterna vittata), Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossi) Expected species formerly observed close the site 
are Weddel Seal (Leptonychotes weddellii), Leopard Seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) and Elephant Seal 
(Mirounga leonine). In all cases, the species were observed in the wider surroundings of the 
assessed locality (north of Ulu Peninsula), not solely at the proposed construction site.

On James Ross Island, no systematic zoological research has been carried out so far, and, 
therefore, no comparison data are available. Both IAA experts also confirmed that no birds nest at 
the construction's site, and they observed sporadic nesting on the cliffs located hundreds of meters 
from the construction site.

At the beginning of the construction, all living objects in its vicinity would be localized and 
mapped so as to eliminate especially the indirect impacts (transportation, transport of material, 
movement of people in the station's vicinity). Based on these data, a map would be drawn; all 
inhabitants of the station would be familiar with it, and it would also serve for monitoring of the 
development of botanical localities. In a defined area around the station, the densities of animals 
would be observed annually.
5.6 Protected areas and historical monuments

In the Antarctic area, there are several types of designated protected areas that correspond to the 
Czech ranking system of specially protected areas, or temporarily protected areas, areas of special 
scientific interest, and historically significant areas. They are the following types: ASMA, CCAS, 
HSM, MPA, SPA, SRA, SSSI.

There is no protected area on James Ross Island. No such areas are to be found tens of kilometers 
around, and, therefore, no impacts on specifically protected areas can be identified. On the contrary, 
the originally proposed location at Turret Point, King George Island, is close to a number of 
protected areas and impacts would be likely there, in particular impacts of a cumulative character 
(great number of scientific bases on the island and the whole South Shetlands Archipelago).

The research project, primary and subsequent periodic monitoring of the environment on James 
Ross Island is directed so that it presupposes a thorough investigation of the whole area. If 
significant sites were found from the point of view of geology, paleontology, geomorphology, 
glaciology or biology, they would be proposed for protection  in a corresponding category of 
protected areas, as used in the Antarctic area.

In the locality of James Ross Island, no protected area of the above listed types is established. 
Therefore, the assessed construction is not in disagreement with any special protection of the site.

The area of the proposed construction has not been consistently inhabited yet. Further, there has 
been no hunting base and, therefore, there are no archaeological findings or architectural 
monuments in the locality.

However, the whole Antarctic area is respected by international treaties as an exceptional area 
with a status comparable to that of national parks. Therefore, it is necessary to respect these special 
conditions and international conventions, particularly the Antarctic Treaty and its annexes and 
amendments, namely the Madrid Protocol.

5.7 Areas of mineral resources

The Antarctic area is exceptional and highly susceptible. Therefore, extraction of raw materials 
is excluded. The construction and operation of the station does not potentially endanger raw 
material sources or any other natural riches except for living components. This question is 
discussed in chapters concerning ecosystems, flora, and fauna.

5.8 Other characteristics of the environment

The main feature of the environment is the extremely unfavorable climatic conditions, 
characterized by particularly low temperatures and a short vegetation period. Therefore, even at low 
species diversity, any intervention to the environment has an extremely long-term character. All 
waste, construction debris and other traces of human activities can remain visible along the coast 
for tens or hundreds of years. Therefore, all activities in this area are subject to international treaties 
and international supervision by governmental and non-governmental organizations. The guidelines 
for the protection of the exceptional Antarctic environment are the subject of the Antarctic Treaty 
and the Madrid Protocol, whose selected parts are presented in the annexes of the Evaluation. 
                                                                                                          34
6. Direct impacts of the planned activity

6.1 Atmosphere and climate

Neither climate, neither logal climate, will be affected by the station's presence. The temporary 
alteration of the microclimate may occur only at the construction site of the station (e.g. during the 
radiation type of weather and almost zero advection as a result of the heating of walls of the 
buildings. The deformation of the air flow may occur between the buildings of the station during the 
periods of stronger wind as a result of strengthened turbulence on the windward or leeward side of 
the station buildings). The air will belocally affected by emission, particularly during the operation 
of the incineration unit (approximately 2 hours once in 7 or 10 days) and diesel generator, i.e. when 
wind generators will not function due to either still air (exceptionally) or adversely strong wind 
(good dispersion conditions) or due to their breakdown. Portable generators have a low output and 
represent insignificant emission sources. A detailed assessment of emission load is a subject in the 
annexes.

The air will be influenced by two static emission sources:

1. Waste incinerator, product of Norway by TEAMTEC, type GOLAR 120 Marine, with a 
weekly cycle.

2. Diesel-generator HONDA EXT 12 utilizing low-congealing oil.

Smaller volume of emission will be produced by mobile sources (gasoline-generators HONDA 
with an output of 6 kW providing electricity locally in the terrain, outboard gasoline motors 
MERCURY 60 EO and MERCURY 40 MH or terrain vehicle - see Annex No. 11).

The total production of emissions and an emission study are part of the Annex No. 8 and 9.

6. 2 Water

The construction and operation of the station will not affect the surface sources of freshwater 
(meltwater streams discharging from snow patches), which will supply drinking and service water 
for the station's operation in the volume of 2.25 m3 per day. Eventual modification of the channel 
for water extraction will affect neither the overall discharge conditions, nor any organisms because 
there are not any in the stream.

Water would be taken from a stream dammed with a natural spillway of a minimum height 
needed for the installment of a submerged electric pump. The pump would take water into two 
operational reservoirs in the structure SO 07 (300 liters each). By scanning the water level in these 
reservoirs, the filling regime would be adjusted so that sufficient storage capacity would be kept 
and impact withdrawal eliminated, which might otherwise cause enormous decrease of the stream's 
flow.

A wooden frame set transversely in the channel and filled with a local fluviatile material would 
perform the damming of the stream channel. The pump would be removed before abandoning the 
station for winter period.

At the station, water will be used for:
-   drinking and hygienic needs (15 persons)
-   cooking (30 meals/day)
-   research needs (laboratories)
-   fire safety
                                                                                           35
Water for drinking and cooking will be quality potable water. Water for the laboratories will be 
processed according to the research requirements. For hygienic needs, bacterially uncontaminated 
service water will be used.

As allowed by the Madrid Protocol, the station's wastewater (2.25 m3.d-1) of a sewage character 
will be ground in a chamber and discharged into the sea (see Chapter No.6.3).

In the accumulation structure, mechanical pre-treatment and sedimentation of possible suspended 
solid particles will occur. For the gravity-driven water supply pipeline, the necessary accumulation 
of water and its hygienic purity will be ensured. The accumulation reservoir will also serve for the 
external and internal fire safety of the station. The water supply pipeline will consist of PE pipes. A 
sludge removal device allowing a complete discharge of the pipeline will be installed at the lowest 
place.

If the station is permanently occupied by 15 people, water needs are estimated as follows:

Qd =15.0 x 15 = 2250 l.d-1, i.e. 2.25 m3.d-1
qaver. = 0.03 l.s-1
qmax = 0.25 l.s-1

The above stated amount of water will by no means threaten the plentiful sources of melting ice 
and snow.

6.3  Coast

The littoral zone, where disembarkation of construction material, supplies and boat launching 
would take place, had been covered with ice in recent history (according to some available data and 
aerial photos still in the eighties of the 20th century) and, so far, there have been no vegetation or 
bird nesting grounds in it above the tidal line. Pinnipeds occur there just occasionally. As the sea 
had been covered with ice quite recently, we cannot expect the existence of richer communities 
below the sea surface. We assume that the littoral zone and consequent benthal are quite poor. 
Disembarkation and other activities would affect the sea only up to 70 cm deep. The beach, where 
material would be transported from the coast to the station, is not covered with vegetation either. 
Material would be transported on a cart with rubber wheels, the containers on a special chassis also 
on rubber wheels, and, therefore, the disturbance of the surface would be minimal.

6.4  Soil, land and bedrock

Under the given conditions, they will not be permanently affected. There are no soils, and 
geological subsoil will not be affected because the building will be constructed on wooden 
foundation grill laid on the terrain surface. Locally, the surface will be leveled for paths connecting 
the station's structures and for the launching ramp between the sea and storages. These 
modifications will affect small fractions of surface layers.

6.5  Risks connected with the introduction of alien species and 
suppression of their occurrence at the station, risks connected 
with the import of forbidden products

The station's construction and operation would follow Article 4, Annex II of the Madrid 
Protocol. In particular, the following measures would be taken:
                                                                                 36
- all material and scientific equipment which would be imported to the area, would be disinfected according to their character (UV radiation, disinfecting solutions, etc.) after their use in other geographical regions,
- the seasonal character of the station allows its freezing through, and, therefore, killing of major portions of potentially introduced invertebrates,
- the supplying of the station would respect Appendix C, Annex II of the Madrid Protocol on the import of poultry, poultry meat and its manipulation,
- the scientific program of the station does not contain laboratory techniques that use living plants or animals, tissue or other cultures. No import of living material is expected. If such a program would be proposed in the future, the permission according to respective articles of Annex II of the Madrid Protocol would be requested.

No materials prohibited in the area by Article 7, Annex II of the Madrid Protocol, would be imported to the station during its construction or operation,, except for the compounds necessary for ensuring hygiene and disinfection at the station.

6.6     Risks connected with the planned methods of energy production

The power generation system (see Part No. 4.4.2) minimizes significantly negative impacts that are connected with it:
-  the masts of wind turbines would stick only 5 m above the terrain.
-  wind turbines decrease to a great extent the consumption of fossil fuels, but do not exclude the possibility of the collisions between these instruments and birds. However, the probability of such accidents is low owing to the low abundance of birds.
-  installation of the masts at the top of service containers avoids problems with the impact on the substrate at their ground,
-  5 m masts present a compromise between the use of lower number of taller masts with high-capacity generators (higher risk to birds, and greater aesthetic impact on the landscape) and lower masts with lower output (and less risk to birds and less aesthetic impact),
-  the masts would be tilted during strong and gusty winds. Such a solution prevents partial or even total damage of the generators, and also prevents possible further damage of the structures. At the same time, tilting of the masts prevents clashes with birds that may not be capable of precise maneuverability in strong winds.

Impacts or risks of further modes of energy production (diesel engines, portable electrical aggregates, the operation of zodiacs and terrain vehicle) are evaluated in the Annex No. 8 and 9 and in Chapter No. 6.

                                                                                                                                             37
7.  Waste

7.1  Waste management plan

Following the regulations that are being prepared on the initiative of SCAR, the procedure of waste management will be further elaborated based on the analysis of the monitoring carried out in 1996 and published by SCAR and COMNAP. In accordance with Article 8, Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol, the waste management plan will be compiled at the next project stage and will respect the following structure and categorization of waste:

Group 1.  Sewage and domestic liquid waste

Group 2.  Other liquid waste and chemicals, fuels and lubricants inclusive

Group 3.  Solid substances intended for incineration

Group 4.  Other solid waste

Based on this structure, a realistic estimation of waste production will be gradually quantified at the next stages of the project's preparation. The waste production should be monitored during the first operation season and evaluated according to the conditions set in Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol and the expected requirements.

7. 1.1  Waste from the station's construction

During the construction of the station, two types of waste will occur:

a.  Solid waste

The assumed amount of approximately 300 kg will have to be stored in plastic drums during both construction seasons and either taken away from the Antarctic Treaty area at the transport of the construction crew, or disposed of in one of the permanent stations.

b.  Waste resulting from assembly and building activities

b.1  Construction waste

This waste consists of trimmings and pieces of wood that constitute the basic building material. During the production and pre-assembly operations prior to dispatch, this amount will be adjusted to allow maximum utilization. Usable cut timber can be utilized for the construction of waste bins or shelves in containers intended for operational use, etc. Appropriate construction elements will be also stored for possible repairs, etc.

b.2  Wrapping material

The materials which are forbidden for use according to Annex III, article 7 of the Protocol will not be used for the transport of constructional segments, equipment or any other equipment used at the station.

There will be basically two kinds - safely disposable wood and paper, and PET foil. Wooden containers (boxes, pieces of wood, etc.) will be stored for later use. Cardboard and PET foil will be sorted and later possibly used for additional creation of heat-insulation layers, e.g. for insulating the inner walls of containers. inner walls of containers. Unutilised waste material will be burnt (low density PET), other materials will be deposited, bundled and prepared for the transport from the construction site outside the territory of the AT.

Unused waste will be banded, stored in as little space as possible and prepared to be transported from the station's construction site.

38
In concord with the Protocol, Annex III, Article 2 a 3 (paragraph 1), PET low density packing materials are considered in particular. These would be combusted at temperatures above 1000°C in the incinerator unit by TEAMTEC Norway - Golar 120 Marine Type Incinerator (see also ATCM XXV, IP-93, Annex No. 10), which meets the requirements of SCAR and COMNAP (Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Scientific Reseárch and Operations in Antarctica, 1996).

7.1.2 Waste resulting from the station's operation

For the purpose of estimating the occurrence and disposal, waste resulting from the station's operation is keeping with Annex III, Article 8 of the Protocol categorized as follows:

a. Solid waste

The estimated amount of municipal waste are amount 300 kg per 15 people per 5 months. This figure relates to the remaining non-combustible waste during the construction itself, and this waste will have to be transported outside the Antarctic Treaty area.

- solid waste appointed to the burning (Group 3) will be sorted as combustible and non-combustible at its formation and collection.

Mixed combustible waste, i.e. remains of office paper, wrapping paper, foil wrapping of foodstuffs and consumables, PET bottles, PET wraps (low density – see ANNEX III, Article 2 and 3, paragraph 1 of the Protocol), etc. will be separated and stored in designated boxes in the container SO 02 (see Chapter No. 4.4.1).

The disposal of solid waste in the station will be carried out by an incineration process in a special facility placed in structure SO 02 (incineration unit), which is connected directly to the main building of the station. The incineration cycle will be based on experience from the specific operation. According to the information obtained from other stations, a two-week cycle of incineration of approximately 200 kg of waste is expected. Waste will be collected and sorted into designated bins in the cargo container. Combustible waste will be incinerated as municipal-type mixed waste.

A specialized manufacturer of incinerators TEAMTEC Norway recommended the GOLAR 120 Marine type incinerator. Marine type incinerator. The technology of burning in this apparatus is compliant with the Protocol.

This incinerator can combust all types of solid waste based on their heating value:

  Classified material           17,270 kJ.kg-1 (dry paper)
  Waste of type II             9,901 kJ.kg-1

Type II of waste, which can be processed by this incineration equipment in 200 liter batches at a frequency of 3-5 hours, is defined as follows:

waste consists of a roughly uniform mixture with a maximum moisture content up to 50% by weight and a maximum non-combustible residue up to 7%. The high temperature in the combustion chamber (in some areas app. 1400°C) provides a smokeless and complete combustion. The solid waste in the gas exhaust is neutralized (disposed) by the burner, and, therefore, the process is ecologically safe. As soon as the waste gases pass the burner zone, they are mixed with the cooling air before entering the spent gases exhaust and emitted through a chimney. The waste should be prepared to a heating value of app. 10,000 kJ.kg-1. For the mixing process, an instruction manual will be prepared for the operators so that the combustion process proceeds smoothly with as low consumption of support fuel (diesel oil) as possible.

39
The incinerator is supplemented with boxes for sorting of waste into the groups: noncombustibles and combustibles. Beforee the liquidation, burnable material will be mixed to the required heating capacity in order to reach the optimal temperature during the burning process.

Other kinds of rigid waste (Group 4 - according Protocol, Annex III, Article 8 uncombustible parts of municipal waste) i.e. glas, PVC high density, metals, batteries, composited wrappings etc. will be separated, packed and transported out of AT territory.

b. Liquid waste

Sewage (Group 1):
- liquid waste of a domestic sewage character that will be drained directly to the sea in the amount of app. 2.5 m3. It is the amount which was inferred from the water consumption statistics in the Czech Republic which indicate expected consumption 160 - 200 l per person and day.

Other liquid waste and chemicals (Group 2)
- liquid waste of physical-chemical solutions from laboratory research - the character of these substances will be specific according to the types of laboratory research activities. It is assumed that for certain laboratory activities, which are proposed and will result in this sort of waste, its expected amount, the manner of primary neutralization (if needed), wrapping, adjustment and placing in a cargo container will be specified.
- liquid waste of oil products such as used oil from engines or spillage from fuelling - after sorting, this waste will be collected in separated canisters and during supply operations returned to the service ship either for incineration outside the Antarctic Treaty area or for the application as a fuel for the ship's engine.

c. Gaseous waste
- exhaust gases of diesel-electric generators or small gasoline-powered generators; in the given case, their amount should be reduced by the utilization of renewable sources of energy
- combustion gases resulting from the disposal of solid combustible waste from the station's operation.

Within the station's area, we can assume the cumulation of some impacts during its lifetime (app. 30 years). To reveal the possible cumulation of impacts, monitoring would start right at the beginning of the station's construction (see Chapter no. 15, 16, 17).

Theoretically, we can assume that cumulation of immissions - mainly NOX group - would occur at the station and its vicinity. This assumption would be subject of one part of the mentioned monitoring program. Cumulative impacts would be limited mainly due to the fact that wastes would not be combusted during calm situations (immission and dispersal study takes into account immission concentrations at still air).

Cumulative impact of discharged liquid wastes on littoral zone communities cannot be excluded either, even though the coast at the station's location is open. The coastline is simple and would not limit the dispersal of compounds around the discharge. Monitorin will also be conducted from the beginning of the construction. 
40
7.1.3 Waste water

The waste water is only sewage water from the hygienic facilities and from food preparation. Therefore, it is common municipal waste water. The amount of waste water is the result of water consumption. The balance of the production of pollution is calculated per one equivalent inhabitant (EI). The calculation takes in account 15 EI at the station. Besides standard parameters (Q _{annual} , Q _{daily} , q _{average} , q _{max} ) for the calculation of the pollution production, an additional parameter (Q _{seasonal} ) was used to calculate the volume of pollution with respect to the assumed extent of maximum 5-month-occupation of the station by personnel.

Balance sheet

Q _{annual}         Q _{seasonal}         Q _{daily}         q _{average}       
q _{max}                                 
m ^{3}  per year     m ^{3}  per 150 days     m ^{3} .d ^{-1}         l.s ^{-1}         l.s ^{-1}
821.25           337.75           2.25           0.03         0.25

Given a daily water consumption of 2.25 m ^{3} .d ^{-1} , the production of pollution is:

|          | kg.d ^{-1} | kg per year | kg per season | mg.l ^{-1} |
|----------|----------|-------------|----------------|-----------|
| BOD5     | 0.90     | 328.5       | 135            | 400       |
| DS       | 0.83     | 302.95      | 124.5          | 367       |
| COD      | 0.67     | 264.65      | 100.5          | 300       |
| pH       |          | 6.0 - 8.0    |                |           |
| dissolved matter | 1.88 | 686.2       | 282            | 834       |
| N total  | 0.18     | 65.7        | 27             | 80        |
| P total  | 0.02     | 7.3         | 3              | 10        |

The process of maceration was rejected (in concord with Annex III, Article 5, paragraph 1b of the Protocol) because the station would have a seasonal character and a smaller personnel than the stated material presumes. The amount of liquid wastes would be significantly lower. At Site No. 4 of the coast at the given place, the disposed wastes would immediately and rapidly dissolve and disperse. Therefore, it would meet the requirements defined in the above mentioned annex, paragraph 1 a.

A separation of used toilet paper into special containers (bags) and their incineration with solid waste will be considered. This would decrease the total input of organic matter into the marine environment, and, furthermore, it would eliminate the unappealing presence of slowly decaying paper by the coast.

8. Response to the contingencies and their monitoring

During the station designing phase, the presupposition was to eliminate two basic kinds of risk events: fire and leak of liquid fuels.

In the case of a fire, the station would be equipped with a sufficient number of manual fire extinguishers with relevant fillings according to the sort of flammable substances and combustion character, with mechanical tools for undertaking the intervention and personal protective means for
staff members. Separate fire safety regulations would be elaborated for  the station, and the 
personnel would periodicaly undertake fire safety instruction.

The consumption of liquid fuels is minimized already by the energy concept of the station 
(utilization of renewable energy sources). Therefore, the handled amounts would be relatively low. 
To eliminate the risk of liquid fuel leaks to the environment, several technical measures have 
already been adopted in the concept of the station's project. Fuels would be transported and handled 
purely in securely covered containers (steel or PET drums). At the station, the liquid fuels would be 
stored in a cargo container with a double floor which would create a retention reservoir and allow 
the disposal of eventual leaks. Fuels for operational needs would be pumped into smaller covered 
containers in this structure as well. In an extreme need situation, several kinds of absorbents would 
be available, and after their application they would be disposed of in acord with the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

9. Noise, vibrations

The following sources of vibrations and noise will be located within the station:
- wind-powered generators
- diesel-powered generator
- portable gasoline-powered generator
- outboard gasoline motor for a boat and terrain vehicle

No other sources of noise and vibrations or motor vehicles are anticipated at the station. The 
station will not be supplied by plane or helicopter and no landing ground is planned. Therefore, 
there will not be any noise from landing aircraft.

A detailed noise study is presented in Annex No.9.

10. Radioactive and electromagnetic radiation

Neither the construction not the operation of the station will create radioactive radiation, and 
no radioactive emitters will be released into the environment.

Presumably, the station will communicate with the world via radiostation with an output of app. 
100 W working in SW frequency band. This will be the greatest source of electromagnetic radiation 
in the locality. Besides, the station will utilize a radiostation for local communication in SW and 
VHF bands, and approximately 5 to 7 portable ministations.

11. Indirect impacts

The most significant indirect impacts that would occur in the region in connection with the 
station's construction are transportation (provisioning) and movement of people on the island.

Supplies would be shipped only twice a year (import and export of material and personnel), and, 
therefore, would not mean significant load to the area. The causeway does not lead close to any area 
significant to animals. The cumulative impacts would not be significant either, because no 
provisioning routes of other stations lead through this area (the closest is the provisioning route 
                                                                                    42
between Argentinean bases Marambio and Esperanza about 80 km to the east). No commercial 
tourist voyages take place in the area either.

The movement of people on the island would mean an increased load in the station's vicinity, 
and the mitigation measures are described in Chapter No. 15 and 5.5. The movement of personnel 
on the island further from the station would be insignificant and of very low density due to the total 
number of workers (15) at the station, and also because the ice-free area is several tens of square 
kilometers.

Within the station's area, we can assume the cumulation of some impacts during its lifetime (app. 
30 years). To reveal the possible cumulation of impacts, monitoring would start right at the 
beginning of the station's construction (see Chapter No. 17).

Theoretically, we can assume that cumulation of immissions - mainly NO
 group - would occur 
at the station and its vicinity. This assumption would be subject of one part of the mentioned 
monitoring program. Cumulative impacts would be limited mainly due to the fact that wastes would 
not be combusted during no-wind situations (immission and dispersal study takes into account 
immission concentrations at still air).

Cumulative impact of discharged liquid wastes on littoral zone communities cannot be excluded 
either, even though the coast at the station's location is open. The coastline is simple and would not 
limit the dispersal of compounds around the discharge.

Besides the measurements and evidence (see above) the following measures would be taken:
- a waste diary would be kept, divided according to the character of waste and stating the manner of 
its disposal (combustion, export, other utilization, etc.),
- strict evidence of energy consumption and its supply from different sources (diesel-powered 
generators, wind-powered generators, solar collectors) would be kept. Such evidence would be 
assessed, would allow for optimization of sources utilizing, and decrease to a minimum the 
consumption of fossil fuels with all their negative impacts,

- other mitigation measures would result from monitoring programs which are presented in Chapter 
No. 17.

The station is proposed for 15 people and seasonal operation, which means 5 months at most. If 
need be to increase the station's capacity in the future, new environmental assessment procedure 
would be followed for "minor or transitory impact" or "more than minor or transitory impact". No 
such alternative is considered at the moment.

In the area among the structures of the station and their vicinity, quite frequent movement of 
people can be assumed, especially in directions toward the disembarkation point, water source and 
meteorological mast. These routes would lead across solid base material and would be marked. This 
way, mechanical impact on the surface with eventual development of erosion would be limited.

Other activities would be dispersed on a large area of Ulu Peninsula, and no local large-scale 
load may be expected here. Movement of people and their activities would concentrate mainly 
around scientific and expert activities. In the initial period, these will be mainly terrain topographic, 
geologic and geomorphologic mapping works and initial monitoring of fauna and flora occurrence. 
In the following periods, a complex research program of the colonization of deglaciated areas of 
different age by vegetation and fauna, and a study of community functions in relation to the 
external environmental factors (climate and microclimate, recent geomorphologic processes, 
transport of nutrients, energy, water, etc.) would be carried out. Such activities would, therefore, be 
similar and comparable to those undertaken at other Antarctic bases. We also anticipate 
international cooperation with scientific institutions of other countries (e.g. Argentina, Great 
Britain, the Ukraine, etc.).




























































































43
The station's capacity (15 people) excludes its eventual commercial use. The authors of the project debated this intention and of the station's construction with the IAATO, namely with Mrs. Denise Landau. Besides the Czech experts and scientists, the project takes into account the involvement of foreign experts. This category embraces visitors participating at any of the station's scientific programs, or utilizing the station's location for regional extension of their field activities. Such workers would participate at the station either upon their own request (in advance approved), in which they would have to prove the "environmental safety" of their planned activities, or their presence would be requested and justified by the Czech program researchers.

The station would be furthermore located in a part of Antarctica out of common routes of tourist ships. At the station's location or its vicinity, there occur no abundant bird or mammal populations of attractive species, there are no aesthetically unique landscapes and, therefore, we do not assume tourist attraction of this area.

12. Inevitable impacts

12.1 Impacts on flora and fauna

The construction site at Site No. 4 on James Ross Island is not covered with vegetation, and, therefore, neither local covering of vegetation with the construction nor trampling will occur. Deschampsia Antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis does not occur on James Ross Island, unlike the originally considered King George Island. In the construction's wider environs, the occurrence of minor vegetation oases with the occurrence of an unidentified range of species of lower plants (mosses, liverworts, lichens) can be expected. The construction and operation of the station will not affect wider environs in terms of trampling or vegetation damage.

In wider environs, there occur several species of birds (Skuas, Antarctic Tern) and mammals (Elephant Seal). However, according to the site observation (Streln in verb.), there are no breeding grounds of mammals or nesting colonies of birds. In both cases, it is only a dispersed occurrence of individuals and, therefore, the location of the station will not have a significant impact on these animals.

In the particular area of Site No. 4 on James Ross Island, the Czech Antarctic station is situated appropriately because
- it disturbs neither nesting colonies of birds nor large breeding or resting colonies of pinnipeds
- it does not produce great amounts of waste which would enrich the local ecosystem (15 EI of discharged waste water during app. 150 days per year is negligible).
- it does not significantly affect primary producers because there occur none in the locality

12.2 Impacts on ecosystems

Coastal ecosystems of the Antarctic peninsula and adjacent islands are quite simple, but still they have very susceptible energy and material flows. As the communities of primary producers are extremely pure here and their production is insignificant, the communities of all mammals and birds are dependant on the marine ecosystem. Therefore, the terrestrial and marine ecosystems are directly linked by food chains. The link is closed by a decomposition chain where both excrement and carrion of birds and mammals are washed off the coast by rain or thawing snow back to the sea and enrich the littoral and shelf zones with nutrients. At large nesting colonies of sea birds, these runoffs represent a highly significant eutrophication of the littoral and shelf zones by nutrients, particularly phosphorus and nitrogen, and a significant contribution to the nutrient cycle and 
44
production of coastal waters. That is why these waters can represent a sufficient trophic base even for large colonies of birds and pinnipeds breeding on the coast.

In this sense, the Czech scientific station does not represent a significant and especially vast influence on the ecosystem.

12.3 Impacts on the anthropogenic systems, their components and functions

There are no anthropogenic systems in the locality. The surrounding stations cannot be considered as systems (at present there are 9 temporary or permanent stations on King George Island; on James Ross Island there is none). The nearest station is situated more than 50 km in a linear distance (about 75 km by sea), and there is minimum or no mutual interaction of their functions (in relation to personnel). Since the Czech Antarctic station would be already the tenth on King George Island, a significant influence of a relatively great number of stations could manifest itself, for example, in an increased transport load on the sea around the island. No such risk is known on James Ross Island and the documentation will be based on data obtained straight from the terrain.

12.4 Aesthetic impacts on landscape

The station and all adjoining structures would influence the location's appearance, in particular observing the land from the sea, and also the coast from the northern cliffs. This impact cannot be entirely eliminated. The buildings and other structures would be painted red, which is a general convention at similar facilities and it also meets the safety requirements (finding the station at an emergency, reduced visibility, etc.).

All possible measures would be taken to minimize the visual impacts, including:
- all structures and buildings would be low (single story),
- structures would be appropriately dispersed (see build-up plan - Annex No.5),
- the station would be located on the coast and would then not form a landscape dominant,
- wind-powered generators would be placed on higher number of lower masts (5 m), furthermore, tilted during winter and strong winds.

13. Description of the operational safety risks

Even though the used materials usually have a fire-resistant finish, the fire within the structures is considered as the greatest risk. Because the personnel's shelter is a life necessity, the individual structures are situated at such distances as to prevent possible fire from spreading. Specific fire prevention measures are proposed for fuel storage (at the beginning of the season it would presumably store 6,000 l of oil and 500 l of gasoline).

During a fire, a larger amount of gaseous toxic emission would be released at once, originating especially from the insulation materials (polystyrene) and fillers of chipboard parts. Due to the fact that the character of such emission depends on temperature, it cannot be definitely pre-established what products, especially the volume of toxic substances, a fire would create.

Another possible risk is the leak of oil products, mainly oil, gasoline, lubricating oils and used oil fills for the generators and the outboard motor. Such leaks can occur
- in the fuel storage if the stored products are poorly secured or ill-manipulated
- during the manipulation of the diesel-generator and gasoline generators
-   during the transport of fuel to the structure containing the diesel-generator.

Another risk is the leak of chemical waste from the laboratory. Although the amount and toxicity of the substances commonly used in the laboratory will be low (mainly basic fixation of samples is considered), there will be prepared regulations for the treatment of these substances, their storage, including the storage of used substances.

14.  Minimization of the environmental impacts

Minimization of the environmental impacts of the construction and operation of the station was assured at two levels:

1. Through the selection of suitable locality. Particularly, the following aspects have been taken into account (with respect to the environment):
    -   the presence of other stations in surroundings,
    -   fauna and flora at the construction site,
    -   character of the sea as a recipient of liquid waste,
    -   possibility to use alternative energy sources,
    -   ventilation of the locality in respect of the dispersion of gas emissions.

The method of construction site selection is described in detail in Chapter 3.2 and following Annex No. 7.

2. Through materials and technologies used for construction and operation. Particularly by:
    -   construction of the station at the level of ground surface and thus minimizing the ground surface disturbance,
    -   energetically effective building materials which minimize the energy consumption,
    -   the station is equipped by electric appliances with low energy input,
    -   the high degree of alternative energy sources utilisation,
    -   places with the risk of oil products leaking are double secured against the release to the surrounding environment,
    -   economical utilisation of water from local sources,
    -   high-technology combustion of waste.

Technical data, applied materials, technologies and methods are supplied in Chapters No. 4, 6, 7, 9-13 and summarized in the Annex No. 10.

                                                                                                                                46
15. Description of the proposed measures to prevent, 
eliminate, minimize or compensate environmental 
impacts

The construction's location, concept and technology, maximum utilization of renewable energy 
sources (solar collectors, wind), waste disposal, etc., are proposed already in the project so as to 
minimize the environmental impacts. The key measures proposed in the project can be summarized 
as follows:
- the construction is situated on the terrain surface, without deep foundation
- the construction can be dismantled and completely transported away after its lifetime expires
- the construction is situated on the part of the coast not used by animals
- the construction maximizes the effort to utilize available renewable sources of energy
- in the locality, there will be deposited no waste which cannot disperse or degrade

Each new-coming group would be instructed at the beginning of the season by the head of the 
expedition as to the location of vegetation oases and the occurrence of animals so that such 
localities would be disturbed as little as possible

16. Description of methods and data used to the forecast 
impact

Technical parameters of the materials and equipment proposed for the station were used as the 
input data for the environmental impact evaluation as well as field data acquired during the terrain 
reconnaissance by the representatives of the investor and project designer. Additional data included 
the published results of the research carried out in the South Shetlands Archipelago area and James 
Ross Island area. Besides, the evaluation utilizes experience from the operation of other research 
stations in the area, including the final Greenpeace report (Anonymous 1994). Their base and the 
research conducted there was directed to acquiring experience with environmental impact 
minimization. Data collecting in field in January – February 2003 will help complete description of 
the details where the station will be situated. There will be learned vegetation cover in the building 
area, bird nesting places and mammal refuges which would be impacted.

All these data are used also by the planners during project development and are taken into 
account in the project. All the date collected before realization should be used for final CEE.

17. Outline of monitoring programme

Monitoring of the impacts of activities in the Antarctic area is compulsory; it has a given 
methodology and purpose derived from the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol. A specific 
monitoring programme is part of the construction plan (Anonymous 2000) and assumes the 
following observations and measurements:
- At the beginning of the construction, soil samples will be taken at the construction site and its 
environs in a grid of 100 x 100 m at a total area corresponding to the maximum short-term 
immission concentration 50 μg.m^(-3) according to the dispersion study, i.e. the grid will cover an 
area of up to 500 x 500 m (total of 25 samples). In this grid, samples will be taken annually at
47
the end of the research season, analyzed, and compared to the referential samples from the first 
year. The analyses will be directed at the contents of nitrogenous compounds in soils.

- At the beginning of the construction, a quantitative survey of bird nesting populations and a 
count of pinnipeds on the coast will take place within 1 km around the station. The counts will 
be taken every season during the station's operation and the results will be analyzed with 
respect to the station's operation possible impact on these populations.

- In the station's environs where its personnel can visit more frequently, i.e. at a radius within 2 
km from the station, a detailed monitoring of vegetation oases and further occurrence of 
vegetation (algae, lichens, mosses) will be carried out at the beginning of the construction and a 
detailed map of such areas will be drawn. At the beginning of each season, the head of the 
expedition will introduce the personnel to these oases and the rudiments of their conservation. 
These areas will be checked every season to assure that there occur no mechanical or other 
sorts of damage.

18.  Gaps and uncertainties affecting the CEE

The initial environmental evaluation utilizes all available sources for the construction's 
alternative locations suggested during terrain reconnaissance of King George Island in January 
2002, and results both published and unpublished from the Antarctic Peninsula area, the South 
Shetlands, and James Ross Island. The knowledge of Argentinean geologists and geomorphologists, 
namely Drs. R. J. Strelin, D. C. Torielli and J. M. Lirio, and employees or collaborators of IAA, 
was utilized for the assessment of localities on James Ross Island.

In the localities, for example, no measuring of noise load background was carried out, thus the 
noise load (especially from wind-generators, and at strong wind from diesel-generators) cannot be 
compared in relation to this background. The samples of soil for the detection of nitrogenous 
compounds have not been taken yet. The extent of eutrophication caused by washing-off of the 
excrements from bird nesting grounds to the sea is not known and cannot be compared to the 
loading caused by wastewater discharged from the station.

No accurate data on the occurrence and location of bird nesting grounds and pinniped assembly 
points in the wider surroundings of the station were available during the elaboration of the 
Documentation, except for the locality itself where nesting was not proved. However, all 
knowledge of localities (all alternatives) proves that no bird nesting colonies or large gathering 
grounds of pinnipeds occur in the here.

19.  Conclusions

The summary of factors for localisation:

1. Potential localities within the western coast of Antarctic Peninsula are not usable for the 
construction of the station due to the small extent of areas suitable for intended scientific 
programme.

2. The region of South Shetlands is in the context of the Antarctic continent characteristic among 
others by the important and diverse biota. Regarding the high number of stations in the region, the 
biota is logically protected by the declaration of many areas with special regimen. Both factors - 
i.e. high degree of exploitation on one hand and the presence of the protected areas on the other 
hand exclude the possibility to build one more station there.

48
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

3. Keeping in mind the facts noted in paragraphs 1. and 2., the effort in searching for the construction site was subsequently directed to the eastern coast of Antarctic Peninsula. Relatively large deglaciated area in the northern part of James Ross Island offers not only very good base for the scientific activities, but also in comparison with other previously considered sites enables to locate station at the place relatively isolated from geologically, geomorphologically, pedologically, biologically and ecologically important localities. Moreover, in context of the exposition to flow of air and sea water, site No. 4 also guarantees very good dispersion of pollution into the environment and thus further diminishes the concentration of pollutants which will be primarily minimized by the technical means.

We are aware of the fact that James Ross Island is a virgin territory. On the other hand the island offers exceptional environment for the considerate research of the almost recently and very quickly deglaciated territory. The locality No. 4 have been chosen just from the reason of the reduction of the adverse impacts. It is located considerably far from the vegetational oasis of the island as well as from the nesting colonies and concentration points of pinnipeds. From this point of view, it would be rather difficult to find similarly "considerate" locality at South Shetlands.

The evaluation of the most convenient locality from eight possible ones (Site No. 4) on the northern coast of James Ross Island (Ulu Peninsula) is quantitatively summarized in the lower given tabular outline whose compilation is successively described.

Our assessment is derived from a basic three-point scale, same as in Article 8 of the Protocol. This five-point scale (used in the Czech Republic) is more sensitive. It enables (according our opinion) distinguish beter and in more detail individual aspects of environmental impacts. That is further refined for an easier assessment of all aspects of the impacts. It does not assess the whole but all discovered partial influences (that can have very diverse impacts). The result takes into account the effect of the weakest chain link (the value of the strongest partial effect is at the same time the value of the total effect).

Definition of the scale with respect to  Article 8, explanations and examples:

0 - without verifiable impact
1 - unverifiable, but probable local reversible impact
→ in Protocol = less than a minor or transitory impact
Explanation:
      In the locality, there are activities with a measurable or observable negative influence, but their impact is not measurable.
Examples:
      - every combustion produces a certain amount of emissions, but at small sources immissions cannot be measured or their impact cannot be proven by existing methods
      - the construction would occupy a certain area, but under the known low density of bird nests, their loss cannot be proven
2 - verifiable reversible impact of local reach
3 - assumed irreversible impact of local reach
→ in Protocol = minor or transitory impact
Explanation:
      The negative impact would be pronounced locally, it would be measurable, of a small scale and intensity. The valid assumption is that after the activity's termination, the impact would not be recognized within years or tens of years, or its permanent effect would not influence the functions of the environment.
Examples:
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Immission impact (cumulative) would long increase NO     x    content in the substrate within the 
area defined by the immission study. The compounds would either wash out in time (reversible 
impact) or in a long-term prospect change pedogenetic processes within hundreds of square 
meters.

4 - assumed regional and supraregional irreversible impact   
5 - certain regional and supraregional irreversible impact   
→  in Protocol = more than minor or transitory impact   

Explanation:                                                                                           
Negative factor is measurable, influences wider region and its impact is measurable and 
verifiable, and changes the environmental conditions permanently.

Examples:                                                                                             
Release of styrofoam filling from electronics packing (in case they were used - but in fact 
they are not, it is just an example) to the environment and such waste dispersal would 
permanently pollute a large area.

Evaluation of the Site No. 4, James Ross Island according above mentioned criterions       


Impact                                                    Point evaluation
on inhabitants                                                  0
on ecosystems, their components and                             1
functions                                                       
on air and climate                                              
        emission                                                    2
        noise and vibration                                         2
on water                                                         1
        freshwater                                                  0
        sea                                                         1
on soil and geological conditions                              1-2
on flora and fauna                                              
        flora                                                   0-1
        fauna                                                   0-1
on ecosystems                                                    1
        terrestrial                                                 1
        marine                                                      2
on anthropogenic systems                                         0
other impacts                                                    0
large-area impacts in the landscape                              2
Legend:
0 - without verifiable impact
1 - unverifiable, but probable local reversible impact
2 - verifiable reversible impact of local reach
3 - assumed irreversible impact of local reach
4 - assumed regional and supraregional irreversible impact
5 - certain regional and supraregional irreversible impact

The table presents the expected greatest impacts that can be confronted given the proposed
construction technology and station's activities. The probability is that real impacts would be lower
or could be, in many cases, reduced. This would be achieved especially through the program of
monitoring and evaluating the impacts, and occasional alterations of the station's operation.

20. References/Sources

Anonymous, 1994: Treading Lightly: A Minimal Impact Antarctic Station. Greenpeace World Park
      Base Antarctica 1987-1992. Greenpeace International Amsterdam, 41 pp.
Anonymous, 2000: Česká vědecká stanice v Antarktidě. Projekt stavby pro stavební povolení. E - 
      Dokumentace stavebních a inženýrských objektů a provozních souborů. A) Průvodní zpráva. 
      Investprojekt Zlín 12 pp. B) Souhrnná technická zpráva. Investprojekt Zlín 93 pp.
Anonymous, 2000: Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica. COMNAP, 
      Hobart, 21pp.
Croxall JP, Steele WK, McInnes SJ & Prince PA (1995) Breeding distribution of the snow petrel 
      Pagodroma nivea. Marine Ornithology 23, 69-99.
Heap, 1994: Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System
Hoyo, J., Elliot, A., Sargatal. J., (eds.) 1992: Handbook of the Birds of the World, Volume I, 
      Ostrich to Ducks. Lynx Edicions Barcelona. 696 pp.
Hoyo, J., Elliot, A., Sargatal. J., (eds.) 1992: Handbook of the Birds of the World, Volume II, 
      Hoatzin to Auks. Lynx Edicions Barcelona. 821 pp.
Perrins, C., M., Lebreton, J-D., Hirons, (eds.)1991: Bird population studies. Relevance to 
      Conservation and management. Oxford, 683 pp.
Poncet S et al (ms) The distribution and abundance of blue-eyed cormorants. Draft ms for Scientific 
      Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (70pp). To be 
      submitted to Marine Ornithology.
Woehler EJ (ms). The distribution and abundance of Southern Ocean larids. Draft ms for Scientific 
      Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (80pp). To be 
      submitted to Marine Ornithology.
Woehler, E.J. & Croxall, J.P. 1997. The status and trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic seabirds. 
      Marine Ornithology 25, 43-66. [Originally tabled as SC-CAMLR-XV/BG/29]
Woehler, E.J. 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic penguins. 
      Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee, iv+76pp
Woehler, E.J. & Croxall, J.P. 1997. The status and trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic seabirds. 
      Marine Ornithology 25, 43-66. [Originally tabled as SC-CAMLR-XV/BG/29]
Woehler EJ (ms). The distribution and abundance of Southern Ocean larids. Draft ms for Scientific 
      Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Bird Biology Subcommittee (80pp). To be 
      submitted to Marine Ornithology.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Selected websites used as a source of other informations

http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/
http://www.anta.canterbury.ac.nz/
http://www.nerc-bas.ac.uk/public/magic/protected-area/
http://www.cold.loc.gov
http://www.aadc.aad.gov.au
http://www.npolar.no/cep/Content/cep_archive/CEP_V_Documents.htm
http://www.teamleyland.demon.co.uk/hillcat.htm
http://www.csmtisovec.sk

Annexes of CEE

Annex No. 1 Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with locations of sites assessed in connection with the intention's construction 53

Annex No. 2 Satellite photograph of J.Ross Island with the research interest area marked 54

Annex No. 3 Northern part of J.Ross Island – 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the final location 55

Annex No. 4 Aerial photograph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin) 56

Annex No. 5 Built-up plan of the station objects on the Site No. 4 57

Annex No. 6 Temperatures, wind direction and intensity on J.Ross Island (J. Strelin) 58

Annex No. 7 Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project 59

Annex No. 8 Emission and dispersion study 60

Annex No. 9 Noise study 70

Annex No.10 Report on project of the Czech research station in Antarctica 88

Annex No.11 Scott Trac 2000 – technical documentation 115
52
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 1

Area of Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula with marked area of sites assessed in connection with the intention of the station's construction

King George Island (left) and  James Ross Island (right)

53
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 2

Satellite image of James Ross Island with research interest area marked

10 km

54
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 3
North part of James Ross Island - 8 assessed alternatives, arrow pointed at the final location

10 km
55
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 4
Aerial photohraph of Site No. 4, construction site marked (photo by J. Strelin)

1 000 m
56
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 5

                                                                               CZECH-SCIENTIFIC STATION IN ANTARCTICA
                                                                               EXECUTED BY:  IN[?]S. SL[?]K[?]N[?]K
                                                                               1:200
                                                                               04/2003
         Station structures
                                                                 
57
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 6

Temperatures, wind direction and wind speed on James Ross Island
Source: Tishio Sone, Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University




                                                                      
58
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 7

Table of the analysis of compared alternatives of the project

                                                                                 | Σ       |                                      | Σ       | Σ       
                                                                                 |         |                                      |         |         
                | negative factors (subtracted from the total)                       |         | positive factors                     |         |         
                |--------------------------------------------------------------------|         |--------------------------------------|         |         
                | Risk of snow drift | soilflow | loading capacity *1 | bank *2 | Influence on vegetation | Influence on fauna | cumulation of stations |         | scientific interest | seasonal accessibility from sea | site for construction | exposure (wind, collectors) | water source |         |         
Turret Point    | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 1                      | -1      | 1                   | 1                               | 1                     | 1                           | 1            | 5       | 4       
Danco Isl.      | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 0                   | 1                               | 0                     | 1                           | 0            | 2       | 2       
James Ross I.   |                    |          |                     |         |                         |                    |                        |         |                     |                                 |                       |                             |              |         |         
Site No. 1.     | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 0                   | 1                               | 1                     | 0                           | 1            | 3       | 3       
Site No. 2.     | 0                  | 1        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -1      | 1                   | 1                               | 0                     | 1                           | 1            | 4       | 3       
Site No. 3.     | 0                  | 1        | 1                   | 1       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -3      | 0                   | 0                               | 0                     | 1                           | 0            | 1       | -2      
Site No. 4.     | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 1                   | 1                               | 1                     | 1                           | 1            | 5       | 5       
Site No. 5.     | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 0                   | 1                               | 0                     | 1                           | 1            | 3       | 3       
Site No. 6.     | 0                  | 1        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -1      | 0                   | 1                               | 1                     | 1                           | 0            | 3       | 2       
Site No. 7.     | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 1                   | 0                               | 1                     | 1                           | 1            | 4       | 4       
Site No. 8.     | 0                  | 0        | 0                   | 0       | 0                       | 0                  | 0                      | -0      | 1                   | 0                               | 1                     | 1                           | 1            | 6       | 4       

*1  of the assumed footing bottom                                     0 - factor evaluated as non significant for the project
*2  bank character with respect to disembarkation needs               1 - factors evaluated as strongly significant for the project

                                                                                 59
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 8

The influence of station's operation on air quality -
dispersion study

CONTENTS:

1.  INTRODUCTION ............................................................p. 60
2.  EMISSIONS ....................................................................p. 60
2.1 Waste incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine ....................................p. 60
2.2 Diesel-electric generator .......................................................p. 61
2.3 Portable gasoline generator ...................................................p. 62
3.  IMMISSION ....................................................................p. 62
3.1 Calculation method according the methodology SYMOS'97 ...............p. 63
3.2 Valid immision limits ...........................................................p. 63
4.  COMMENTARY TO THE RESULTS ...............................................p. 63
5.  ASSESMENT AND CONCLUSIONS ...............................................p. 64

1.INTRODUCTION

The operation of a proposed scientific station in Antarctica will also include production of supplementary electricity by a diesel-generator and treatment of solid municipal waste in a small incinerator of GOLAR 120 Marine type.

For proposed station were assessed two alternative sites, the first one located on the south coast of King George Island in the South Shetlands, the second on the north coast of James Ross Island.

Therefore, the station's operation will emit pollutants to the air. The dispersion study models and evaluates the possible influence of such emissions on the quality of air in the station's surroundings.

2. EMISSIONS

2.1 Waste incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine

For the quantification of emissions, available technical specifications present the amount of CO 131 mg/MJ produced during the incineration of solid waste. Based on the published heat output 175 kW (=0.175 MJ.s-1), emission flow of CO can be expected at 23 mg.s-1.

Available data do not permit direct calculation of emission flow of other basic pollutants (group 0 according to the Ministry of the Environment Regulation n. 117/1997 Coll., i.e. NOx, HC, etc.), or other eventual harmful substances (group 1 - 4).
For the incineration unit, a rough estimate of nitrogen oxides mass flow is deduced from the data 
on CO when considering the assumed ratio of CO and NO
x emission at incinerators of the given 
type, utilizing high temperature incineration. This is done since NO
x cannot be omitted at emission 
and immission evaluation (due to the ratio of emission relative amount and immission limit). In 
"Special Emission Standards for Waste Incinerators", etc.). Under these circumstances, the emission 
flow of NO
x is assessed at about 100 mg.s
-1 for the incineration of solid municipal waste in the 
GOLAR 120 Marine incinerator.

Combustible waste is expected to be disposed of in single portions of about 200 l approximately 
twice a month.

One summer season will, therefore, have about 9 incineration cycles. One 200 l portion of solid 
waste is incinerated in about 4 hours.

Based on the previous facts, the following values of CO and NO
x emissions can be assessed for 
the expected incineration of solid municipal waste in the incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine during 
seasonal operation of the Czech scientific station in Antarctica.

|                  | CO     | NO
x   |
|------------------|--------|---------|
| Total emission per season  kg/120 days | 2.981  | 12.960  |
| Emission mass flow g/hour     | 83     | 360     |

At the stated capacity of the output fan at 3000 m
3
.h
-1
, the emission concentrations of NO
x and CO 
in combustion products (corresponding to the mentioned mass flows) reach the level of 120 mg.m
-3
, 
and 28 mg.m
-3
. These levels are well below limits (see the above mentioned regulation).

Emission of other pollutants that may be produced by the given facility can also be considered at 
low below-limit levels due to the high-temperature incineration (up to 1400 °C). Considering the 
substances in group 1, especially the frequently discussed polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and 
dibenzofurans, one can say that under the given incineration conditions, and given the amount and 
character of combusted waste, the emission of these substances exceeding the limits is highly 
improbable. Facilities, such as GOLAR, have long been verified for the disposal of waste under the 
given conditions and there is no reason to disregard their emission standards.

2.2 Diesel-electric generator

So far, diesel generator HONDA EXT 12 with an output of 10 kW
el
. has been chosen as a 
supplementary source of electricity for the scientific station. Based on the available data, i.e. 
efficiency 0.8, consumption max. 271 g of oil per kWh, the hourly consumption of fuel can be 
deduced at 3.375 kg.h
-1
. The generator is supposed to cover about 45 % of the seasonal need for 
electricity (about 55 % will be supplied by the main source – wind generators). Therefore, the total 
operation time of the generator at the presumed input of 9 kW would be 1166 hours (if the season 
lasts 120 days).

The following emission data can be deduced when we use emission factors published by the 
Institute for the research of motor vehicles "Specific emission for the basic categories of cars and 
61
selected regimes, Prague 1995" (emission factors adjusted for the technical level of motors after year 2000):

|          | CO  | NO<sub>x</sub> | C<sub>x</sub>H<sub>y</sub> | solid pollutants |
|----------|-----|---------------|------------------|------------------|
| Total emission kg/120 days | 128 | 90            | 38               | 28               |
| Emission mass flow g/hour   | 110 | 77            | 35               | 22               |

2.3 Portable gasoline generators

Based on the available data, the following emission flow values can be deduced for one operating generator:

|          | CO   | NO<sub>x</sub> | C<sub>x</sub>H<sub>y</sub> | solid pollutants |
|----------|------|---------------|------------------|------------------|
| Emission mass flow g/hour   | 1570 | 37            | 23               | -                |

Certainly, total emission per season cannot be presented.

In order to provide the full picture, it should be mentioned that there will be emissions in connection with the presumed operation of motor boats.

3. IMMISSION

Potential immission of nitrogen oxides is calculated as a part of the evaluation of the scientific station's possible influence on air quality in its surroundings. Model calculation is conducted according to the valid methodology SYMOS' 97 ("Methodical directions of the department of air protection of the Ministry of the Environment for the calculation of air pollution from point and mobile sources", Prague 1998).

We assess three situations - operation of a diesel-electric generator, operation of an incinerator, and simultaneous operation of both facilities.

For the given locality, complete meteorological data (i.e. detailed wind rose at atmosphere's stability classes) that are necessary for the calculation of statistically bound immission parameters, such as average annual concentration IH<sub>r</sub>, or total duration of limit exceeding, are not available. Therefore, only a model calculation of maximum short term immission concentrations of NO<sub>x</sub> was carried out. The reduction of the outcomes of the dispersion study in this case does not lead to an abatement of the quality of presented assessment. Emission flows of both assessed sources almost insignificant from the point of view of possible values of average annual concentrations that were calculated from emission data. We can say that the IH<sub>r</sub> values of NO<sub>x</sub> would be at the level of 10-15 μg.m<sup>-3</sup> at maximum, which is well below immission limit (80 μg.m<sup>-3</sup>). Similarly, the total number
62
of hours exceeding the limit for average 30-minute concentrations of NO     x    would by no means 
exceed the permissible 5% annually anywhere around the station.

A model assessment is carried out for nitrogen oxides. This pollutant definitely reaches the most 
unfavorable ratio between relative emission amount and immission limit.

3.1 Calculation method according to the methodology SYMOS' 97.

SYMOS' 97 methodology is based on a static gauss model of exhaust plume dispersion at stability 
classification of atmosphere according to Bubník and Koldovský. Side dispersion of polluting 
admixture in the axis of exhaust plume (depending on side deviations) is determined by gauss 
division in analytically formulated computational regulation (Sutton's formula).

According to the available data, the model covers the assessed line sources as follows (see the 
above chapter "Emission"):
- Incinerator GOLAR 120 Marine - construction height 2.5 m, heat yield 0.1 MW, emission 
      mass flow of NO     x    100 mg.s     -1    ;
- Diesel-generator - construction height 2 m, heat yield 0.001 MW (low value takes into account 
      horizontal layout of the exhaust), emission mass flow of NO     x    21 mg.s     -1    .

A model immission calculation is carried out in a detailed square grid of referential points with 20 
m pitch. The calculation comprises specific orography of the given locality at standard detail 
corresponding to the grid of referential points.

Calculated values are interpolated and further processed (utilizing GIS) to the final graphic 
outcomes - maps of the interest area covered by color restricted areas of the occurrence of 
individual value ranges of modeled immission parameters.

3.2 Valid immission limits:

Nitrogen and carbon oxides (for comparison) have the following immission limits set by the 
provision of FVŽP, October 1, 1991, following the Act No 309/1991 Coll.

 
|                | Immission limits (μg.m     -3    ) |                  | 
 |                | Average annual | Average 30-minute | Permissible number of 
 |                | concentration IH     r    | concentration IH     k    | hours per year when 
 |                |                 |                 | exceeding IH     k   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| NO     x          | 80              | 200             | 438               |
| CO             | -               | 10 000          | 438               |

4. COMMENTARY TO THE RESULTS

As already stated above, the possible influence of the proposed scientific station's operation is 
assessed via a model calculation of maximum short-term immission concentrations of nitrogen 
oxides in the surface layer of atmosphere.

Maximum short-term immission concentrations are not statistically defined parameters, i.e. they 
are not averages as are other immission attributes but maximum theoretically possible values that 
can be reached by immission concentration at a certain point.

63
In this case, therefore, we model the situation of persistence of the most adverse dispersion conditions when the flow direction causes maximum transport of pollutants from the dominant source to individual referential points. The value of maximum short-term immission concentration at each point in the interest area in fact represents different directions of flow - different meteorological situations. Final distribution of maximum short-term concentration values in the presented area is, therefore, an integration of all the most adverse meteorological situations (from the point of view of every single referential point). In this context, maximum short-term concentrations are always referred to in plural in contrast to statistically bound average annual concentration.

We can add that the comparison of maximum theoretically possible immission concentration with the IH
limit (average 30-minute concentration) automatically presupposes a stable half-an-hour duration of the above described dispersion conditions and flow direction without direction or speed fluctuations in order to reach the predicted immission maxima. In reality, such situation never exists. It means that the calculated immission maximum can be in reality reached only as an immediate value. The average 30-minute sequence of concentrations is almost always lower.

4. ASSESSMENT AND CONCLUSIONS

Situation - operation of diesel-generator:

The eventual occurrence of slightly limit-exceeding values of NO
immission concentrations in the surface layer of atmosphere, i.e. 200 - 250 μg.m
(red color), can be encountered in the immediate surroundings of the station within app. 50 m. This concentration results from a presumed lower plume rise from the horizontal exhaust (at lower value of NO
mass flow used).

Nevertheless, it should be noted that the situation (or collection of situations for different flow directions - see commentary to the results) corresponds to very adverse dispersion conditions with a noticeable thermal inversion at very slight to no flow intensity. Under normal dispersion conditions, the calculated NO
immission concentrations at a given situation are significantly below limit.

Further, it is possible to presume that the actual NO
mass flow produced by the assessed modern facility will be slightly lower than the one used for the calculations. With respect to the information source, another was not available, the NO
mass flow value used for the calculation can be considered to totally overestimate any actual occurrence.

The result we obtained does not show any possibility of significant exceeding the IH
NO
immission limit. In connection with the above stated facts (see commentary to the results), the operation of the diesel-generator in the given locality can be considered permissible with respect to the presumed influence on air quality (even though the generator might be put into operation at lower flow intensities).

Situation - operation of incineration unit:

A favorable result, even if a significantly higher value of NO
mass flow is used in comparison to the proceeding situation, can be expected due to the higher thermal rise of hot emissions. It is possible that slightly above-limit values of immission concentrations will be encountered within 30 m around the structure containing the incinerator.

Except for the overestimation of the used mass flow, the facts stated at the assessment of the proceeding situation can be repeated. Furthermore, the incinerator's operation is not limited by the occurrence of lower flow intensity.

64
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Situation - simultaneous operation of incinerator and diesel-generator:

The results basically correspond to the unification of both above assessed situations.

In general, we can say that except under extremely adverse dispersion conditions the  incinerator 
can be operated simultaneously with the diesel generator, if necessary.

Conclusion

Model assessment of the eventual impact of the future operation of the Czech scientific station in 
Antarctica on air quality shows that the implementation of this project will not bring an 
unacceptable immission load in the given locality.

References:
SYMOS 97, Methodical direction of the Czech Ministry of Environment (Division Atmosphere 
Protection) for computation of air pollution (the point and mobile sources) - in Czech. Praha 
1998

Krobl, L.: Specific emissions for basic categories of motor cars and representative types of their 
operating regime. UVMV/TUV Bayern, ltd. - in Czech, Praha 1995

Dvorak, M.: Evaluation of Winter seasons as a consequence of circulation factors in the central part 
of South Shetlands. Diploma thesis, Masaryk University Brno, Brno 2000

Other information and map sources supplied by the applicant:
Teamtec - GOLAR Incinerators, Technical Specification, Type OG 120 C
Technical data  - diesel-generator HONDA EXIT 12
               - portable gasoline generator
Description of the proposed scientific station
Map of the area of interest:

King George Island - Turret Point





Czech scienentific station 
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact
Operation of diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm 
immission concentration 
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m^(-3))

65
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

King George Island -Turret Point


                                   < 20
                                   20 - 40
                                   40 - 60
                                   60 - 80
                                   80 - 100
                                   100 - 130
                                   130 - 160
                                   160 - 200
                                   200 - 250

Czech scienentific station
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact
Operation of incineration unit

Maximum short-therm
immission concentration
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m-3)

King George Island -Turret Point


                                   < 20
                                   20 - 40
                                   40 - 60
                                   60 - 80
                                   80 - 100
                                   100 - 130
                                   130 - 160
                                   160 - 200
                                   200 - 250

Czech scienentific station
in Antarctica

Model assessment of impact
Simultaneous operation
of incineration unit and
diesel-generator

Maximum short-therm
immission concentration
of Nitrogen oxides (μg.m-3)

66
James Ross Island - "Site No.- 4"

Maximum short-term immission concentration of Nitrogen oxides 
(No
x
) (μg.m
−3
). Model assessment of impact operation of diesel 
generator.

                                                  < 20
                                              20 - 40
                                              40 - 60
                                              60 - 80
                                              80 - 100
                                              100 - 130
                                              130 - 160
                                              160 - 200
                                              200 - 250

Česká vědecká 
stanice v Antarktidě -
modelovany vliv na ovzduší

Situace: 
provoz dieselagregátu

Oxidy dusiku - NOx 
Maximální krátkodobé 
imisní koncentrace v 
přízemním ovzduší (μg.m
−3
)
67
James Ross Island - "Site No.- 4"

Maximum short-term immission concentration of Nitrogen oxides 
(No_(x)) (μg.m^(-3)). Model assessment of impact operation of 
incineration unit.


                                   < 20
                                   20 - 40
                                   40 - 60
                                   60 - 80
                                   80 - 100
                                   100 - 130
                                   130 - 160
                                   160 - 200
                                   200 - 250

Česká vědecká 
stanice v Antarktidě - 
modelovaný vliv na ovzduší

Situace: 
provoz spalovny odpadů

Oxidy dusíku - NOx 
Maximální krátkodobé 
imisní koncentrace v 
přízemním ovzduší (μg.m^(-3))

68
James Ross Island - "Site No.- 4"

Maximum short-term immission concentration of Nitrogen oxides 
(No_(x)) (μg.m^(-3)). Model assessment of impact operation of 
incineration unit and diesel generator.


                                                      < 20
                                                      20 - 40
                                                      40 - 60
                                                      60 - 80
                                                      80 - 100
                                                      100 - 130
                                                      130 - 160
                                                      160 - 200
                                                      200 - 250

Česká vědecká
stanice v Antarktidě -
modelovaný vliv na ovzduší

Situace:
současný provoz
spalovny odpadů a
dieselagregátu

Oxidy dusíku - NOx
Maximální krátkodobé
imisní koncentrace v
přízemním ovzduší (μg.m^(-3))

69
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 9

Acoustic study

CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................... 70
2. SOURCE MATERIALS ....................................................... 71
2.1. Source materials delivered by the customer............................... 71
3. Prerequisites for the realization ................................................ 71
3.1. Area of interest........................................................................... 71
3.2. Conditions for the study's realization ......................................... 71
3.2.1. General characteristics ........................................................ 71
3.2.2. Point sources ........................................................................ 72
3.2.3 Description of calculation points ............................................ 79
4. ACOUSTIC SITUATION ............................................................ 81
4.1. Noise propagation from point sources to the outer surroundings ........ 82
4.2. Noise propagation from a portable gasoline generator to the outer surroundings ....... 82
5. CONCLUSION ........................................................................... 83
6. REFERENCES .......................................................................... 844
7. ATTACHMENTS ........................................................................ 84
8. WASTE INCINEERATOR ........................................................... 87

1. INTRODUCTION

This study aims to determine the area impacted by the noise produced by point sources located on the structures within the Czech scientific station in Antarctica to the surroundings.

This study deals with two acoustic situations :

1.Situation during the operation of the scientific station. The assessment was calculated on the basis of acoustic features of point sources located on the structures within the area of the scientific station.
2. Situation during the use of portable diesel-generator. The assessment was calculated on the basis 
of acoustic features of the portable gasoline-powered generator.

2. SOURCE MATERIALS
2.1. Source materials delivered by the customer

The customer delivered to the compiler the following source materials :
1.Built-up plan of the Czech scientific station in Antarctica, 1:1000
2.Cross-section of the accommodation structure SO 01, 1:125
3.Longitudinal section of the accommodation structure SO 01, 1:125
4.Cross-sections of the operational containers SO 02 - 06, 1:100
5.Excerpts from the technical report and project
6.Photographs with a transparency representing the nesting and migration of fauna.

Other sources used for the study's preparation SO are listed in Chapter References.

3. PREREQUISITES FOR THE REALIZATION
3.1. Area of interest

The area of interest is situated on a rocky sea coast; the Czech scientific station is in its 
center. The area of interest is formed by a circle with a radius of 200 m. There is a cargo container 
SO 05 - Diesel generator in its center. The generator is the most significant source of noise.

The area of the scientific station comprises two basic types of structures. The first type is the 
main accommodation structure with dimensions of 26.53 x 10.53 x 3.15 m. The other type 
comprises eight cargo containers with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m. The list of individual 
structures that constitute the scientific station and their acoustic features are presented inpter 3.2.2.

3.2. Conditions for the study's realization
3.2.1. General characteristics

Acoustic situations were assessed by calculation. Software HLUK+, version 5.02, was used 
for the calculation. The program facilitates the calculation of the levels of acoustic pressure A 
generated by industrial sources of noise in the outer environment. The program contains a 
procedure published in "Source materials for proposing and assessing of industrial constructions, 
part 3 – construction acoustics" (M. Meller, J. Stěnička, VÚPS Praha, 1985 in Czech).

Program HLUK+ requires entering the type of terrain when creating a calculation 
environment. A global choice of "reflective terrain" or "absorptive terrain" is used, or an attribute 
of "immersed terrain" can be used. "Reflective terrain" causes minimum attenuation of sound 
waves. It is represented by concrete or asphalt areas and water surface. On the contrary, during the 
propagation of a sound wave above an "absorptive terrain", the attenuation of sound waves is 
greater. Such a terrain comprises, for example, grass areas, fields of grain, and other agricultural 
crops. In our case, the area of interest for noise propagation can be with characterized as a reflective 
terrain with a minimum percentage of acoustically absorptive areas.
3.2.2. Point sources

Because no specific acoustic parameters of the individual sources of noise were available, the calculation utilizes values set according to a common knowledge of acoustic features of similar facilities. Table 1 of this chapter presents the assumed acoustic features of the individual sources of noise. The following outline presents only the basic characteristics of individual structures and their sources of noise or further calculations of parameters that are later used as input acoustic parameters at the calculation program HLUK+.

Survey of the scientific station's structures:

> Structure SO 01 - Operation and accommodation building

This is the main building of the station with dimensions of 26.53 x 10.53 m. It is covered with a pent roof with an approximate 5% slope (height 3.15 − 2.6 m). The building is designed as a one-story structure erected from the K-Kontrol construction system. The system comprises sandwich panels consisting of two OSB chipboards with an inner insulation layer of self-extinguishing polystyrene. Floor and roof panels are 320 mm, external walls 265 mm thick. The panel will be 170 mm thick where a solar collector wall will be installed.

The alternative of the surface finish of the outer walls with a coating of waterproof plywood 6 mm thick on lath grill is preferred.

Sources of noise:
- According to the project developer, the ventilation engine room contains app. 6 pieces of small equipment with the level of acoustic pressure A **L** **pA** = **40 dB** within **1 m** from the source and **2** pieces of **exhaust and suction fans** with the level of acoustic pressure A **L** **pA** = **50 dB** within **1 m** from the source. **On** the suction and exhaust lattices from the eastern side of the structure SO 01 towards the incinerator (SO 02), the level of acoustic pressure A is **L** **pA** = **40 dB** in **1 m** from the source.

Based on the computations according to the equations (1) - (3) of this chapter, the level of acoustic pressure A inside the engine room was determined as L_(pA )= 58.4 dB. With respect to the fact that **the soundproofness of the outer coat of the structure SO 01 is R_(W )= 45 dB**, the value of acoustic pressure A in the outer surroundings according to the equation (4) of this chapter is L_(2 )= 7.4 dB, which is an absolutely negligible value. Therefore, the model computation takes into account only the suction and exhaust port from the eastern side of the structure SO 01 with the level of acoustic pressure A **L** **pA** = **40 dB** in **1 m** from the source.

> Structure SO 02 - Waste treatment

The structure is located with a direct relationship to the main building of the station. It is accessible through a technical entrance from the eastern front, directly from an entrance ramp. The structure comprises a modified cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.

Sources of noise:
-   Incinerator OG 120 SW, produced by TEAMTEC Norway, with two sources of noise - **a pump of the heating oil with a burner and an exhaust fan for combustion gases** with a value of acoustic output of the source app. **L** **_(WA)_ **= **40 – 50 dB**, which will operate once every 10 days with approximately a 4-hour combustion cycle.
-   **Wind-powered generator** with the level of acoustic pressure A **L** **_(pA)_ **= **38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 03 - Generators storage

This is a modified cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA) = **38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 04 - Engine room of power supply equipment
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 05 - Diesel generator
Structure SO 05 is the most significant source of noise within the station's area. It is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m, without windows, with two permanently mounted diesel generators for the production of electricity and two mobile diesel generators. The outer coat of the container comprises a trapeze sheet 2 mm thick followed by a mineral matting 50 mm thick with a perforated aluminum sheet.

Sources of noise:
-   Two permanently mounted diesel generators of Spanish origin with the electricity output of 12.6 kW. Only one generator at a time will be in operation for 24 hours. The other diesel generator will serve as an electricity backup. As the project developer states, no authentic noise parameters were available, therefore, a comparable value of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **90 dB** in **1m**, stated by the producer Catterpilar for 12.6 kW, was used for this source of noise. The exhaust of the diesel generator protrudes horizontally from the wall 2.5 m above the ground. Air suction is located on a suction grating with dimensions of 150 x 210 mm, which is situated in the upper part of the front against the entrance door. Below this suction grating, i.e. in the lower part of the front, and above the entrance door, there are air grates. These are 50 x 150 mm big and have holes 10 mm in diameter. These holes represent 50 % of the area. The air grate is further covered with blinds from the outside.

-   Two portable gasoline-powered generators with a total operation time app. 10 hours a week outside the scientific station's area. Only one generator at a time will be in operation. The project developer states the value of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= **90 dB** in **1m**.

Using the above mentioned data, the following values of acoustic parameters were calculated as valid for the structure SO 05. Based on these computations, the calculation program HLUK+ utilized input values of acoustic parameters, which are summarized in Table 1.

According to the equation (1), the level of acoustic output was calculated as **L_(WA )= 98 dB**

L_(pA )=L_(WA )+10log(Q/4πr^2)     [dB]                  (1)

where:
L_(pA )..... level of acoustic pressure A in dB (L_(pA )=90 dB),
L_(WA ) ..... acoustic output of a sound source in dB,
Q ....... factor of directionality of a sound source in a given environment and direction (Q = 2),
4πr^2 ..... wave front of a spherical sound wave in m^2,
73
r ........ distance between the immission point and the center of the source of sound (r = 
1m).

According to the equation (2), the level of acoustic pressure A inside the container was 
calculated as L_(pA) = **93 dB**

                      L_(pA) = L_(wA) +10 log (( Q   +  4(1-α) ))[dB]              (2)
                                  (4πr^(2)         A

where:
L_(pA) .... level of acoustic pressure inside the container,
L_(wA) ... level of acoustic output of the diesel generator (L_(wA )= 98 dB),
Q ...... factor of directionality of a sound source in a given environment and direction (Q = 
2),
α ....... factor of absorptivity (α = 0.25),
A ....... absorptivity of area (A = 18.6 m^(2)).

According to the equation (3), the absorptivity of the area was calculated as **A = 18.6 m^(2)**

                                 A = ∑Sα     [m^(2)]                            (3)
where:
A .... absorptivity of area in m^(2),
S ..... inner surfaces of the container in m^(2),
α ..... factor of absorptivity (α = 0.25).

With respect to the construction of the container and the value of the level of acoustic 
pressure inside the container, not only the individual openings in the container walls but also the 
walls themselves are considered as sources of noise. According to the equation (4), the levels of 
acoustic pressure on the container walls are calculated as **L_(2 )= 57 dB**

                               L_(2 )= L_(pA) - R'_(w )- 6     [dB]                 (4)
where:
L_(2 ).... level of acoustic pressure on the container wall in dB,
L_(pA) .... level of acoustic pressure inside the container (L_(pA )= 93 dB),
R_(w )... soundproofness of the outer coat (R_(w )= 30 dB).

The soundproofness of the outer coat was assessed as follows:

By calculating the air soundproofness with a technical method according to Watterson [1], a 
minimum construction value of the soundproofness of a trapeze aluminum sheet 2 mm thick was set 
as R_(w)' = 22 dB. This value was then increased by a professional estimate to R_(w )= 30 dB, because 
of the influence of the filling from the mineral matting 50 mm thick and the perforated aluminum 
sheet, which is used on the inner walls of the container.

> Structure SO 06/1 - Intermediate storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
• Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A **L_(pA )= 38 dB** in **1 m** from 
the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 06/2 - Fuel storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.

74
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA)=**38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 06/3 - Spare parts storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA)=**38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 07 - Water intake and distribution
This is an accumulation basin of approximately 3 m^(3), which will be obtained by deepening the streambed to approximately 80 cm.
Sources of noise:
- Cold service water pump with a reservoir (DARLING), the project developer states the value of acoustic pressure below L_(pA)=**45 dB** in **1 m** from the source.

> Structure SO 08 - Waste water treatment
There is a wastewater pipeline draining sewage water from the operation building and a grinding pump in combination with a slush pump pumping the sewage from an underground reservoir, which is located beside accommodation structure SO 01, and has a lid.
Sources of noise:
- Slush and grinding pump AS PUMP 800/1500; the project developer states the value of acoustic output L_(WA) up to **60 dB**. The pumps will run in minute cycles 5 x 2 minutes per hour.

> Structure SO 09 - Watercraft storage
This is a cargo container with dimensions of 6.06 x 2.44 x 2.59 m.
Sources of noise:
- Wind-powered generator with the level of acoustic pressure A L_(pA)=**38 dB** in **1 m** from the source, which is anchored to the container on a 6 m tall mast.

> Structure SO 10 - Launching ramp
The structure's foundation is a leveled plain of the existing terrain that allows access to and from the coast; the terrain will be leveled merely with local coarse gravel and aggregates to the flattest possible surface.
There are no sources of noise.

The following Table 1 contains assumed point sources of noise that are located on the scientific station's structures. Acoustic parameters are presented in the same form in which they were used in the calculation program HLUK+. Figure 1 represents the location of individual point sources on the structures of the scientific station. Figure 2 shows a detailed location of point sources on the noisiest structure, SO 05 - Diesel generator.

Acoustic parameters of point sources can be put in the program HLUK+ as follows:
-  L_(r) .....level of acoustic pressure [dB] in distance r [m]
-  L_(2) .... level of acoustic pressure [dB] with source area S [m^(2)]
-  L_(W) ... level of acoustic output [dB]

Table 1: Assumed sources of noise located on the structures of the scientific station
                                                                                                          75
Source number  | Description of the source of noise | Acoustic parameters
-------------------------------------------------------------
P1 - P8       | Wind generators on structures SO 02- 6/1, 06/2, 06/3, 09. | L _{r} = 38 dB in 1 m
P9            | Diesel generator exhaust on the wall of structure SO 05 | L _{W} = 98 dB S = 0.02 m ^{2}
P10           | Suction grating of the diesel generator on the wall of structure SO 05 | L _{2} = 84 dB S = 0.05 m ^{2}
P11, P12      | Ventilation openings on the walls of structure SO 05 (diesel generator) | L _{2} = 84 dB S = 0.005 m ^{2}
P13 - 17      | Peripheral walls and ceiling of structure SO 05 (diesel generator) | L _{2} = 57 dB
P18, P19      | Suction and exhaust from the ventilation engine room on the wall of structure SO 01 | L _{r} = 40 dB in 1 m
P20           | Slush and grinding pump structure SO 08 | L _{W} = 60 dB
P21           | Outlet of the combustion gases suction fan on the wall of structure SO 02 | L _{W} = 50 dB
P22           | Water pump structure SO 07 | L _{r} = 45 dB in 1 m
76
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 1: Location of point sources on the structures of the scientific station


"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktide", Terén-odzazivý, Rok=2002.





Legend:





      Calculation point





      Built-up area





      Source of noise
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 2: Location of point sources on the structure SO 05 - Diesel generator

"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktid[e"], Terén-odz[raziv]oj, Rok=2002.


                                                                 AM7.ZAD                           80   M=1:250

Legend:




                                                                 Calculation point




                                                                 Built-up area




                                                                 Source of noise


                                                                                                                  78
3.2.3. Description of calculation points

The following Table 2 contains the description of points used for the calculation of noise from point sources located on the structures of the scientific station, and Figure 3 represents their location. The points are divided according to cardinal points. The starting point for locating calculation points is the noisiest place within the station, i.e. structure SO 05 - Diesel generator. Points 1, 11, 18 and 26 are located 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 and point 14 is 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 01. The following points are located every 10 m in an area where greater noise can be expected, i.e. in the area app. 50 m within the source, and every 50 m in the remaining area so that the area of interest is covered with calculation points within app. 200 m from the source. All points are located 1, 2 and 3 m high above the ground.

Table 2: Location of calculation points

| Number | Description of the point |
| --- | --- |
| 1        | Northward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 2 - 7    | Northward, located every 10 m from point 1       |
| 8 - 10   | Northward, located every 50 m from point 7       |
| 11       | Eastward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 12, 13   | Eastward, located every 10 m from point 11       |
| 14       | Eastward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 01 |
| 15 - 17  | Eastward, located every 50 m from point 14       |
| 18       | Southward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 19 - 21  | Southward, located every 10 m from point 18      |
| 22 - 25  | Southward, located every 50 m from point 21      |
| 26       | Westward, 2 m from the plaster of structure SO 05 |
| 27 - 30  | Westward, located every 10 m from point 26       |
| 31 - 33  | Westward, located every 50 m from point 30       |
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Figure 3: Location of calculation points within the area of the scientific station and its surroundings
"Ceska vedecka stanice v Antarktide", Terén=odrazivý, Rok=2002.

                                                                                                     
                                                        10                                                   
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
200                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                        23b                  
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                        9                    
                                33                                                                         
                                                                 32                                            
                                                                 31              7                           
                                                                 30              6                           
                                                                              5                           
                                                        28      29              4                           
                                                        27                      3                           
                                                                 26              2                           
                                                                 1  18  19          1                           
                                                P20     P21 13  12              
                                                                 11  P14  P15      15                          
                                                                                                 16         
                                                                                                 17         
                                                                 22                                            
                                                                 23                                            
                                                                 24                                            
                                                                 25                                            
                                                                                                     
-100                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
                        ANT7.ZAD                -100                0                   100                 200   
                                                                                                    M=1:4000 
Legend:



    Calculation point

    Built-up area

Px    
    Source of noise
4. ACOUSTIC SITUATION

4.1.  Noise propagation from point sources to the outer surroundings

Based on the above presented input acoustic parameters, a quasi-three-dimensional model of 
noise propagation from point sources, located on the structures of Czech scientific station in 
Antarctica, to the outer surroundings was created using the calculation program HLUK+.

Table 3 presents the final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in the 
calculation points.

Table 3: Final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in the calculation points generated by point 
sources at the scientific station

                                                                                                      
|          North                      |          East                      |          South                      |          West                      |
| Number  | Height [m] | L   [dB]    | Number  | Height [m] | L   [dB]    | Number  | Height [m] | L   [dB]    | Number  | Height [m] | L   [dB]    |
|         |            |  Aeq        |         |            |  Aeq        |         |            |  Aeq        |         |            |  Aeq        |
|---------|------------|-------------|---------|------------|-------------|---------|------------|-------------|---------|------------|-------------|
|    1    |     1      |   63.2      |   11    |     1      |   53.4      |   18    |     1      |   55.2      |   26    |     1      |   56.6      |
|         |     2      |   64.0      |         |     2      |   54.9      |         |     2      |   55.7      |         |     2      |   57.8      |
|         |     3      |   64.0      |         |     3      |   55.6      |         |     3      |   56.0      |         |     3      |   57.9      |
|    2    |     1      |   51.7      |   12    |     1      |   43.8      |   19    |     1      |   43.6      |   27    |     1      |   44.7      |
|         |     2      |   51.8      |         |     2      |   44.2      |         |     2      |   43.8      |         |     2      |   45.0      |
|         |     3      |   51.8      |         |     3      |   44.7      |         |     3      |   44.6      |         |     3      |   45.5      |
|    3    |     1      |   47.0      |   13    |     1      |   43.8      |   20    |     1      |   39.1      |   28    |     1      |   40.9      |
|         |     2      |   47.0      |         |     2      |   43.9      |         |     2      |   39.2      |         |     2      |   41.2      |
|         |     3      |   47.1      |         |     3      |   40.9      |         |     3      |   39.9      |         |     3      |   40.8      |
|    4    |     1      |   44.2      |   14    |     1      |   24.9      |   21    |     1      |   36.2      |   29    |     1      |   38.3      |
|         |     2      |   44.1      |         |     2      |   28.6      |         |     2      |   36.3      |         |     2      |   38.4      |
|         |     3      |   44.2      |         |     3      |   32.1      |         |     3      |   36.9      |         |     3      |   38.6      |
|    5    |     1      |   42.0      |   15    |     1      |   27.0
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Evaluation:

The most significant source of noise within the area of the scientific station is structure SO 
05 - Diesel generator. The highest values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A will be in 
northwards from structure SO 05, where app. 40 dB will be reached at a distance of 50 m from this 
source.

At 200 m from the structure SO 05 in all cardinal points, the values of acoustic pressure A 
will oscillate between app. 28 dB and 20 dB.

The calculation was carried out for low acoustic background as the acoustic background is 
not known. Due to the fact that the area of the scientific station will be located on the sea coast 
where other factors with possibly high noise, such as wind and surf, may apply, the noise from the 
point sources located on the scientific station's structures can be camouflaged.

4.2.    Noise propagation from a portable gasoline generator to the outer surroundings

It is impossible to create a quasi-three-dimensional model of noise propagation which would 
characterize purely specific situations because the portable gasoline generator will be used in 
different places, i.e. in different terrain. Therefore, for this source of noise, a plain model was 
created that would show the probable manner of noise propagation from the portable gasoline 
generator to the surroundings. Based on the previous characterization of the area of interest, 
reflective terrain was chosen for the calculation.

Table 4 presents final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in calculation points 
around the portable gasoline generator. Calculation points are located as follows: points 1 - 5 are 
situated every 10 m from the source, points 6 - 8 every 50 m starting from point 5 so that an area 
within 200 m from the source of noise is covered.

Evaluation:

When a portable gasoline generator with the value of acoustic pressure A L_(pA )= 90 dB in 1m 
is used, the value of equivalent level of acoustic pressure A will be 47 dB at a distance of 200 m 
from the source. Since the exact location where the portable gasoline generator would be used is not 
known, and it might disturb local fauna, covering and noise insulating are recommended.

82
Table 4: Final values of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A in calculation points around the portable gasoline generator.

| Number | Distance from source [m] | Height [m] | L<sub>Aeq</sub> [dB] |
|--------|--------------------------|------------|--------------------|
|        |                          | 1          | 72.9               |
| 1      | 10                       | 2          | 72.8               |
|        |                          | 3          | 72.6               |
|        |                          | 1          | 66.9               |
| 2      | 20                       | 2          | 66.9               |
|        |                          | 3          | 66.8               |
|        |                          | 1          | 63.4               |
| 3      | 30                       | 2          | 63.4               |
|        |                          | 3          | 63.4               |
|        |                          | 1          | 60.9               |
| 4      | 40                       | 2          | 60.9               |
|        |                          | 3          | 60.9               |
|        |                          | 1          | 59.0               |
| 5      | 50                       | 2          | 59.0               |
|        |                          | 3          | 59.0               |
|        |                          | 1          | 53.0               |
| 6      | 100                      | 2          | 53.0               |
|        |                          | 3          | 53.0               |
|        |                          | 1          | 49.5               |
| 7      | 150                      | 2          | 49.5               |
|        |                          | 3          | 49.5               |
|        |                          | 1          | 47.0               |
| 8      | 200                      | 2          | 47.0               |
|        |                          | 3          | 47.0               |

## 5. CONCLUSION

_Based on the results and analyses in this study, the conclusion is:_

The overall impact of the scientific station's operation on its surroundings is acoustically insignificant. The most significant source of noise within the whole area of the scientific station is structure SO 05 - Diesel generator, due to which the values of acoustic pressure A within the station's area will range from 64 dB to 40 dB. At a distance of 200 m from the structure SO 05, the values of acoustic pressure A will range only from app. 28 to 20 dB. As the scientific station would be located on the sea coast, the noise from point sources situated on the structures within the scientific station may get camouflaged by acoustic background, i.e. by wind and surf.

When a portable gasoline generator with the value of equivalent level of acoustic pressure A L<sub>pA</sub> = 90 dB in 1m is used, the value of equivalent level of acoustic pressure A will be 47 dB at a distance of 200 m therefore, covering and noise insulating of the generator or using a less noisy source are recommended.

This study is only primary material. It is necessary to specify the acoustic calculations after the final location of the station and actual technologies are known.
Note: The conditions of the station's exact location are not known. Therefore, neither the 
acoustic features of the terrain, i.e. its absorptivity, are known. This feature will change throughout 
the year with the changes in weather conditions (bare terrain, snow, hard snow, etc.). For safety 
reasons, reflective terrain was used at the calculation.

6. REFFERENCES

[1] Čechura J., Physics for civil ingeneering 10 - in Czech. ČVÚT, Praha 1997
[2] Meller, M., Stěnícká, J., Sources for projection and judgement of industrial buildings, Volume 3 
      - building acoustic - in Czech, VÚPS Praha, 1985
[3] Liberko, M., Polášek, J., NOISE + version 5.02 passband. ENVICONSULT, JpSoft, 2000
[4] Vaverka, J., Kozel, V., Ládyš, L., Liberko, M., Chybík, P., Physics for civil ingeneering I - in 
      Czech. VUT Brno, 1998

7. ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from point sources located on the 
                scientific station's structures
Attachment 2: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from portable gasoline generator

Legend to the attachment:

            Calculation point
Built-up area
Source of noise
                                                                                                          84
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Attachment 1: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from point sources located on the scientific station's structures

                                                                      
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                    80                                                
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                    40                                                
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                    0                                                 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                   -40                                                
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                        ANT7.ZAD         0           40      80      120     M=1:1414
                                                                                           <40 dB
                                                                                       40-50 dB
                                                                                       50-60 dB
                                                                                       60-70 dB
                                                                                       >70 dB
                                                                      
85
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Attachment.2: Zones of equivalent levels of acoustic pressure A from portable gasoline generator

 
                                                       <40 dB
                                                  40-50 dB
                                                  50-60 dB
                                                  60-70 dB
                                                  >70 dB
             A-MALYDI.ZAD                                  M=1:4000

                                                       86
8. WASTE INCINERATOR – Noise measurement
Equipment of measurements:
- Accurate Modular Analyzer Bruel & Kjaer, Type 2260 (with operating module type BZ 7206 
       and microphonic filler type 4189
- Acoustic Calibrater Bruel& & Kjaer Type 4230

Measured characteristic: L_(A,eq) – equipollent level of acoustic pressure
                         L_(Amin) – minimal level of acoustic pressure
                         L_(Amax) – maximal level of acoustic pressure
                         L_(N) (L_(1), L_(10), L_(50), L_(90), L_(99)) – time weighted level of acoustic pressure
                         N /%# - the real level of acoustic pressure were equal or higher as L_(N) in N
                                   % of measurement time

Results of measurement – see eclosed table

Measurement carried out on 3 September 2003 between 8.50 and 9.20 h a.m.

|  |Point of measurement                          |    | time   | t      | L_(Amin) | L_(Amax) | L_(Aeq) | L_(1)  | L_(10) | L_(50) | L_(90) | L_(99) |
|  |                                              |    |        | min    |          | dB(A)    |         |        | dB     |        |        |        |
| 1| 1m from exhaust of diesel generator          | FA | 08:51  | 00:30  | 90,6     | 93,0     | **91,8**| 92,6   | 92,2   | 91,8   | 91,2   | 91,0   |
| 2| repeated                                     | FA | 08:52  | 00:30  | 90,6     | 92,5     | **91,6**| 92,2   | 92,0   | 91,6   | 91,2   | 90,8   |
| 3| repeated                                     | FA | 08:52  | 00:30  | 90,7     | 92,6     | **91,6**| 92,2   | 91,8   | 91,4   | 91,2   | 90,8   |
| 4| 1 m from exhaust of incinerator              | FA | 08:54  | 00:30  | 90,9     | 95,7     | **92,8**| 94,8   | 93,8   | 92,6   | 91,4   | 91,2   |
| 5| repeated                                     | FA | 08:54  | 00:30  | 90,2     | 95,0     | **92,1**| 94,4   | 93,2   | 91,8   | 90,8   | 90,4   |
| 6| repeated                                     | FA | 08:55  | 00:30  | 89,9     | 94,2     | **91,4**| 93,8   | 92,0   | 91,2   | 90,6   | 90,0   |
| 7| 10 m from booth sources                      | FA | 08:56  | 00:30  | 73,3     | 83,5     | **75,8**| 81,2   | 77,6   | 74,8   | 74,0   | 73,6   |
| 8| repeated                                     | FA | 08:57  | 00:30  | 73,2     | 73,3     | **74,7**| 75,8   | 75,2   | 74,6   | 74,0   | 73,2   |
| 9| repeated                                     | FA | 08:58  | 00:30  | 73,2     | 76,6     | **74,9**| 76,4   | 75,6   | 74,8   | 73,8   | 73,4   |
|10| 15 m from booth sources                      | FA | 08:59  | 00:30  | 75,9     | 84,3     | **78,4**| 82,6   | 79,2   | 78,0   | 77,0   | 76,4   |
|11| repeated                                     | FA | 09:00  | 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 10                                                   XXV ATCM
                                                                Information Paper IP-93
                                                                Agenda Item: CEP 4c
                                                                CZECH REPUBLIC
                                                                Original : English

                                                         REPORT ON
                                             PROJECT OF THE CZECH RESEARCH STATION
                                                         IN ANTARCTICA

                                                                September 2002

                                                                Contents:
                                                                A. Report
                                                                B. Graphic Attachments

                                                         Submitted by the Czech Republic
                                                                88
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

A. Report

Contents:

A. 1    Identification data of the construction ............................... p. 90
A. 2    Introduction ....................................................... p. 91
A. 2.1  Background of the station construction ............................ p. 91
A. 2.2  Research programme for the proposed station ...................... p. 92
A. 2.2.1 Aims of research programme ....................................... p. 92
A. 2.3. Building site ......................................................... p. 92
A. 2.3.1 General information ................................................. p. 93
A. 2.3.2 Planed site extent ande distribution of structures ................. p. 93
A. 3    Technical structure of the station ...................................... p. 94
A. 3.1  Station structures ..................................................... p. 94
A. 3.2  Brief description of the structures ................................... p. 95
A. 3.3  Operational infrastructure of the station ............................ p. 99
A. 3.3.1 A brief description of the structures ................................ p. 100
A. 3.3.1.1 Electric energy production ........................................ p. 100
A. 3.3.1.2 Heat supply ........................................................ p. 101
A. 3.3.1.3 Water supply ....................................................... p. 101
A. 3.3.1.4 Waste water disposal .............................................. p. 102
A. 4    Basic data and information sources ..................................... p. 102
A. 5    Environmental impact of the construction .............................. p. 103
A. 5.1  Basic starting points of environmental care .......................... p. 103
A. 5.2  Wastes ................................................................ p. 104
A. 5.2.1 Wastes from the station's construction .............................. p. 104
                                                                 89
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

A. 5.2.2 Wastes created during station operation ................................p. 105

A. 5.2.2.1 Solid wastes ...............................................................p. 105

A. 5.2.2.2 Liquid wastes ...............................................................p. 106

A. 5.2.2.3 Gaseous wastes ...........................................................p. 107

A. 5.3    Waste management plan .......................................................p. 107

A. 6      Conclusions .......................................................................p. 107

B.        Graphic attachements ............................................................p. 108

A. 1 Identification data of the construction

Construction title:                                      Czech Research station in Antarctica

Construction site:                                      Maritime Antarctic, northern coast of James Ross Island, Brandy Bay

Investor:                                               Masaryk University in Brno, Faculty of Science
                                                        Kotlářská 2, CZ - 611 37 Brno, as commissioned by the
                                                        Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the
                                                        Czech Republic

Project manager:                                        Prof. Dr. Pavel Prošek
                                                        Dept. of Geography
                                                        Faculty of Science
                                                        Masaryk University Brno

Chief Designer                                          Ing. Alois Suchánek
and Project Engineer:                                   INVESTPROJEKT, Ltd. Zlín
                                                        Bratří Jaroňků 4079, CZ - 760 01 Zlín, Czech Republic

General contractor:                                     PSG International, Ltd. Zlín,
                                                        Zarámí 4077, 760 40 Zlín, Czech Republic
                                                        90
A. 2 Introduction

This material has been prepared on the basis of comments on a previous version of this document presented by the Czech delegation at the XXIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation on 9 - 20 July 2001 (see information Papers XXIV ATCM/IP24, XXIV ATCM/IP69 and XXIV ATCM/IP75). Concerns and reservations about the proposed location of the Czech station on King George Island were set out in the Final Report of the XXIV ATCM, Recommendations 48, 138 and 139 and in the Report of the Fourth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP IV), Recommendations 21 and 23

Following a careful analysis of all the arguments presented at the XXIV ATCM, different potential locations for the Czech station were evaluated and changes in the proposed research programme were made and are presented in Sections A. 2.2, A. 2.3 and A. 5 of this document.

The selection of a location suitable for the proposed station was reviewed in collaboration with the United Kingdom and Ukraine. Pursuant to Recommendations XV-17 of the XIV ATCM, which urged that the location of a new station should maximize scientific potential and avoid the excessive concentration of installations in Antarctica, James Ross Island has been proposed as the new site for the Czech research station.

This document is identical with the IP 93 which have been submitted at the ATCM XXV (CEP V) in 2002. It is here utilized as Annex No. 9 to the draft CEE. In this context the parts concerned scientific programme of the station (Chapters No. A.2.2 and A.2.2.1) were from this material cuted out and used as Chapters 3.3.2 "Scientific activities proposed for the Czech Antarctic station", 3.3.2.1 "Research programme" and 3.3.2.2 "Aims of the research programme" in draft CEE.

A. 2.1 Background of the station construction

The importance of long-term, interdisciplinary Antarctic research has increased in recent years. Antarctica is a climate stabilizer for the planet, an area whose vegetation and fauna are perfectly acclimated to its extremely cold climate. It is a region with unique conditions for many types of observations, experiments and field investigations (astrophysics, geophysics, geology, meteorology, high atmosphere research, etc.). It is the continent where ozone depletion in the stratosphere was first recognized and has the highest levels of depletion of the ozone layer. At the same time, it is the only continent where people live together free of conflicts; where scientists, including many Czech researchers, are able to carry out fundamental research, the results of which are often applicable to other parts of the Earth.

The idea of building an official Czech research station in Antarctica emerged as the result of several important events. First and foremost was the research activities of Czech scientists in the region of Antarctica, carried out from the first half of fifties through the end of sixties, almost entirely at Soviet and American Antarctic bases (fields of research included astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology and geology). After a roughly twenty-years-long break, systematic research was carried out on King George Island (South Shetlands). This was followed by activities in the nineties and in the years 2000-2002 at the Henryk Arctowski Station (Poland), the Machu Picchu Station, (Peru), in the Pieter J. Lenie refugium (USA), at the Engenheiro Wiltgen Station on Elephant Island
(Brazil) and at the Vernadski Station (Ukraine). Based on our own experience from our research 
programmes during the nineties, a group of researchers from Czech scientific institutions decided to 
formulate a programme for the construction of the first official Czech Antarctic station. The 
existence of such a station is an important condition for the further successful development of 
Czech research activities in Antarctica.

In addition to the professional experience of Czech scientists that has already been mentioned, 
obtained during a number of expeditions to Spitsbergen, to the Canadian Arctic, as well as to 
Antarctica, knowledge of the functioning of a number of polar stations, including technical and 
logistical aspects, that has been gained by these scientists, also speaks in favour of the construction 
of a separate Czech base.

A. 2.2 Research programme for the proposed station - see draft CEE

A.2.2.1 Aims of the Research Programme - see draft CEE

A. 2.3 Building site

As a result of two reconnaissance missions to the coast of the northern section of the Antarctic 
Peninsula that were carried out in February and March of 2002, the northern coast of James Ross 
Island was selected as the most optimal location for the construction of a Czech station. 
Specifically, the station should be located on either the western or southern shore of Brandy Bay 
(see attachment B0 11). According to information provided by BAS, the conditions for landing are 
relatively favourable. The presence of a relatively large vegetation oasis and lake in the vicinity will 
provide excellent opportunities for carrying out the biological part of the proposed research 
programme and a large ice-free zone will allow geomorphological, hydrological, pedological and 
geochemical research.

The area of James Ross Island is a traditional focus of research activities by British and Argentine 
geologists. At a minimum, this will allow the co-ordination of the geological and geomorphological 
portions of the research themes. The relatively close proximity of the Argentine stations of 
Marambio and Esperanza will provide a good basis for the connection of the Czech and Argentine 
programmes and future co-operation. The philosophy behind the running on the Czech station is 
based on the openness of Czech facilities to researchers from other countries, especially Argentina 
and UK.

The location, design and equipment of a Czech research station should meet the following goals:
- the station should be situated in an accessible location, enabling it to take full advantage of the 
seasons, i.e. a location that provides conditions for several-months of systematic scientific work in 
the period of the southern hemisphere’s summer;
- the station’s location, architectural concept and equipment must enable conducting scientific 
research activities that may be integrated with international scientific programmes and, in 
connection with this it must be open to international cooperation, mainly in such a manner that 
would enable interconnection of its activity with other bases in the selected area; 
                                                                                                                         92
- the station should be constructed in a location that is easily accessible in summer from the point of view of logistics (the transportation of people and material and transportation in the case of emergencies, e.g. acute illness, etc.) by means of transportation from neighboring stations;
- the station must allow for complex scientific research programmes in the disciplines of biology, geography, geology and chemistry, etc. Research should be multidisciplinary and focused on questions concerning the ecology of coastal Antarctic oases. The focus of this theme is motivated by the fact that until now, the internal connections of the subsystems of Antarctic coastal oases (minerals, moraines, soils, water, ice, snow and the atmosphere on the one hand and the biosphere on the other) have not been sufficiently studied.

A. 2.3.1 General information

Virtually all the structures of the station must be constructed on relatively stable subsoil (a non-weathered rocky substrate reinforced by a moraine or a coastal marine terrace)
Their function and relationship to the main building conditions the location of all other structures. It has been assumed that the conditions for place of objects using cargo containers will be favourable and the existing subsoil will be acceptable with only some minor modifications.

During the summer of 2002/03 an expedition will be sent will the following goals of examining the following conditions:
- Assessing the ice conditions in the area around Prince Gustav Channel.
- A detailed mapping of the sea bottom and coastal relief in the areas where ship landings are planned.
- Offloading construction material and other equipment for the station and its transportation to the construction site.
- Completing terrain recognisance and estimating the impact of construction and of station buildings on the surrounding environment (CEE).
- The possibilities on ensuring a water supply for the station.
The expedition will be on site only for the time necessary to complete these tasks.

A. 2.3.2 Planned site extent and distribution of structures

The building site of the proposed complex of structures will cover an area of approximately 78 by 30 meters. The need for an area of this size is the distribution of the structures with reference both to their location on the terrain and operational safety. The goal is to separate the structures where there is a potential threat occur, e.g. by fire or other dangers, and a separation of those structures that are not operationally related to each other. The concept behind the building plan respects these requirements.

As is clear from its technical parameters, the station is designed for summer operation only and its crew will consist of 10 to 15 individuals (2 – 3 of whom will be technicians).

The centre of the station is the main operational and residential structure, which is conceived as a structure with a permanent foundation. This building will fulfil three basic functions:
- space and conditions for scientific research and other work;
- space for accommodations, essential personal and community services;
- a technical complex for the provision of heating and sanitation.

The main building contains in all the equipment necessary for providing these functions. Cargo containers are proposed for the other structures. These containers will be based on conventional containers with a more refined and Other buildings are proposed in containers, designed using conventional containers with an improved and more careful exterior surface finish and which would arrive pre-assembled with technology and equipment for specialized functions.

Cables will interconnect all the structures wherever it is functional. There will be marked paths between the structures, but these paths will not be artificially modified in any way.

## A. 3 Technical structure of the station

It is necessary to adjust the basic conditions for the preparation of the construction of the station to (as well as to the seasonal character) of the project, production, transport and erection on site.

This corresponds with the basic division into construction units and service modules. This has been done for methodical reasons and for ensuring concept complexity. They can be modified, if needed.

## A. 3.1 Station structures

    B0    01    Central building including accommodation facilities
          02    Waste processing
          03    Engine/generator storehouse
          04    Power supply building
          05    Diesel generators
          06    Refrigerated storehouses
          06/1  Food store
          06/2  Fuel store
          06/3  Spare parts store
          07    Water intake and service pipe
          08    Waste water treatment
          09    Watercraft garage
          10    Takeoff ramp
          11    External cable distribution system
                                                                                                  94
A.3.2 Brief description of the structures
(See Attachments B0 02, B0 03 and B0 03)

B0 01 Central building including accommodation facilities

This is the main building of the scientific station. The building is designed as single-story structure, 
fully assembled using the K-Control construction system, which is based on sandwiched panels, 
consisting of an inner insulation layer, made of a self-extinguishing polystyrene, covered on both 
sides with OSB wood-chip panels. For climatic reasons, the building is designed as a simple 
structure with a minimal height above the surrounding ground. The design was chosen with 
consideration of the thermal properties, the requirement of minimal heat loss and with respect to 
transport and construction issues.

The floor and roof panels have a thickness of 320 mm, the external walls 265 mm. In the part of 
installation of the wall collector, the sandwich will be 170 mm thick. The object is statically 
considered as a semi-three-wing building with two internal longitudinal weight-carrying walls. The 
object will act in a stable manner because of the box-like arrangement of the vertical and horizontal 
elements, which are firmly interconnected.

The building has a rectangular ground plan with dimensions 10,530 by 26,530 millimetres. It is 
covered with a sloped roof with a slope of approximately 5%.

The location in the terrain is based on the prevailing wind directions and with the aim of providing 
the maximal solar energy collecting area. This is achieved by orientating the longitudinal axis of the 
building in an east-west direction, with the taller front facing towards the north. Overall, the 
disposition conforms rather to the expected operations than to the cardinal direction. The east-west 
orientation is however preferred because it allows the maximization of solar radiation collecting 
areas.

The building foundation has been proposed, given the location of the station in a wind-exposed 
littoral area, low to the land and - following the recommendation of foreign experts -- upon a set of 
wooden piers. This will minimize the air draught under the floor.

The building will be subsequently assembled upon a prepared foundation from prefabricated 
elements that are to be slightly modified on site. The openings in the panels for windows and doors 
will be prepared and pre-tested for assembly. The roof will consist of a sandwich with a thickness 
of 320 mm and will be covered by a rubber membrane mechanically anchored and glued to the 
base. The membrane comes prepared in strips on rolls with a diameter of approximately 5,700 mm. 
Drainage is directly onto the ground without the use of gutters.

There are a number of different alternatives for the surface treatment of the outer walls. The 
preferred alternative is the providing the surfaces of outer walls with a coating of waterproof 
plywood, 6 mm thick, on a lath grill, which will serve to protect against corrosion by aerosols of sea 
salts blown by the wind. It will also protect against mechanical abrasion caused by hard-frozen 
snow in combination with fine sand. The minimum life expectancy of this building is approximately 
ten to fifteen years. Subsequently it would be revitalized. This outer surface would be provided just 
with a colour glaze-type acrylic paint. The advantage here is simple repair when the paint gradually 
wears off. All the proposed paints are water-based and no carbohydrate thinners will be used.

A hot air heating system will be installed. This air conditioning equipment provides the heating of 
air using heat recovered from hot air collectors, heat pumps and heat recovery from the warm air 
during ventilation.
95
Sanitary fittings will be based on the standard installation of fixtures and fittings, made mainly of 
plastics, plastic pipelines will be insulated by cavity blocks. The internal sewage system will also be 
made out of plastics. All conduits will be placed on the land surface; to be controllable the sewage 
outlet from the object will be equipped with covered inspection shafts.

The electrical system - lights, appliances, distribution systems - the internal electric power 
supply system for this building includes the distribution net for lightning, electric sockets and the 
main circuit breaker panel. The distributors for securing the operation of technological facilities are 
part of PS 101 (see part A.3.2). The station will have multiple sources of electrical energy.

The laboratory equipment contains the classical furnishing of working benches as well as a table 
with a stainless steel working surface, a fume chamber, a table for scales and other accessory 
furniture. The instrumentation will be variable, according to needs and character of the scientific 
research being conducted.

Other furniture will be standard. For the specification of the complete outfits, a project of the 
interiors has been worked up separately.

Floor space of Building SO 01:     280 m^(2)
Volume of structure:               1,033 m^(3)

B0 02 Waste processing

This structure is situated in a direct adjacent to the station's main building. It is accessible through 
the technical entry on the eastern face and directly from the ramp. The structure consists of a 
modified 20-foot long cargo container (6,055 x 2,438 x 2,591 mm).

A waste management system will be placed in this structure that is in accordance with the 
requirements for waste treatment and disposal and, eventually, for the adjustment of wastes prior to 
their transport from the area. All is consistent with the Madrid Protocol of the AT. Because of its 
location, the structure will also be used for the heating of non-potable water. The system of heating 
hot water is based on the use of solar warm-water collectors, with the primary circuit filled with an 
anti-freeze mixture.

It is being proposed that an OG 120 SW incinerator produced by Teamtec Norway, which is to be 
used for solid waste disposal, will be positioned in this container. This equipment is already being 
used in this region. The container will be equipped with means for storing, manipulation with and 
preparation of wastes for incineration and storage of wastes intended for removal from Antarctica.

Floor space:                       14.78 m^(2)
Volume of structure:               38.30 m^(3)

B0 03 Engine/Generator storehouse

This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container. The object will serve as a 
storehouse for engines and generators during the winter break. Windmills, tools and spare parts for 
the set of engines/motors stored there. The structure will be connected to the electric distribution 
system, and contain lighting and sockets. A windmill will be constructed on the container's roof.

Floor space:                       14.78 m^(2)
Volume of structure:               38.30 m^(3)
96
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 04 Power supply building

This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container that will have been outfitted 
with the necessary equipment in the Czech Republic. It will serve for operation of the production 
and distribution of electricity. It will be provided with thermal insulation. A windmill will be 
constructed on the container's roof.
Floor space:                                 14.78 m2
Volume of structure:                        38.30 m3

B0 05 Diesel generator

This structure is consists of a modified 20-foot long cargo container that will have both a 
permanently mounted and mobile diesel generators for the production of electric power. The 
generators will be anchored to the floor of the container, accessory elements for the completion of 
the diesel central will be fitted in the container space. From within, the system is insulated with a 
sandwich layer of thermal and acoustic insulation for reduction of emissions into the ambient 
environment and to the accommodations. A windmill will be constructed on the container's roof.
Floor space:                                 14.78 m2
Volume of structure:                        38.30 m3

B0 06 Refrigerated storehouses

A series of storage structures complementing the collection of single-purpose cargo-container 
structures.

B0 06/1 Food store

This structure will serve mainly for storage of preserved foodstuffs that must be kept in a cool 
place. Bulk packages of foodstuff are placed on shelves or loose in the container. During the 
primary transport, it will be used for transportation of durable dry foodstuffs with the rest of the 
space being used for the transportation of non-noxious materials. This is a standard container 
without thermal insulation and a windmill will be installed upon it.
Floor space:                                 14.78 m2
Volume of structure:                        38.30 m3

B0 06/2 Fuel store

It will serve for storage of fuels: diesel oil and petrol. The container that will be used for the storage 
of fuels is to be modified to meet safety and ecological requirements for storage of oil products. The 
container has a double floor that creates 200-liter storage reservoirs. They are distributed 
throughout the container. Their upper side (the floor of the container itself) is made of perforated 
zinc-coated steel. On the floor area, steel barrels with a volume of 200 litres will be place. This 
structure is located in the most remote part of the research station farthest away from the residential 
structure. Given the necessity for periodic fuel re-supply, it has been located as close as possible to 
the disembarkation point on the shoreline. A windmill will be constructed on the container's roof.
Floor space:                                 14.78 m2
Volume of structure:                        38.30 m3

B0 06/3 Spare parts store

97
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

This structure will serve for the storage of spare parts and material that will be used according to 
the needs of the station. Eventually it will also be used for the storage of treated and packaged 
waste materials intended for transport out, etc. The structure will be equipped with collapsed ready-
to-assemble shelves prepared for assembly in case of need. It is assumed that the container will be 
utilized also for storage of packaging materials (wooden pallets, cardboard boxes, etc.) for a 
possible treatment as mixed waste for incineration. A windmill will be constructed on the 
container's roof.
Floor space:      14.78 m
Volume of structure:  38.30 m


B0 07 Water supply and distribution

Water for normal hygienic needs as well as for cooking is supposed to be taken from natural 
resources. This is the way water is obtained at all other stations on King George Island. For 
drinking needs and meeting daily nutritional requirements for minerals, bottled water imported into 
Antarctica will be used.

The water supply will be the local freshwater (glacial) stream that flows down from the front of the 
glacier located northeast of the station area. This stream flows around the proposed building site 
and enters the sea on the northwest coast, north dropping from an unnamed cliff. The base of the 
water supply system will be an accumulation basin with an area of approximately 3 m
. This basin 
will be created by deepening the streambed to a depth of approximately 80 cm. Prior to the 
beginning of accumulation, a zeolite filter that has been placed in a perforated PE-vessel will be 
sunk into the deepest part of the basin. During the shutting down of the station for the winter, the 
pump will be dismounted, the basin emptied using sluice gates and the filter will be washed and 
stored.
Water surface:     3 m
Distribution length:  c. 50 m

B0 08 Waste water treatment

The structure will house facilities for the basic treatment of sewage water from the station. Since 
the wastewater will be biological sewage only without any chemicals, disposal is rather easy. The 
disposal of wastewater will conform to the requirement of draining the sewage below sea level in 
order to secure immediate dilution and to avoid any impact on the station's freshwater systems. The 
proposed route of the wastewater pipeline uses gravity to drain the untreated materials. Given the 
need to minimize the solid particle content, the re-pumping and grinding of sewage will also be 
carried out.
Total amount of domestic sewage will be 2.25 m
/day
Total length of the pipeline approximately will be 200 m

 
                                  98
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 09 Watercraft garage

The object is used for storage of watercraft. The station's watercraft will be two inflatable boats of 
the type similar to GRANT RAID MK III. For storage, one will be hung under the ceiling of the 
container, the other will be placed on a undercarriage on the floor. A windmill will be installed on 
the roof of this structure.

Floor space:     14.78 m^(2)
Volume of structure:  38.30 m^(3)

B0 10 Launching ramp

The construction of the ramp will allow for a safe and controllable location for floating watercraft 
and conditions for the unloading of supplies and materials (foodstuff, fuels etc.) during the working 
season and during the seasonal abandonment and closing down of the station. The ramp's 
foundation is the creation a flat area sloping off of the existing terrain to allow for access to and 
from the coast; this will be attained by levelling the natural terrain with local coarse gravel and 
aggregates to achieve the flattest possible surface. Because a launching cart is to be constructed and 
used, it is not thought that it will be necessary to create a guide rail, and that the surface 
modifications will suffice. The exact position and dimensions will be determined by on-the-spot 
reconnaissance. The data provided are preliminary.

Built-up area    - trimming of the ramp plain:  150 m^(2)
                 - plank platform:           20 m^(2)

B0 11 External cable distributions

This concerns the external cable connections among the individual structures. Considering the 
character of the station's operation, which is based on pedestrian traffic only by people with 
knowledge of the local conditions, the external cable distributions are to be placed in shallow 
trenches that the local ground conditions will permit. The cable routes will be placed along the 
walkways and this will be indicated by markings.

A. 3.3 Operational infrastructure of the station

Infrastructure in the following areas is to be installed in the individual buildings:

        electricity production
        heat production
        water management
        waste disposal management
        warehousing
        maintenance
        transportation
        laboratories
        electrical devices (weak current)
        measuring and controls
        basic outfit of the operation object

99
A. 3.3.1 A brief description of the infrastructure providing the station's main 
functions

This scientific research station is conceived of as being an insular system. This means resources 
that are either locally available (water) or that work using solar and wind power cover all needs. 
These sources are backed up by energy systems for production of electric energy or heat using 
diesel generators with a defined 100% reserve capacity. Each aspect of the infrastructure is divided 
up into blocks, each of which will now be described.

A. 3.3.1.1 Electric energy production

The part of the infrastructure deals with the creation, distribution and consumption of electric 
energy. It will utilize two sources, namely wind energy as the primary source and diesel generators 
as the secondary source.

A significant part of the proposed electric energy consumption of 20-25kW can be covered by the 
wind-generated power (windmills). Provided that the conditions on the selected site will be similar 
to those on the South Shetlands, we may expect approximately 60% of the time during the Antarctic 
summer that there will be exploitable wind velocities with a dispensable power of 1400kWh per 
wind generator.

We propose to use eight wind generators with a nominal capacity 1400W each. These will provide 
50-60% of the seasonal consumption of electric energy. The wind aggregates will supply electric 
energy to the distribution system through a block of batteries and converters and from there to the 
distribution systems 3PEN AC 50Hz 230/400 V/TN-C, 3 NPE AC 230/400 V/TN-S and 2DC 48V. 
The distribution systems are separated with respect to the type and importance of the appliances 
hooked up to them.

The electric batteries fulfil an important task in compensating the disproportion between the supply 
and consumption of the electric energy during normal operations. If there were to be a serious 
failure of the electric energy supply, the capacity of the full loaded batteries is to be designed to 
supply full coverage of the expected average consumption for two hours (in this case approximately 
10kWh). The two hours is considered sufficient time to for contingency to the failure, refilling fuel 
into the tanks or starting-up of the backup source. Ni-Cd batteries with a nominal voltage 24V are 
suggested because of their particular characteristics.

The whole of electric energy supply system is backed-up using liquid fuel sources, ensuring a 
supply of is in the event of a total lack of wind-generated electricity energy. Two Honda EXT 12 
diesel generators (one in reserve for extreme conditions) have been preliminarily selected as a 
generator with a sufficiently stabile capacity of 10kW. This generator uses low viscosity oil, is 3 x 
230/400V, has fully body-supported body with a sound damper, a transport cart and a pulley and is 
equipped with automatic regulation and remote starting. The total weight is 380 kg.

For instantaneous mobile sources of electric energy, portable petrol generators with manual start-up 
and capacities up to 6kW (which is not a problem in this case, as petrol must be in the fuel store for 
the ship's engines) will be used.

100
A. 3.3.1.2 Heat supply

The production of heat will be based on the expected and/or real consumption. An external temperature of -15°C was chose for calculation purposes. The heat loss from the structure is 8.4kW. According to meteorological data from surrounding stations, the average temperature during the summer from beginning of November until the end of March oscillates around +1.5°C. If the average temperature inside the object is 23°C, the temperature difference to be covered by heating will be on average 21.5°K. This corresponds with an average heat loss 4.52 kW. Under such conditions, the consumption of heat energy for heating for the 120 days of the Antarctic summer amounts to 13,020 kWh.

For heating, three independent sources are available, namely: electricity and solar energy. We decided to abandoned the idea to use the heating pump owing to the problems with the maintenance and reparations of possible defects

Solar energy production is divided into two parts - a hot water and a hot air system. The latter is intended to support the heating of the residential building. This means that solar energy will serve in the daytime as the preferred method preheating of air circulating through the hot-air heating system. The hot water produced by solar energy is to be used preferably as water for hygienic needs.

A. 3.3.1.3 Water supply

At the station, water will be used for:
-   drinking water and hygienic needs (max. 15 persons)
-   cooking ( 30 meals/day)
-   research needs (laboratories)
-   fire equipment.

Water for drinking and cooking will be quality potable water. Water for the laboratories will be prepared according to research requirements. For hygienic needs, bacterially uncontaminated water will be used. The source of water will be the chosen fresh water stream sustained from a melting glacier or snow patches, flowing by gravity to the sea.

The water will be transported to the station:

a) by gravity from a reservoir, if the configuration of the terrain allows (recommended elevation min. 15m)
b) by pumping from the accumulation reservoir.

In the accumulation reservoir, the mechanical pre-cleaning and settling of possible suspended solids will occur. For the gravity-driven water supply, the necessary water accumulation and hygienic purity of the water will be ensured. The reservoir will also serve for the internal and external fire safety of the station. The water supply system will be made of a PET pipes. At the lowest point, a sludge removal device that will allow the system to be completely emptied will be provided.

Given the permanent occupation of the station by 15 people, the water needs according to the guidelines in 9/73 MLVH will be:
Q_(d )= 15.0 x 15 = 2.250 l/d, i.e. 2.25 m^(3 ).d^(-1)
q_(aver.) = 0.03 l.s^(-1)
q_(max )= 0.25 l.s^(-1)

101
A. 3.3.1 4 Waste water disposal

Sewage wastewater - this is the wastewater from the hygienic facilities and from the preparation of 
food. The amount of waste water is given by the amount of water consumed:

Balance sheet
Q       Q       q       q
yearly   daily   average max
m       m       l.s     l.s
3       3       -1      -1
per year d       .s      .s
        -1      -1      -1
675     2.25    0.03    0.25

This will be normal domestic wastewater. The production of contaminants is calculated based on 
one equivalent inhabitant (EI). For the calculations, 15 EI are assumed in the station.

Given a daily water consumption of 2.25 m .d , the production of contaminants is
3       -1

|         | kg.d   | kg/year | mg.l   |
|         | -1     |         | -1     |
| BOD5    | 0.90   | 270     | 400    |
| DS      | 0.83   | 248     | 367    |
| COD     | 0.67   | 203     | 300    |
| pH      |        | 6.0 - 8.0 |        |
| dissolved matter | 1.88   | 563     | 834    |
| N total | 0.18   | 54      | 80     |
| P total | 0.02   | 7       | 10     |

Where:
BOD 5   - biological coefficient of oxygen     N - nitrogen
DS      - dissolved solids                  P - phosphorus
COD     - chemical coefficient of oxygen

After the completion of the next project stage, these requirements will be adjusted and the project 
will be adapted to reflect this.

A. 4 Basic data and information sources

Waste disposal in the Antarctic. Report SCAR Panel of Experts (ATCM XIII 4), Australian 
Antarctic Division 1989

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991), Madrid, Reprint of 
SCAR Cambridge, May 1993, 67 pp.

Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica, SCAR, 
COMNAP, 1996

Final report of the Twenty-fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Saint Petersburg, Rusian 
Federation, 9 - 20 July 2001

102
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Climatic data obtained by realization of own scientific programmes between     1994 - 1997 and 
between 1999 - 2001   

James Ross Island - map 1 : 100 000. Series BAS 100, Sheet 2, Edition 1, 1995   

Aerial photographs of selected perts of James Ross Island. Source: BAS   

Personal findings and information   

Information and experience acquired by stays of employees of Masaryk University Brno, Institute 
of Botany AS CR Třeboň and others on the stations: H. Arctowski (Poland), Bellingshausen 
(Russia), Cdte. Ferraz (Brazil), PDTE E. Frei (Chile), Great Wall (China), King Sejong (Korea), 
Machu Picchu (Peru), Rothera and Signy (UK) and Vernadski (Ukraine).   

Findings obtained by reconnaissance travels and by the stay of persons responsible for the project 
of the Czech station:   
- on the possible sites proposed for localisation of the Czech station,   
- by the trips of British and Ukrainian scientific ships in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula.   

A. 5 Environmental impact of the construction   

Complex evaluation of potential environmental impacts of the station projected is being carried out 
at present as requested  in international accord (draft CEE). An evaluation of the technical 
parameters of energy production and waste management has been prepared under the direction of 
the Ministry of Environment of the Czech Republic and in accordance with Czech and international 
environmental legislation. The environmental impact on the abiotic and biotic components of the 
station's surroundings will be assessed "in situ" immediately after the approval of proposed station 
site.   

A draft CEE will be prepared and distributed to the consultative parties and CEP in October of this 
year. Comments received to the draft CEE will be discussed at the XXVI ATCM 2003. The final 
CEE will subsequently be issued. After the addressing of comments received, including a written 
summary of such comments, the project will proceed no earlier than 15 month from the date of 
publishing the draft CEE, pursuant to paragraph 5, Article 3, Annex I to the Madrid Protocol.   

A. 5.1 Basic starting points of environmental care   

The Czech research station complex in Antarctica is designed to minimize its impact on the local 
ecosystem. The preparation and processing of the proposed project respects to the maximum the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty. In assessing the environmental 
impacts of the station activities, the analysis of anthropogenic influences in the Antarctic region 
issued by SCAR and COMNAP in 1996 entitled "Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from 
Scientific Research and Operations in Antarctica" was taken into consideration (see Section A.4 - 
Basic Data and Information). In addition to analysis, this report also addresses monitoring 
programmes that will be applied in estimating the quality of activities of the stations and their 
environmental impact.   
                               103
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Given the expected level of activity at the station, the environmental care has two aspects. The 
primary one is the concept of the station and the programme of its use, which is based on the 
seasonal character of the station. With respect to energy, it is based on the use of actually available 
and renewable energy sources. This concept has as its aim in part the limiting of environmental 
impacts and in part to ensure a realistic estimation of the technical needs for such demanding 
climatic conditions. The other important aspect is that the station will not be operated during the 
winter when massive energy demands would lead to the large consumption of liquid fuels. It is 
therefore realistic to assume that the overall environmental impact of the station will be minimal.

A. 5.2 Wastes

A. 5.2.1 Wastes from the station's construction

During the construction of the station, two types of waste will be created:

a. Wastes of a municipal nature. It is assumed that they will amount to approximately 300kg, which 
will have to be placed into plastic barrels and either taken away from the Antarctic Treaty area by 
the construction crew, or disposed of in one of the permanent stations,

b. Wastes created during assembly and building activities.

b.1. Building waste
It is a matter of trimmings and pieces of wood that constitute the basic building material. Because 
of production and pre-assembly operations prior to dispatch, this amount will be optimised from the 
point of view of maximal usability. The usable cut timber can be used for the building of waste bins 
or shelves in containers, intended for operational use, etc. Appropriate construction elements will 
also be stored for possible repairs, etc.

b.2. Wrapping materials
There will be of two kinds - safely disposable wood and paper and PET foil.

The storage of wooden containers (boxes, pieces of wood, etc.) for later use is planned. Cardboard 
and PET foil will be sorted and can be modified to create an insulation layer, e.g. for insulating the 
inner walls of the containers. Unused wastes will be bounded in such a way as to minimize the 
space needed for storage and thus prepared for transport from the station.

To ensure the maximal use of wrapping material on the spot is a presupposition for a minimal of 
hauling and the elimination of incineration the preparatory phase prior to the station's occupation.

The detailed amounts of waste will be calculated in the next phase of preparation, as soon as 
questions concerning the expedition have been clarified with the manufacturers and suppliers of 
individual components, structures and elements of the station. In principle, all will be carried out in 
accordance with the corresponding provisions of the Attachment No. 3 of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

                                104
A. 5.2.2 Wastes created during station operation

For purposes of estimating their occurrence and their disposal, wastes arising from the operation of 
the station are divided as follows:

A. 5.2.2.1 Solid wastes

Solid wastes that may be classified as municipal waste will be sorted as combustible and non-
combustible during their collection.

The mixed combustible waste, i.e. remains of office paper, wrapping paper, wrapping of foodstuffs 
and consumables, PET bottles, PET wraps etc. will be separated and placed in designated boxes in 
the container.

In accordance with the requirements of the Madrid protocol, the non-combustible wastes, e.g. 
battery elements, glass, rubber etc. will be deposited in special boxes and prepared for transport 
from the area.

Ash created during incineration belongs to this category and is therefore considered as waste to be 
transported away from the Antarctic Treaty area.

Solid wastes created during the station's research activities, especially those created in the 
biological and physical-chemical laboratories, can be defined as non-contaminated as long as we 
are referring to biological remains, which will be incinerated.

The disposal of solid wastes in the station will be carried out by an incineration process in special 
equipment placed in the Structure 002, the waste incineration plant connected directly to the main 
building of the station.

The incineration cycle will be based on experience from a specific plant. According to the 
information obtained from other stations, we assume a cycle at intervals of two weeks, with the 
amount of waste to be incinerated being approximately 200 kg.

The collection and sorting of wastes into prepared bins will be carried out inside the cargo 
containers. Combustible wastes will be incinerated as municipal-type mixed waste.

Consultations with a specialized manufacturer of incinerators, TEAMTEC Norway, led to the 
recommendation of GOLAR 120 Marine type incinerator.

The incineration plant consists of following four main parts: incineration chamber, electric control 
panel, exhaust for combustion gases.g-1 and controller (damper) of waste gas exhausts.

The Fremo HF-210-R atomising pressure burner for vacuum incineration, modified for our 
purposes, has a capacity 5.7kg/h. For special purposes and conditions, nozzles with other capacities 
and/or with an automatic programme and a photoresistor sensing can be delivered.

This incineration equipment can incinerate all types of solid wastes based on their heating value:
Classified material             17.270 kJ.kg-1 (dry paper)
Wastes of type II               9.901 kJ.kg-1
                                 105
Type II wastes can be processed in 200 litre batches by this incineration equipment at a frequency 
of 3-5 hours. This type of waste is defined as consisting of roughly a uniform mixture with a 
maximum moisture content of 50% by weight and a maximum non-combustible residue of 7% 
content.

The high temperature in the combustion chamber (in some cases up to 1400°C) secures 
a smokeless, complete combustion.

The solid wastes in the gas exhaust are neutralized (disposed) by the burner ensuring that the 
process is ecologically safe. As soon as the waste gases pass the burner zone, they are mixed with 
the cooled air before entering the spent gases exhaust and leave the plant through a chimney.

The wastes should be prepared to a heating value of approximately 10,000 kJ/kg. For the mixing 
process, a manual will be prepared for the operators so that the combustion process proceeds 
smoothly with a consumption of support fuel (diesel oil) that is as small as possible.

The incinerator is equipped with boxes for sorting of wastes into the following groups: 
combustibles, glass, plastics, metals, rubber, batteries.

Non-combustible wastes will be prepared for safe storage prior transport away from Antarctica. For 
transport, the sorting of the wastes according to the SCAR is crucial.

It is assumed that the wastes require this type of disposal will be prescribed by the waste 
management plan and will be concentrated in PE transport barrels with a lid. After being filled to 
the recommend weight, they will be put on a ship and shipped to a country where their disposal will 
be carried out.

Given the distance from Europe, this treatment will be carried out on the basis of a contract in a 
South American port.

A. 5.2.2.2 Liquid wastes

The standard liquid wastes like domestic sewage at a maximal amount of roughly 2.5 m^(3) will be 
drained directly into the sea. Additional liquid wastes will consist of:

- chemical solutions from laboratory research. These kinds of wastes will be specific the types of 
research being carried out in the laboratory. It is assumed, that for the type of laboratory research 
selected specific wastes in their given quantities will be directly neutralized (if necessary) and their 
packing and placing in transport containers will be specified.

- liquid fuels from oil products can be primarily expected to be used oils from engines and 
generators and spillage from fuelling. This will be collected in separated canisters and returned to 
the supply ship either for incineration outside of the Antarctic Treaty area or for use as fuels for the 
ship's engines.
                                 106
A. 5.2.2.3 Gaseous wastes

They will consist of:
- exhaust gases of diesel-electric generators. Their amount will be maximally minimized through 
the use of renewable energy sources,
- combustion gases created during the disposal of solid combustible wastes from the operation of 
the station.

Given the complex the energy management plan and the extent of station activities, the occurrence 
of gaseous wastes can be defined as more or less insignificant.

A. 5.3 Waste management plan

In accordance with the regulations that are being prepared on the initiative of SCAR, the procedure 
for waste management will be further elaborated on the basis on monitoring carried out in 1996 by 
SCAR and COMNAP and which is set out in Attachment 2 of that report.

In accordance with the Article 8, Attachment No. 3 of the Madrid Protocol, the waste management 
plan will be further detailed at the next project stage and it will observe following structure and 
categorization of wastes:
    Group 1. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes,
    Group 2. Other liquid wastes and chemicals including fuels and lubricants,
    Group 3. Solid substances, intended for incineration,
    Group 4. Other solid wastes.

Pursuant to this structure, a realistic estimation of waste production will be quantified in the next 
stages of the project's preparation. The level of production should be monitored during the first 
working season and evaluated according to the conditions mentioned in the Attachment No. 3 of the 
Protocol and to the expectations set out in the next stage of the project.

The technical disposal of particular types of waste is described in the corresponding text sections 
above and includes proposals for their disposal.

A. 6 Conclusions

The project of a Czech Antarctic station is the result of many years work by that part of the Czech 
scientific community that is engaged in research into issues relating to polar environments, a 
community that is internationally recognized for its research in a number of different fields of polar 
research.

The aim of the station is to create conditions for further research that will enable the further 
integration of the Czech scientific community into international research activities.

The project proposal conceives of the station as the most optimal ecological system possible. In its 
technical specifics, it should answer questions of a general systematic influence on permanently 
sustainable development.
                                 107
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

 
                                                
                                                
## B.  Graphic attachments

B0 01     Central unit incl. accommodation facilities, northern and western view and 
          section A – A´, ground floor plan

B0 02     Waste processing, operational stores, power supply system engine room

B0 03     Diesel generators, fuel store, watercraft garage

B0 04     Room listing

B0 05     Czech Antarctic station: generally view on the supposed  configuration of 
          station objects (in idealised area)

 
                                                
                                                
108
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 01

                                                                                         FAKULTY OF SCIENCE, MASARYK UNIVERSITY BRNO, CZECH REPUBLIC
                                                                                         CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION IN THE ANTARCTICA
                                                                                         B0 01 CENTRAL UNIT INCL. ACCOMODATION FACILITIES
                                                                                         NORTHERN VIEW, SECTION A-A'         SC. 1:125





NORTHERN VIEW                                                                             WESTERN VIEW







KEY

 1      EXTERNAL SOLAR PANELS - PAINTED VARIOUSLY
        (DOORS - LUMINESCENT RED
        WINDOWS - WHITE
 2      MODERN STRUCTURES (RAILING - DISPERSED PANEL PAINT
        WITH IMPREGNATING DARK VARNISH
 3      STEEL PANELS WITH IMPREGNATING DARK VARNISH
 4      STANDING RUBBER MEMBRANE 3.2 MM THICK, BLACK
 5      HOT - SOLAR-COLLECTOR SYSTEM
 6      BASE STEPS, FALLS TOWARDS RAMPS - MODERN SLEEEFERS
 7      DARK STRIPE VARNISH - BROWN, BLACK SLEEFERS
 8      IMPREGNATED BY MANUFACTURERS

                                                                                                                    109
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 01

FAKULTY OF SCIENCE, MASARYK UNIVERSITY BRNO, CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION IN THE ANTARCTICA
B0 01 CENTRAL UNIT INCL. ACCOMODATION FACULTIES
GROUND FLOOR PLAN
SC: 1:125

110
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 02

B0 02 WASTE PROCESSING




(1) OG 120 SW INCINERATOR TEAMTEC NORWAY
(2) HOT WATER TANKS
(3) SORTED WASTE BINS
(4) INCINERATOR FUEL TANKS
(5) WIND-POWER PLANT

B0 03, 06/1, 06/3 OPERATIONAL STORES




(1) EQUIPPED AS NEEDED - NO RISK
(2) WIND-POWER PLANT
(3) RACKS

B0 04 POWER SUPPLY SYSTEM ENGINE ROOM




(1) MAIN CONTROL ROOM
(2) ACCUMULATORS
(3) WIND-POWER PLANT

FAKULTY OF SCIENCE, MASARYK UNIVERSITY BRNO, CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION IN THE ANTARCTICA
CONTAINER BUILDINGS SCHEMATIC PLAN
GROUND FLOOR PLAN             1 : 100

111
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 03

B0 05 DIESEL AGGREGATES




(1) STABLE DIESEL AGGREGATES
(2) OPERATING TANK WITH DOUBLE JACKET
(3) MOBILE AGGREGATES
(4) WIND-POWER PLANT

B0 06/2 FUEL STORE




(1) BARRELS WITH FUEL ( OIL, PETROL ) ON DOUBLE SAFETY FL
(2) WIND-POWER PLANT
(3) DISTRIBUTION POINT (DP)

B0 09




(1) PLATFOERM TRAILER
(2) WIND POWER PLANT
(3) ZODIACS
(4) ROPE (CABLE) WINCH
(5) REMOTE CONTROL FOR (4)

FAKULTY OF SCIENCE, MASARYK UNIVERSITY BRNO, CZECH REPUBLIC
CZECH SCIENTIFIC STATION IN THE ANTARCTICA
CONTAINER BUILDINGS SCHEMATIC PLAN
GROUND FLOOR PLAN             1 : 100
                                  112
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 04

KEY

EXTERNAL SKIN - K. KONTRL. BUILDING SYSTEM
OSB SPLITTER BOARD SANDWICH PANEL 15 MM THICK, 
POLYSTYRENE FILLING, PANEL THICKNESS 265 MM
INTERNAL LOAD - BEARING PARTITIONS - K. KONTRL. BUILDING SYST.
OSB SPLITTER BOARD SANDWICH PANEL 120 MM THICK,
POLYSTYRENE FILLING, PANEL THICKNESS 265 MM
INTERNAL PARTITIONS - K. KONTRL. BUILDING SYSTEM
OSB SPLITTER BOARD SANDWICH PANEL 15 MM THICK,
POLYSTYRENE FILLING, PANEL THICKNESS 100 MM


                                           | AREA (M2)  | HEIGHT | VOLUME 
-------------------------------------------|-----------|--------|--------
NUMBER | NAME                                   |          | (M)    | (M3)   
-------------------------------------------|-----------|--------|--------
       | BEDROOM                                | 6,50     | 3,20   | 20,80  
       | BEDROOM                                | 6,30     | 3,20   | 20,16  
       | BEDROOM                                | 7,10     | 3,20   | 22,70  
       | DINING HALL                            | 21,20    | 3,20   | 67,80  
       | FOOD STORE                             | 6,55     | 3,20   | 20,95  
       | CORRIDOR                               | 4,00     | 3,20   | 12,80  
       | WASH ROOM                              | 5,00     | 3,20   | 16,00  
       | WC                                     | 2,00     | 3,20   | 6,40   
       | WC                                     | 2,00     | 3,20   | 6,40   
       | QUAR. AIRLOCK                          |          |        |        
       | WC                                     | 1,30     | 3,20   | 4,15   
       | WC                                     | 0,70     | 3,20   | 2,25   
       | OFFICE                                 | 18,45    | 3,20   | 59,05  
       | SAMPLES                                | 13,90    | 3,20   | 44,50  
       | TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT                    | 0,70     | 3,20   | 2,25   
       | RAMP                                   | 3,60     |        |        
       | RAMP                                   | 8,20     |        |        


ROOMS LISTING

                                           | AREA (M2)  | HEIGHT | VOLUME 
-------------------------------------------|-----------|--------|--------
NUMBER | NAME                                   |          | (M)    | (M3)   
-------------------------------------------|-----------|--------|--------
101    | RAMP MAIN ENTRANCE                     | 10,00    |        |        
102    | DOOR SPACE                             | 4,15     |        |        
103    | LOCKER ROOM                            | 6,65     | 3,20   | 21,30  
104    | DRYING ROOM                            | 6,45     | 3,20   | 20,65  
105    | TOOLS, LOCKERS                         | 13,55    | 3,20   | 43,35  
106    | CORRIDOR                               |          |        |        
107    | ANTECHAMBER                            | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
108    | BEDROOM                                | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
109    | BEDROOM                                | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
110    | BEDROOM                                | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
111    | BEDROOM                                | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
112    | BEDROOM                                | 1,80     | 3,20   | 5,75   
113    | BEDROOM                                | 1,80     | 3,20   | 5,75   
114    | OFFICE                                 | 8,40     | 3,20   | 26,90  
115    | BEDROOM                                | 8,60     | 3,20   | 27,50  
116    | BEDROOM                                | 8,60     | 3,20   | 27,50  
117    | BEDROOM                                | 5,50     | 3,20   | 17,60  
118
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

B0 05

                                                                                              114
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation: Czech scientific station in Antarctica

Annex No. 11

Scott Track 2000 R - technical documentation
(see also: www.csmtisovec.sk)


                                  SCOT TRAC
                                  2000R

Scot-Trac 2000R is the vehicle designed to cope with the hardest terrain, offering an
attractive blend of a powerful engine, agile and manoeuvrable hydrostatic transmission. Eight
driven wheels and lightweight monocoque body secure its extreme off road performance.

Technical description

The basis of the vehicle is a lightweight frame on which eight wheels are mounted. The low-
pressure tyres secure maximum grip whatever the condition and also very low ground pressure. The
fixed axles ensure that wheels are always in contact with the maximum ground surface. The source
of power is a diesel engine YANMAR, with output 42,5 kW at 3 000 r.p.m. The engine and
transmission sit directly behind the operator's cab, in the centre of the vehicle, which makes the
vehicle perfectly balanced. High engine output together with low vehicle's weight (appr. 1 480 kg)
guaranties enough power in rough terrain and high manoeuvrability and stability at the same time.
The individual wheels are driven by hydrostatic transmission via chain distribution.

Maximum speed 30 km per hour, climbing ability 76 % accompanied by low ground pressure (104
g/cm2) and front approach angle more than 90° (secured by protrusion of the front wheels) makes it
ideal for the terrain full of ravines, rocks, sharp bents, extreme slopes. The high tractive force
enables the vehicle to overcome obstacles otherwise impassable. Ravines, ditches 1,5 m wide with
sharp slopes are not an obstacle. When equipped with tracks the vehicle copes easily with wet
grounds. swamps and deep snow. The tracks are optional and are available in summer and winter
115
modifications.

Technical parametres:

Engine/output:                         YANMAR 4TNE 84 Turbo Diesel /42,5 kW at 3 
                                                       000 r.p.m.
Drive:                                    hydrostatic, 8 x 8
Max. speed:                              30 km per hour
Climbing capacity:                       76%
Loading capacity:                        500 kg + two persons
Weight:                                   1 480 kg
Rated ground pressure:                   104 g/cm2
Fuel consumption:                        3,3 l per engine hour

Attachments

Using any of the following attachments, which can be fitted to the vehicle, can further extend 
overall efficiency of the vehicle:

- three-point linkage (front and rear) supplemented with additional hydraulics with an optional to 
use attachments both in the front as well as in the rear (rotary snow plough, plough blade, hydraulic 
manual tools, mowing machine, bush cutter, palette forks...)

- spraying equipment for farming

- special boring equipment for geological survey

- digging-down equipment for excavation works

- fire fighting superstructure

- crane of 500 kg capacity

- trailer to transport materials

- winter and summer caterpillar tracks

- ambulance for transport of injured persons

- floating equipment

- various hydraulically powered manually operated tools (abrasive cutter, demolition hammer, 
water pump, welding unit)

- an option to supplement attachments depending on customer requirements

116
