XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 080
Agenda Item: 4
IHO
Original: English










REPORT BY THE INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION (IHO) ON “COOPERATION IN HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEYING AND CHARTING OF ANTARCTIC WATERS”









XXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
24 May – 04 June, Cape Town, South Africa


Agenda Item 4
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports by Parties, Observers and Experts.


Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) on
“Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters”


Introduction.

On behalf of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) I would like to take this opportunity to thank the authorities of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) for having invited the IHO to this XXVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) to report on the Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters since the XXVIth ATCM.  

The IHO is strongly committed to improving safety of life at sea, safety of navigation and the protection of the marine environment in the Antarctic, through coordination between National Hydrographic Services in providing updated and reliable hydro-cartographic products.

The recommendations included in Resolution 3 (2003) adopted at the last ATCM in Madrid, have been interpreted not only as a recognition of the efforts made so far by the Organization, but also a clear expression of support to the initiatives underway, entrusted to the IHO Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica, the body established by the IHO to give special attention to this very important and unique area.


The IHO Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica

The Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA) met in September 2003 and amongst other technical topics, discussed the progress made in the INT Chart Scheme production; the S-55 initiative and the need to strengthen cooperation with other organizations. 

Out of 90 INT charts covering the Antarctic waters, 29 have already been published. Moreover, some of them are already available as electronic charts (ENC).  
The updating of the IHO S-55 Publication “Worldwide Status of Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical Charting” was considered vital to properly assess the actual situation regarding these two aspects, “surveying” and “charting”, and to monitor its progress thereafter. The publication will consist essentially of a standardized data base which will be kept updated and, therefore, at any time it will be possible to know what progress has been made and to identify any shortcomings. This information will serve as a useful resource for strategic planning, decision making and the international coordination of a work program, and will assist in properly prioritising the work to be done.
  
The need to improve cooperation with other organizations was highlighted, and concrete actions were agreed in relation to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO), the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR),  amongst others. 

The HCA gave special attention to and carefully examined Resolution 3 (2003) mentioned earlier, and agreed that ATCM should be briefed on the risks (loss of human life, environmental risks, etc.) associated with navigating in poorly-charted/surveyed areas. The HCA  considered it important to make all the necessary efforts to raise the level of priority given to national hydrographic programs, to complete the INT chart scheme, which is the only way to ensure safe navigation in Antarctica.  

Concern was expressed regarding new ship operators entering Antarctica, with no previous experience of the navigational conditions, and sometimes with inadequate equipment. In order to facilitate access to useful information for planning and navigating in Antarctica, the establishment of an open dedicated section of the IHO web page was agreed. 

However, bathymetric data is one of the most important elements needed to produce nautical charts. Improving cooperation and collaboration between ocean mapping projects, such as the joint IOC/IHO General Bathymetric Chart of the Ocean project (GEBCO) and the International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean Project (IBCSO), ready to be launched next July, was highlighted. Moreover, a proposal to be submitted to the IOC Executive Council (June 2004) and to IHO Member States to improve the existing global ocean mapping programs was considered to be vital.  

Regarding bathymetric data gathering, there were discussions regarding the serious limitations in the use of Multibeam Echo Sounders (MBES), due to their potentially adverse impact on marine mammals. Without denying that this issue is a sensitive one, it was felt that these restrictions might place a serious constraint on the progress in surveying, delaying the production of reliable nautical charts. 

It was recognized that multibeam data is of great importance to nautical charting and the continuous collection of data would result in a real improvement of present bathymetric knowledge. It was identified as extremely useful to perform an objective cost benefit analysis between the risk of exposing marine mammals to a sonar pulse and the risk of a maritime accident, with its impact in human and mammal life due to inadequate charting in Antarctica. 

The progress so far achieved with the actions agreed at the September meeting, can be summarized as follows:
    a) with the cooperation of IAATO we are seeking: views of ship operators on priorities for terrestrial aids to navigation; establishment of a mechanism that would allow hydrographic surveyors to make use of IAATO ships of opportunity to conduct hydrographic activities in Antarctica; comments on how to best prioritise INT chart and ENC production for the region. We are awaiting the IAATO meeting that will take place (end April) midpoint between the date of preparation of this report and the date of the ATCM.
    b) IHB in liaison with the IOC Secretariat have prepared, for consideration by IHO and IOC Member States, a draft proposal to improve the structure of the existing global ocean mapping programs/projects, identifying the need to have a centralized directing board to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the global program, by better coordinating the work and available resources. 
    c) The number of INT charts produced has increased by 6.  At present 32% of the scheme has been produced. 
    d) The IHB is finalizing the development of a prototype data base of the new S-55, based on a chart background with layers for hydrographic surveys, INT charts, ENCs and RNCs. This database will be made available on the HCA page of the IHO Website, for consultation and comments.
    e) The IHB, acknowledging the importance of the constraints that restrictions in the use of multibeam could impose, sent a Circular Letter to Member States advising them of this matter.



New initiatives and challenging issues

- Launching of the Southern Ocean IBC Project

Today, 7 International Bathymetric Chart projects are in progress, but the Antarctic region does not have such a project which could facilitate the coordination and improvement of the bathymetric knowledge of the Antarctic. 

During the SCAR XXVIII Conference, the International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean project (IBCSO) kick-off meeting will be held. The project will be realized under the auspices of the IHO, the IOC and (SCAR). It is anticipated that this project together with the efforts conducted by the HCA would in the short term provide a vehicle for further coordination to gather, process and make bathymetric information on the Antarctic available.  

Survey activities of modern ice-breaking research vessels during the last decade using multibeam systems have increased the data-base, which may result in compilations of new bathymetric charts around Antarctica that could reveal the seafloor morphology of large “white spots”. However, most of the collected single beam and multibeam sonar data are not archived or inventoried and only limited metadata information about expeditions or surveys is available. 

We believe that the most complete bathymetric database of the Southern Ocean can only be created through an international project with focus on gathering all the available bathymetric data including the important metadata with participants from all nations which carry out research around Antarctica.

Bathymetric data play an important role in climate, environmental and solid earth research, especially for geo-referencing and interpreting of bio-geo-marine observations; studying marine glacial and sedimentation processes; modelling ocean circulation; studying of physiography and tectonics, and they are indispensable for preparing reliable Nautical Charts for the safety of navigation in Antarctic waters.



- Concern on safety to navigation in Remote Areas. 

There is increasing concern about safety to navigation in Remote Areas, the Antarctic being one of them. This situation has generated joint work between the IHO and the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  

The IHO has consulted various organizations to get a wider view on the subject.  Substantive contributions were received from IAATO, the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), New Zealand Antarctic Institute (NZAI) and the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI).

The issues raised in the responses are summarized below with comments as appropriate:

    a. ‘Surveys and charting in areas of national interest, i.e. Antarctic bases are generally satisfactory. Away from the immediate vicinity of these areas the situation is generally unsatisfactory, in many areas there are only a few isolated track lines.’ 

The cost of conducting surveys to modern standards, as set out in IHO Publication S-44, is high particularly in ‘Remote Areas’. National Hydrographic Offices have to prioritise their activities. The IHO will continue to promote the need to conduct surveys in these remote areas. 

    b. ‘Charting discrepancies and other relevant information provided by Tour Ships sometimes take up to 5 years to appear as corrections to charts.’

This was a generalized comment and the IHO has asked for more definitive information in order that the cause of such delays can be investigated and hopefully rectified. The possibility of a single focal point to which information should be sent has been suggested. The focal point would then ensure that all information is sent to all relevant charting agencies as a matter of priority. This subject will be raised at the 4th meeting of the HCA, which will be held in Greece in September 2004.

    c. ‘The information shown on charts from different countries can be inconsistent.’

The IHO believes that such occurrences will be reduced as more International (INT) Charts become available. Indeed this will not provide a short-term answer however, in the interim the IHO will continue to promote the exchange of chart information.

    d. IAATO indicated that, where space permits, their members’ vessels could be used as platforms for gathering data.

The IHO is grateful for this offer. IHO and IAATO have developed a procedure to enable the hydrographic offices to identify appropriate opportunities and make contact with the operators of the vessels. The IHO and IAATO will continue to promote this facility amongst Member States.
Hydrographic Surveys are expensive and resources are finite. There is no simple action that will, in the short term, provide high quality hydrographic data for remote areas, except the raising of priority to conduct hydrographic surveys in the Antarctic. The ATS should strongly consider inviting Members States to move resources in this direction. In the meantime, the IHO, through the HCA will continue defining priorities and coordinating the present level of activity. 

UN Resolutions 2003
	
On 23 December 2003, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution A/RES/58/240 on oceans and law of the sea that dealt, in large part, with safety of navigation.  In brief, this resolution:

    (a) Welcomes the work of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) and its 14 regional hydrographic commissions. (NB : One of which is the HCA)
    (b) Invites the IHO and the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to continue efforts and to jointly adopt measures with a view to encouraging greater international cooperation and coordination for the transition to electronic nautical charts; and to increase the coverage of hydrographic information on a global basis, especially in areas of international navigation and ports and where there are vulnerable or protected marine areas. (NB : the Antarctic is par excellence a vulnerable area) 
    (c) Encourages intensified efforts to build capacity for developing countries, to improve hydrographic services and the production of nautical charts. (NB : this is one of the highest priorities of the IHO) 

As it can be understood, United Nations is clearly recognizing the importance of hydrography as well as it was recognized by ATCM Resolution 3 (2003). As regards the Antarctic, the IHO gives high priority to the work of the HCA and supports its activities. Nevertheless, progress can only be achieved by augmenting resources towards the execution of hydrographic surveys in the Antarctic, this being the responsibility of Member States. 

Conclusions

1.-	Improvement of the coordination between the IHO and other organization interested in the Antarctic is in progress and the implementation of several initiatives is greatly facilitated through the positive support and understanding of the importance of hydrographic surveys and availability of reliable nautical charts. 

2.-	 The application of certain restrictions in force, on continuous multibeam surveys, create enormous concern regarding the substantial constraints imposed on the gathering of bathymetric data, affecting the progress of INT Chart production of Antarctic waters, under IHO responsibility.

3.-	Progress achieved so far by the IHO in the production of INT Charts is according to the priorities and resources allocated by Member States to survey the Antarctic waters. In order to advance more quickly, so as to be in line with ATCM and UN Resolutions, enhancing national priorities and augmenting the mobilization of resources are necessary.


Proposal


It is recommended that the XXVIIth ATCM : 

1.-	Accepts the IHO Report. 

2.-	Acknowledges the progress made to date by the HCA and encourage continuation of 
its commitments.    

3.-	Expresses support of the launching of the IBCSO projects. 

4.-	Expresses support for the use of continuous multibeam surveys to foster 
 	bathymetric data gathering and the production of INT nautical charts.

4.-	Considers inviting Members States to augment the hydrographic survey activity in 
 	Antarctic.


Monaco, April 2004

