XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 053
Agenda Item: 4 a
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 






ON THE ACTIVITY OF THE RUSSIAN PERMISSION SYSTEM











Under the conditions of increasing tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic and the need of its regulation, of great importance appears to be information of the Parties about the national procedures of decision-making on undertaking the activity. It seems important to have a wider coverage of this issue by all Parties in order to clear up what document presents a national Permit for its conduct.
At XXIII ATCM, Russia presented the Information paper IP No. 78 “Procedure for consideration and issuance of permits to authorize activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic”, which described the first steps in implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) and developing the Russian Antarctic legislature.  
After ratification of the Protocol by the Federal Law No. 79-F3 of 24 May, 1997 “On ratification of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”, the Decision of the RF Government of December 11, 1998, No.  1476 was issued that endorsed the “Procedure for consideration and issuance of permits for the activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area”.
In compliance with this Procedure any activity in the Antarctic, corresponding to its goals and principles, is carried out on the basis of the adequately legalized Permits. This order does not apply to scientific and commercial activity with respect to marine living resources, which is conducted in the framework of the Conventions in force of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
The Permit is granted by the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia (ROSHYDROMET) as agreed with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (MFA RF) and the Ministry for Natural Resources of the Russian Federation (MNR RF). 
The Permit is granted on the basis of the application by the Russian individual persons and legal entities and the MNR RF expert conclusion on the submitted Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). 
To consider applications for the activity of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic and expert conclusions of the interested federal  bodies of the executive power ROSHYDROMET as agreed with the MFA RF, MNR RF and the Russian Academy of Science (RAS) sets up a Commission of 18 representatives of the interested ministries, agencies, RAS and research institutions (ROSHYDROMET, MNR RF, MFA RF, Ministry for Science of Russia, State Committee for Fishery of Russia, Ministry of Justice of Russia, Roskartographiya, the State Committee for Sports and Tourism of Russia, RAS, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute and the Russian Antarctic Expedition).
For obtaining the Permit, an applicant submits the following obligatory documents to ROSHYDROMET:
    1. Application in the adopted form.
    2. EIA performed in compliance with Article 8 of the Protocol.
    3. Copies of the statutory documents.
    4. Copy of the state registration certificate.
    5. Copy of the license for the conducted activity in cases stipulated by the legislature of the Russian Federation.
This set of documents is transferred to the MNR RF for considering the application and for expert conclusion on the EIA. Depending on the character of the activity, ROSHYDROMET and the MNR have the right in the process of consideration to request additional information from the applicant (availability of insurance, safety provision issues, coordination of actions with the national Antarctic operators, etc.) or in case of the documents not conforming to the established requirements return them to the applicant with comments for revision. After the documents are agreed and an expert conclusion on the EIA is received from the MNR RF, ROSHYDROMET prepares the materials for the session of the Commission. 
The Commission makes a decision on the:
    • permit issuance or denial;
    • need for additional information;
    • permit suspension, restriction, renewal or revocation .
In case the Commission makes a decision on the possibility of granting the Permit for the activity the documents are sent to the MFA RF for their consideration in terms of the international law. After agreement with the MFA RF, ROSHYDROMET draws up the Permit, which is signed by the Head of the Service. The procedure for obtaining a Permit takes two to eight months.
In cases stipulated by the Protocol if there is a need for a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE), ROSHYDROMET sends the Draft CEE prepared by the applicant and approved by the Commission to the MFA RF to submit it to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and the Committee for Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty within the time frame set up by the Protocol. After the Draft CEE is discussed by the Consultative Parties, the applicant taking into account the comments received prepares the final CEE and submits it to the Commission. Then in compliance with the order stipulated by the Protocol, the final CEE is disseminated to the Consultative Parties.
The Permit is drawn up on a numbered form, which is a document of strict accounting that has a protection degree similar to a security. The Permit indicates the area and the conditions under which the indicated activity can be implemented.
The permit and its copies (duplicates) are registered by ROSHYDROMET.
The control for the availability of the Permits, observance of the requirements and the terms set forth in the permits is performed through the observers and responsible representatives of the Russian Federation who are designated by ROSHYDROMET from the participants of the Russian Antarctic Expedition.
ROSHYDROMET has the right to suspend or restrict the action of the Permit or revoke it in case of inconsistence with the declared activity. 
In case of a threat of emergency situations, the activity can be suspended by the responsible representative of the Russian Federation who immediately informs ROSHYDROMET about it for consideration of the problem by the Commission.. 
The inventory of granted and revoked Permits and Permits, the action of which is suspended is kept by ROSHYDROMET. 
The Permits are granted not only to the non-governmental but also to the governmental organizations, including the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). Taking into account the approved long-term program of the activity of Russia in the Antarctic (Decision of the RF Government of 24.09.2001 No. 685 and the Sub-Program “Study and Research of the Antarctic“ of the Federal Program the “World Ocean”, the RAE has received such a Permit for 5 years (up to 2007). In case of the new types of studies and activities appearing in the RAE Program not included to a long-term Program such as water sampling in Lake Vostok or construction of snow-ice airfields at Novolazarevskaya and Progress stations, the RAE additionally prepares and submits all materials for obtaining the Permit for special types of activity.
As an example, a copy of the Permit for construction of the orthodox temple at Bellingshausen station is attached.  

Attachment 



Pic. Copy of the Permit for activity
