XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 109
Agenda Item: 14
NORWAY
Original: English

 








THE DRONNING MAUD LAND AIR NETWORK (DROMLAN)















The Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN).

Information Paper for ATCM XXVII, submitted by Norway and Russia on behalf of the DROMLAN consortium. Suggested location: Agenda item 14



Historical Background

The need for rapid and better transport in and out of the Polar Regions has been an issue to many nations for a considerable period of time. Several means of transport have been evaluated, for price, speed and efficiency. Air transport has been on the agenda in several international forums for some time, and a considerable amount of research and work has been laid down through COMNAP (Committee of Managers of National Antarctic Programs) and its logistic subcommittee SCALOP in order to find a solution to faster transport to the continent, and to share costs and resources among national Antarctic operators.

The idea of establishing a cooperative air network in the Antarctic appeared as early as the beginning of the 1970s. At the VIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Recommendation VII-8 “Cooperation in transport” was adopted, which encouraged countries-participants to the Treaty to cooperate in undertaking joint marine and air operations and using common ships. In 1974, the SCAR Working Group on Logistics set up an ad-hoc sub-committee called CATSA, which was requested to consider the possible ways and specific measures for cooperation in air transport. The CATSA activity was supported by adopting Recommendation VIII-7 “Cooperation in transport” at the VIIIth Consultative Meeting and continued until 1980 when the Group terminated its activity.

Different SCALOP workshops on air transport have been held through the years.  As a result, three Air Network areas have been identified:
    • The Antarctic Peninsula and Weddell Sea Air Network
    • The Central Antarctic Air Network
    • The Ross Sea Region Air Network.

The pioneers of transcontinental flights in the Indian Ocean sector of the Antarctic were specialists of the Russian Aeroflot who in the 1970s-1980s in the framework of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition Program made flights to Molodezhnaya and Novolazarevskaya stations from the airports of Maputu, Mozambique and Cape Town (South Africa) on Il-18D and Il-76 aircraft. For receiving such aircraft in Antarctica, specialists of the Leningrad Design Institute “Lenaeroproject” developed a technology for construction of runways on compacted snow. This technology was successfully realized in conducting the programs of the Soviet Antarctic expeditions. The economic crisis of the early 1990s occurring in the USSR and naturally at the Russian Federation, interrupted transcontinental flights to the Antarctic and preparation of runways under the programs of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE).
Stabilizing of the economic situation in Russia allowed us once again to consider the implementation of the projects on air communication between South Africa and the Queen Maud Land in Antarctica. However, the RAE capabilities to accomplish such aviation program independently were insufficient. At the same time, the national Antarctic Programs of such countries as Germany, Finland, Sweden and Norway showed increased interest in the possibilities of delivering specialists and part of scientific equipment for conducting summer seasonal programs at their stations and bases. 

Resuming in December 2001 transcontinental flights of aircraft Il-76 to the snow-ice airfield of the Russian Novolazarevskaya station played a decisive role in the development of a really effective project of the cooperative air network in East Antarctic The airfield is located in 15 km to the southeast of Novolazarevskaya station at the ice dome snow-bare slope. The geographical coordinates of the airfield control point (ACP – runway center) are as follows: 11o35’44” E and 70o50’39” S. The flight time for Il-76TD from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya is 6 hours.

For the Central Antarctic Air Network establishment it has been important to get all national operators in Dronning Maud Land (DML) interested to take part and to find ways to start operations from South Africa to DML, and at the same time be able to work on improvement of operations, feeder service options etc.

Through bi-and multilateral meetings and discussions an agreement was reached and the national Antarctic operators in DML, eleven in all, formally established DROMLAN in 2002 at XIV COMNAP in Shanghai.


Purpose of DROMLAN

The aim of the DROMLAN Project is to provide air transport to/from and within Dronning Maud Land (DML) to any member country of COMNAP in science related activities, including logistics.

This includes the following actions:
-    To organize air transport between Cape Town and DML
    • To maintain and improve the airfield at the Novolazarevskaya station and establish and maintain an airfield at the Troll station
    • To organize feeder flights inside DROMLAN area
    • To organize any other service necessary for the flights above.


ADMINISTRATION OF DROMLAN

The administrative structure of DROMLAN consists of a Steering Committee, an Executive Director and a Support Group.

The Steering Committee is responsible for the general direction of the DROMLAN, and consists of one representative from each participating country.  This Committee is the DROMLAN Projects decision making body for policy, financial matters, operating guidelines and the annual programme and decisions are reached by consensus.

The Executive Director acts on behalf of DROMLAN nations within a framework agreed by the Steering Committee.

The Support Group consists of four members from the Steering Committee. The Support Group will help the Executive Director with the co-ordination of appropriate project planning and administration as necessary.

The DROMLAN nations have organized meetings at the following schedule during a one season cycle: one pre seasonal meeting Oct/Nov to discuss and make up plans for the work ahead, one post seasonal meeting to sum up the season behind and also to take note of lessons learned, one main meeting in connection with the yearly COMNAP meeting.


MEMBERSHIP IN DROMLAN

Founding members are the national COMNAP organizations of Belgium, Finland, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

A “Terms of Reference” (TOR) has been worked out and 9 of the above national operators have already signed the document in Brest on 12 July 2003. Signals received by the Executive Director indicate that the two remaining nations will sign TOR during 2004.

New membership nations to DROMLAN will be decided upon by the Steering 
Committee based on applications.

National representatives of DROMLAN:

Maaike Vancauwenberghe, Belgium (OSTC)
Henrik Sandler, Finland (FIMR)
Hartwig Gernandt, Germany (AWI)
Prem Chand Pandey, India (NCAOR)
Kazuyuki Shiraishi, Japan (NIPR)
Jan H Stel, Netherlands (NWO/NAAP)
John E. Guldahl, Norway (NPI)
Valery Klokov, Russia (RAE)
Henry Valentine, South Africa (SANAP)
Magnus Augner, Sweden (SPRS)
John Pye, United Kingdom (BAS)


OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES TO DATE

In the season 2000-2001 an international inspection/survey of air operations from Cape Town, South Africa to DML was carried out on an initiative by Norway. Altogether 20 participants joined the inspection team from Australia, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Japan, Norway, South Africa, and Sweden. During this operation the natural blue ice runway at Henriksenskjæret (71º31'S, 08º48'E) was used. Feeder flights were performed by using Basler BT 67, DH Twin Otter, and Helicopter BO 105 to visit Troll, Kohnen, Neumayer, Aboa/Wasa, and Tor stations. A major outcome of this inspection was the discovery of an appropriate blue ice area to land heavy aircraft in the vicinity of Troll station.

Since season 2001-2002 the snow compacted runway “Novo-Airbase” (70º50'39"S, 11º35'44"E) located close to the Russian station Novolazarevskaya has been used as the gateway for intercontinental flights with Ilyushin aircraft (IL-76) into the Dronning Maud Land. In parallel survey and preparation works started at Troll to establish an alternate runway (approx 71º57'S, 2º25'E) by 2005/06. The availability of two runways in the area of destination will improve the planning and safety of intercontinental flights in future.

The season 2000-2001 was the first one with international participation in the emerging DROMLAN co-operation. The intercontinental flights were organized by the Norwegian Polar Institute in contractual co-operation with a commercial operator. Two IL-76 flights were carried out, with a total of 37 passengers. Altogether 10 tons of cargo was flown to Antarctica and 7 tons cargo in return. Feeder flights to Troll, Neumayer, SANAE, Aboa and Wasa were done by combined use of Twin Otter and Dornier aircraft as well as helicopters available to the national operators in the region.
Since season 2002/03 flight operations in the frame of DROMLAN are being established by yearly contracts between national operators and a commercial operator organizing intercontinental flights by IL-76 aircraft and part of feeder flights with two AN-2 aircraft. National operators support feeder flights to various stations and provide other services necessary and facilities at their stations. Further progress was made by establishing a detailed and individual weather forecast at Neumayer station in order to improve safety and reliability of intercontinental and feeder flight activities. 

During season 2002-2003 four IL-76 flights took personnel and cargo from Cape Town to Novo-Airbase, with altogether 110 passengers in and 131 out. The cargo amounted to 11 tons in to Antarctica and 6 tons out from the continent. Internal feeder flights were done by two Antonov (AN-2), two Dornier, and one Twin Otter aircrafts to fly personnel and cargo to destinations as Kohnen, Neumayer, Halley, Aboa/Wasa, SANAE IV, and Troll.

In the summer season 2003-2004 all together 7 IL-76 flights were launched, carrying south 158 passengers and 89 tons of cargo, and out of Antarctica 145 passengers and 24 tons of equipment. Feeder flights were carried out by two AN-2 aircraft (301 hours), two Dornier aircraft (138 hours), and one Twin Otter aircraft (17 hours). Feeder flight destinations have been Neumayer, Kohnen, Aboa/Wasa, SANAE IV, and Troll. New destinations for Dornier aircraft have been the landing sites Air Relay Point (ARP 1) at the inland ice plateau and S 17 close to Syowa station in order to fly personnel and cargo from Novo-Airbase for Dome Fuji station and back.


DROMLAN LONG TERM PLANS

A long-term plan has been worked out for 5 years as the first period of the project lasting from 2003 until 2008. During this period Novo-Airbase will be operational for intercontinental flights every season. Preparation of Troll runway will be continued and finished until season 2004/05. Necessary upgrading of both airfields facilities will take place as need arise and the funds are made available.
National and commercial operators will further organize feeder flights within DML. In parallel new options will be checked to improve efficiency and range of feeder flights.  
Supporting services such as weather forecast, fuel provision and accommodation will be provided by national operators as to date. 

Major dead lines as currently considered:

2004/05 	Runway inspection and test flights to Troll.
2005 	Progress review of DROMLAN activities.
2005/06 	Novo-Airbase and Troll airfields are fully operational for this and subsequent seasons.
2007 	International evaluation of the flight operations to/from Novo and Troll.
2008 	Set out for continuation of DROMLAN cooperative operations.
CONCLUSION

Based on our experience so far, DROMLAN has proved to be a very efficient way for national operators with a mutual interest in the same geographical areas to solve transport needs in a cost effective and rapid way. Preparation and daily administrative matters can be directed to a smaller group tasked to deal with this issues, and working effort can be given in full scale to own program and scientific work. The DROMLAN community likes to think that this set up could stand out as a model for other international co-operations, both in science and in logistics in Antarctica.




