






 




REPORT BY THE INTERIM SECRETARIAT OF THE AGREEMENT ON THE CONSERVATION OF ALBATROSS AND PETRELS (ACAP)













REPORT BY THE INTERIM SECRETARIAT OF THE AGREEMENT ON THE CONSERVATION OF ALBATROSS AND PETRELS (ACAP)

1.	The Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels, or ACAP, is a multilateral agreement which seeks to conserve albatrosses and petrels by coordinating international activity to mitigate known threats to albatross and petrel populations.  ACAP has been developed under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).

2.	The Agreement is the first multilateral agreement which seeks an integrated and holistic approach to albatross and petrel conservation throughout the Southern Hemisphere. It seeks to promote, cooperate in, and support research relating to these birds.  Actions identified in the Agreement’s Action Plan include the exchange of information on mitigation measures aimed at protecting these birds from fishing practices; monitoring and managing seabird populations; monitoring conservation measures and their effect on breeding and habitats; and introducing effective scientific and administrative programs.

3.	ACAP was opened for signature in June 2001 in Canberra, Australia.  To date, there are 11 signatories – Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, France, New Zealand, Peru, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom.

4.	ACAP came in to force on Sunday, 1 February 2004 following the ratification by five countries (Australia, New Zealand, Ecuador, Spain and the Republic of South Africa) and is expected to provide a major boost for the conservation of threatened seabirds.  The United Kingdom recently became the sixth State to ratify the Agreement. 

5.	The interim Secretariat arrangements for the Agreement are currently provided by the Australian Government and the first meeting of the Parties will be convened in late 2004.  Further information can be obtained at www.acap.aq or by contacting the interim Secretariat by email at barry.baker@aad.gov.au or by telephone on +61 3 6232 3407.
