XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 102
Agenda Item: CEP 4a
UKRAINE
Original: English

 





Annual report pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
the Ukraine
(2004)









































Annual report pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
the Ukraine 
(2004)

1. Notification pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

1.1. The legislation

The Ukraine produced the documents According to Article 13 (3) of the Protocol:

a) the Law of the Ukraine “ On ratification by Ukraine to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (22.02.2001, № 2284-III);

b) the resolution of the Cabinet Minister on "Maintenance of the international obligations Ukraine in connection with acceding of the Ukraine to Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” and “The Procedure of the permission issue on physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic” (16.06.2003, № 908);

According to these documents, the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine is responsible state organization for the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty discharging. The Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine issues the permissions on physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic in accordance with decision of impact assessment on the Antarctic environment. These documents contain information about obligatory conditions for the issue permission for the planned activity, the consideration terms, and the control for the activity and using sanctions;

The Commission for the permission issue on physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic region was created (04.03.2004, № 176). The Commission competence is review of the request for activity and preparation of the conclusions on character and level of possible environmental impact.

c) the project of the Law of the Ukraine “On Antarctic Activity” is considered by the Verkhovna Rada. The Law is defined the general principles of Antarctic activity under Ukrainian jurisdiction to guarantee the scientific, economical, domestic and normative activity according the Treaty (Article IX).

        1.2. Contingency plans in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol

The contingency plans of activity at the extremely situations was recommended by Article 15 of Protocol to the Protocol are prepared. Activity of personnel in extremely situations at the Ukrainian Antarctic station Vernadsky is regulated under documents: Instructions for the station personnel operation under principles of fuel transfer from ships and acting in the case of its leakage, Instructions for the personnel operation in fire emergency. 

    2. Annex I.

Ukrainian activity in Antarctica is subjected to rigorous environmental impact assessment procedures. There procedures are in accordance with the Annex I, Article 1, 3, 6 of the Environmental Protocol. 

    3. Annex III.

The waste management at Ukrainian Antarctic Station is provided in compliance with Annex III (9). The detailed waste management plans are working out and will be realized within 2003–2004.
In compliance with Annex III (8) the database for regions of former activity of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions are under preparation till 2004.

    4. Annex V.

The HSM-62 - Base F (Wordie House) is located on Winter Is, Argentine Islands (65º15’S,64º16’W). It is the historical place so importance as an example of the early British scientific base. Party undertaking management: UK and Ukraine.

