Information Paper
Submitted by Germany
Continuation of the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica
(EPICA)

Introduction
Current status
	-	Reasons for the extension
	-	Additional activities resulting from the extension
	-	Evaluation of the impacts of these additional activities on the Antarctic’s environmental assets.
Summary

Introduction

In December 2000, the Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research started a deep ice-core drilling activity in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. This activity is part of the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA), in which Germany as well as Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Great Britain and Northern Ireland are involved.

Prior to commencement, this activity was subjected to an environmental impact assessment in accordance with Annex I to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 

The following points were seen as arguing for the performance of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) assessment:

    • The project was comparable in size and duration to the Cape Roberts and Dome Concordia (Dome C) drilling projects, for which – before entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in January 1998 – CEE´s had been performed on a voluntary basis.
    • The number of participants on site was on average 20 persons per season. Due to the traverses, this number grew to up to 30 persons.
    • The camp was to be installed as a container camp for a period of five years.
    • The activity comprised overland traverses, erection of the camp, use of helicopters and airplanes, the drilling activity itself, handling of waste and drilling fluid, and camp dismantling.

Following discussion in the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), which fully endorsed the draft CEE at its 11 to 15 September 2000 meeting in The Hague, and adoption by the XII Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting, Germany’s competent authority, the Federal Environmental Agency, authorised the deep ice-coring activity. The permit expires on 30 April 2005.

Issues raised included, in particular, the intention to leave the drilling fluid behind in Antartica. In that respect, the permit was linked with the condition that the drilling chips be centrifuged. For further environmental impact minimisation, the centrifuged drilling chips, before being placed into the ice pit, were to be stored over extended periods of time so as to ensure extensive evaporation of the drilling fluid.

While the start of the project proceeded as planned, delays occurred in the timing of the drilling operations, for logistical and technical reasons. 

Current status

Drilling status and initial scientific results

A depth of 1565 metres was reached at the end of the 2002/03 drilling season. By 2003/04 (7.2.2004), the drilling had reached a depth of 2566 metres. Core yield and core quality along the entire length of the drillhole can be rated as excellent. Greatest possible care was taken in handling the drilling fluid, and the permit conditions were complied with, i.e. the drilling chips were centrifuged and dried on the ice surface as far as reasonably practicable prior to final storage in a snow pit. Drilling fluid was collected where possible. For example, a collection tank was installed below the winch in the course of the drilling work, so that drilling fluids thus collected could be filled into vats and transported out of Antarctica for disposal. Consumption of drilling fluid in the 2002/03 season was 18 litres per metre drilled (drillhole volume 13.2 l/m) and was thus well below the level of 22 litres per metre drilled assumed in the CEE.
Analysis of the core material obtained is progressing quickly. Depth profiles of electrical conductivities (DEP (dielectric profiling) and ECM (electrical conductivity measurements)) are available to a depth of 2565 and 1565 metres, respectively. Continuous profiling of the stable isotopes 18O and deuterium has been completed to a depth of c. 1000 metres. Gas concentration measurements with the material from the 2002/03 season are currently ongoing. Chemical analysis of this material could not, however, be started until March 2004, as unfortunately the measuring apparatus for continuous flow analysis (CFA) was lost during the return journey from the Antarctic (Dome C) and had to be replaced. For the Holocene, there are indications that climatic variation patterns in the Dome C and Droning Maud Land areas are largely synchronous. Differences in detail cannot, however, be discussed until reliable dating results are available. It can be assumed that the core material from the 2003/04 season includes the last interglacial, the so-called Eem warm period, so that a complete glacial cycle is now available for evaluation, at a temporal resolution that can be regarded as high by Antarctic standards.

Reasons for the extension

Considerable delays occurred in the first drilling season (2001/02) of the deep ice-core drilling activity, due initially to the late arrival of FS Polarstern at Neumayer Station because of adverse ice conditions as well as some unexpected technical problems during the drilling. As a result, the target depth of 1000 m was not reached and the drilling had to be interrupted at the end of the season at a depth of 450 m for the winter break.

Although in the subsequent 2002/03 season the drilling target of 1000 linear metres of ice core was surpassed and 1115 m of new core was gained, this was not sufficient to make up for the shortfall from the previous season. The drilling also proceeded apace in the latest season, 2003/2004, but bedrock has not yet been struck (thickness of the icesheet: 2750  50 m). In order to make up for the shortfall that currently exists compared to the original plans, at least one additional drilling season is needed, assuming that the drilling continues without any interruptions.

However, drilling progress is slowing with increasing hole depth, due to longer lowering and raising times as well as unfavourable changes in the mechanical properties of the ice with increasing ice temperature. Model calculations now carried out with new data from the area under study show that the temperature near bedrock is likely only 1 degree Celsius below the pressure melting point. Temperature measurements in the drillhole during the 2003/04 season, which showed that temperature already reaches –7.8°C at a depth of 2560 m, confirm this result. This would mean that the ice is several degrees warmer than originally assumed when the activity was planned. Therefore, problems with drilling in nearly-temperate ice, similar to those that occurred in the NGRIP (Greenland) and the EPICA Dome C (Antarctic) drilling projects, will likely be encountered near bedrock. This could result in an additional delay of one further season.

For these reasons, a two-season extension of the drilling activity should be planned.

Activities resulting from the extension

Additional activities resulting from the extension consist of the implementation of two additional drilling seasons in 2004/05 and 2005/06. This increases the number of drilling seasons from 5 to 7. Activities in these two additional seasons comprise the transport of personnel and material to and from the Kohnen drilling camp, drilling from 2565 to 2750  50 metres depth, transport of the ice cores from the Kohnen camp to Neumayer by the Polar 4 airplane, and to Europe. Among these, the only relevant additional activity compared to the scale described in the CEE is operation of the camp during the 2004/2005 and 2005/2006 seasons and related transport of personnel and material. The scale of the drilling and of the transport of drilling cores will remain unchanged; it will merely be spread over two additional years. Also, the additional drilling seasons will not require additional consumption of drilling fluid.

Additional fuel consumption for traverse vehicles and camp operation in the additional seasons corresponds to the season-related consumption figures given in the CEE.

The activities in Season 5 described in the CEE remain unchanged; they will merely be postponed for two years to the 2006/07 season, now Season 7.

Assessment of the impacts of these additional activities on the Antarctic’s environmental assets

Since – as described above – both the scale of the drilling and of core transport will remain unchanged compared to the project as authorised, only the additional logistical activities had to be assessed with respect to their environmental impacts.

These additional logistical activities mainly comprise:

    • Operation of Kohnen Station in the 2004/2005 and 2005/2006 seasons, and 
    • Transport of personnel and material (including waste) to and from Kohnen Station.

The resulting environmental impacts are largely limited to emissions caused by the consumption of fuel and consumables and to the disposal of wastewater and faeces in ice. These impacts can be assessed, with regard to duration and intensity, as being less than minor or transitory within the meaning of Article 8, paragraph 1 of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Summary

Since December 2000, the international research project “European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica” (EPICA) has been successfully ongoing in Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica, under the lead management of the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research. In addition to the drilling itself, to a depth of about 2800 m, the project also comprises the operation, establishment and dismantling of the Kohnen summer station as well as logistical activities (overland and air transport of personnel and material).

Logistical and technical problems that have occurred several times in the past have made it necessary to extend the project, which was originally planned to end in 2005 and authorised in the course of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE).

The environmental impacts likely to result from the extension are mainly limited to additional emissions and wastewater disposal operations.
Furthermore, since both the scale of the drilling and of the transport of drilling cores is to remain unchanged, the likely overall impacts can be assessed as being less than minor or transitory.

In particular, there are no obvious reasons pursuant to Article 8, paragraph 3 of the Protocol of Environmental Protection which would have required the performance of another environmental impact assessment pursuant to Annex I to the Protocol of Environmental Protection.

Therefore, on 10 March 2004, the competent authority, the Federal Environmental Agency, authorised the extension of the EPICA project until 30. April 2007, as requested.
