XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 030
Agenda Item: CEP
INDIA
Original: English

 





ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF THE INDIAN PERMANENT STATION-MAITRI IN PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY














ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF THE
INDIAN PERMANENT STATION-MAITRI IN PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY



Introduction
Each Antarctic Treaty nation is required to report annually about the action taken to implement the Protocol as per the Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In accordance with the recommendation XV-5 of the Fifteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting, held in Paris in 1989, there are a series of activities that should be monitored. Through continuous monitoring the environmental change can be observed which would provide valuable benchmark to evaluate the state of Antarctic environment. According to the Protocol on Environmental Protection (article 8 and annex I), environmental impact assessment (EIA) procedure has been developed for activities undertaken in the Antarctic. India initiated towards the ratification of Antarctica Treaty and following measures represents the active role;  
    • India admitted to the Antarctic Treaty on August 19, 1983 and soon after obtained a consultative status on September 12, 1983
    • India was admitted as a member of Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) on October 1, 1984.
    • India became the member of Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLER) in 1986.
    • India ratified he Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty in 1997, thus upholding its commitment to preserve the pristine continent
For Madrid Protocol our activities aim at:
    • Implementation of suggested steps in Environmental Management Plan, to minimize the adverse impact to conserve the Antarctic Environment and introduction of Environmental Management System.
    • Providing valuable environmental and technological data, useful for the development national and international research
    • Development of strategy to build cooperation with the research programme of other countries for environmental protection
This paper represents the environmental monitoring conducted at Indian permanent station “Maitri” at Antarctica during the summer period of year 2003-04.
Monitoring Programme During Summer Period 2003-04
According to the Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica (SCAR, 1996) the monitoring improvement is carried out. An Environmental laboratory was established in the year 1999 and this year it is enhanced with the new analytical tools, glassware and plastic ware. The old chemicals are removed from the laboratory. In this year the monitoring was carried out for air (SPM, SO2 and NOx), water/wastewater samples are collected and physico-chemical analysis (pH, temperature, conductivity, turbidity, alkalinity, chloride, ammonical nitrogen, dissolved oxygen, biochemical oxygen demand, and chemical oxygen demand) carried out at Environmental Laboratory at Maitri. Water and wastewater samples were preserved for further analysis of hydrocarbon and heavy metals like cadmium, copper, chromium, lead, iron and zinc) in the Laboratory at NCAOR, India.
Data regarding the air quality modelling study are collected to provide the input source for Industrial Source Complex Short Term Version-3 (ISCST-3) for Maitri station and mixing height is calculated based on the radiosonde dada available at the Maitri station of the same period. First time in Maitri the stack monitoring is carried out to estimate the SPM concentration from the various stacks of the boiler, generators, and incinerators.
Water samples collected from the sea nearby India bay and analysed at environmental laboratory at Maitri, flow, current and salinity measurements are carried out at various place for dilution and dispersion study of the wastewater discharge into sea, after primary and secondary treatment. During this year in summer in continuation of earlier expeditions once in 15 days an environmental cleaning of surrounding of Maitri station is carried out. 
 Performance evaluation of biodiscs was done to carryout the treatment efficiency of biodiscs. The result obtained in the laboratory and based on the results the tuning is done to improve the treatment efficiency of Rotating Biological Contactor which is at present being utilized for primary as well as secondary wastewater treatment at Maitri. An environmental management plan was prepared to mitigate the adverse impact including health and safety of the occupants.
Biological samples (Algae, Lichen, Diatoms) in and around the Maitri station are collected to understand there existence and the stress condition if any.
A continuous measurement of CO, CO2 and CH4 throughout the year is made using automated gas chromatograph at Maitri. 
 Waste Management
Station has the systems to collect and segregate the waste as per nature of the waste i.e. bio degradable and non-biodegradable. Further biodegradable waste is also segregated as papers, rags and food waste. Paper rags etc are burnt in a closed room by incinerator and ash is collected in the drums similarly the human excreta is incinerated and the ash are collected into the drum and all the solid waste is removed from the Antarctica and bring to country for safe disposal. The basic aim of this activity to remove the waste from the Antarctica treaty area. 
Fire Fighting Drill
To combat the fire in case of emergency, training on fire fighting technique is given and   fire drill was organized every months during the summer and all the members participated.
Conclusion
The environmental monitoring Programme at the Indian scientific permanent station was started in the year of 1993. At Maitri station, based on the EMP suggested each year by the group of environmental scientist is implemented year-to-year basis, which result into improvement in the quality and aesthetics of the station. Due to collection of the data a significant database is generated for future comparison. Indian team members are working also in close cooperation with other country i.e. Peru, Germany, Iran, France, Russia and South Africa. The analysis of data does not show the significant change in environmental indicator. Regular monitoring activity is continue in order to keep under control any negative impact on the Antarctic environment, surrounding to the Maitri station. An environmental lab is setup in the station Maitri (to analyze basic parameters) and at National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean research (a nodal agency of India to undertake, organize and coordinate Antarctic Scientific Programme), which is a major step towards environmental monitoring Programme and which will be strengthened further in coming expeditions.

