XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 028
Agenda Item: 14
GERMANY
Original: English

ATCM XXVII

Cape Town, 2004

CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW
PERMANENT ANTARCTIC STATION
REPLACING NEUMAYER STATION
AT EKSTRÖM ICE SHELF
ATCM XVII
Information paper IP-xxx
Agenda Item: ATCM 14
CEP
Germany
Original: English

Construction of a new permanent Antarctic station
replacing Neumayer station at Ekström Ice shelf

General

Germany has got the consultative status in 1981. Since then extensive research activities has 
been conducted in Antarctica.

Since March 1981 Germany has been running permanently occupied research stations at the 
Ekström ice shelf/Atka Bay. The first station Georg von Neumayer (NM I) has been operational 
for 11 years until 1992. During summer season 1991/92 this station was replaced by the current 
Neumayer station (NM II). As tube construction has been founded on ice the increasing pressure 
by snow accumulation and plastic deformation of ice. The lifetime of NM II is estimated till 
2008.

For more than 20 years these stations became primary research platforms running high 
sophisticated observatories for long-term meteorological, air chemistry and geophysical studies.

                                                                         
(air-borne sythetic aperture and interferrometric radar altimeter system) for validation and 
calibration of Cryosat data, performing and co-ordinating balloon-borne observations in the 
frame of QUOBI (quantitative understanding of ozone losses by bipolar investigations) with 
cross validation of satellite and balloon-borne data.

Germany will continue Antarctic research programmes in the national frame and actively take 
part in international projects. This effort, which needs a large share of field work and station 
facilities, is dependent on very specific infrastructure allowing efficient and safe operations, and 
in turn requires constant investments to keep all facilities in top conditions or to make advanced 
replacements.

Beside the regular contribution to global 
networks, Neumayer station has been developed 
as a base for air-borne missions and deep field 
traverses within the Dronning Maud Land. Since 
January 2001 Kohnen station as a summer base 
has been commissioned about 750 km south of 
Atka Bay at the inland ice plateau, which is 
supplied by the vehicle fleet and aircraft based at 
Neumayer station. These logistic facilities were 
used to perform or to join international projects 
such as EPICA (European Project on Ice Coring 
in Antarctica), air-borne surveys for SEAL (sea 
level change), air-borne missions with ASIRAS
Germany would like to inform XVII ATCM and CEP VI that the current Neumayer station will be replaced by a new construction - Neumayer III (NM III). - to be commissioned until 2007/08 season. This effort is considered as a sustainable scientific and logistic contribution of Germany to the International Polar Year (IPY 4) and beyond.

Start of construction works is currently scheduled for 2006/07 and to be completed in the following season. The removal of NM II is planned when the new station will be fully operational.

Since February 2004 the CEE process has been commenced. According to the current planning the draft CEE will be submitted to national authorities and subsequently transmitted to Consultative Parties and CEP so that it can be considered at ATCM XVIII in 2005. The draft CEE is to comprise i) transport and erection of NM III, ii) running NM III, and iii) retrograde NM II.

Selection of construction site for NM III

As the new station will be erected on an ice shelf, it will flow with the ice along the flow line towards the ice edge. Typical flow velocities are 150 to 1200 m per year. Precautions against breaking off at the ice edge can be easily avoided by placing the station site sufficiently far away and to select a flow line of the ice shelf, which gives the least deformations from strain over the distance the station will move during its lifetime.


The map shows the area of Ekström ice shelf with flow of Georg von Neumayer (NM I) and Neumayer (NM II) positions. Because of the continuous northward ice movement, the construction site for NM III is considered several kilometres southwest off the current position of NM II.

Since summer season 2003/2004 field studies have started to investigate the shelf ice dynamics of the construction site area by GPS reference network. These studies are completed by satellite image studies to identify shear zones and tidal flexure zones of the Ekström ice shelf.

The photo shows the central point of GPS network (N-III) which is currently supposed as the construction site.
The proposed location of the new construction site supposes an operational lifetime of NM III for more than 20 years. This site is also sufficiently close to the position of NM II in order to ensure the consistency of long-term records at the observatories.

The profile for NM III to meet scientific and logistic requirements

The new Antarctic research station Neumayer III is to implement scientific, logistic, and political tasks in order to further get high quality scientific results as well as to support international co-operation in science and logistics. In order to meet these requirements NM III has to carry out a few tasks in parallel:
- Operation of aircraft and vehicle fleet in the frame of international research projects in geophysics, glaciology, and atmospheric sciences within the Dronning Maud Land region.
- Provision of working and accommodation facilities for extended scientific activities in the frame of national and international projects during summer season.
- Installation of scientific instrumentation, communication and working facilities in order to proceed the regular meteorological, air chemistry, and geophysical observations. All observatory programmes are integrated into quite a number of global monitoring networks. The results of these long-term observations are disseminated to international data centers on a regular schedule.

The operational standard and data quality of the three observatories has been internationally reviewed in 2003. The reviewers explicitly recommended the long-term continuation of these observations as a crucial contribution to meteorology, upper atmosphere research and air chemistry as well as to seismological observations allowing a special look at the regional seismic activities and geomagnetic measurements to examine the time dependent variations of the Earth’s magnetic field, not only on a global scale, but also on a regional one.

The operation of the meteorological observatory in a long term follows the WMO resolution 5/3 (EC-LV) of the Executive Council of WMO on maintenance of manned meteorological (including climatological) stations in the Antarctica: “There is a growing need of high quality (high resolution) weather forecast products to support increasing logistic activities such as intercontinental and intracontinental aircraft operations as well as long distance continental field expeditions. The quality of forecast products for selected Antarctic regions significantly depends on the data quality and number of GSN and GUAN stations currently operated in the Antarctic region. National operators, particularly those currently running permanently occupied stations are invited to continue their efforts to keep manned stations running in the long term, and by so doing to keep the quality of global and regional forecast models at the necessary level for demanding operations in Antarctica.” As part of these activities the weather forecast service is to be continued for Dronning Maud Land.

As a scientific-political obligation the infrasound array IS27DE has to be permanently run as part of the geophysical observatory at NM III. Since 2004 this infrasound recording station has been integrated into the global monitoring system (IMS) of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organisation (CTBTO) controlling the adherence of the Comprehensive nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). Hence Germany has a contractual commitment to keep operational IS27DE as one of a total of four infrasound recording stations in Antarctica.
Logistic concept for NM III supply and operation

The location at the Ekström ice shelf is ideal for running a permanent station. As more than 20 years of operation show the ice shelf is very stable and ship calls have been possible in the beginning of December almost each year.

                                                                    The map shows the positions of
                                                                    NM III   (red) and other
                                                                    permanently occupied stations
                                                                    (blue) in DML as assumed for
                                                                    2008. These stations are Halley,
                                                                    NM III, SANAE IV, Troll,
                                                                    Maitri, and Novolazarevskaya.
                                                                    Supply traverses (red).

In Atka Bay the height of the ice shelf margin is about 8 to 10 m and allows easy unloading and loading operations. The distance to NM III is short compared with the traverse routes for other stations in the Dronning Maud Land area.

In order to perform extended deep field and aircraft missions the logistic concept for NM III includes regular access to the station in the frame of Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN). Since DROMLAN has been established as an international project in 2001/02 air transport is provided to/from and within Dronning Maud Land to stations in all science related activities, including logistics. DROMLAN is supported by 11 national operators providing runways, fuel capacity, flight following and SAR services. Among others regular weather forecast service will be continued by NM III for DROMLAN flight operations.

The efficient running of NM III will depend on international co-operation and support, and the same time the station will provide support in science and logistics to other national operators working in the Dronning Maud Land region.

Design concept for NM III building

As more than 20 year experiences for NM I and NM II show the tube concept enables a lifetime of maximum 12 to 15 years with relatively high running costs to keep the station facilities operational. A new challenge has come from the Protocol of Environmental Protection which requires the complete removal of all structures and facilities at the end of station usage.

In the result of comprehensive evaluation, experiences collected for more than 20 years, and to observe national and international environmental regulations the so far applied conventional tube concept is to be replaced by an advanced combination of "Above-Ground and Below-Ground Combination" in a single construction with a rigid aerodynamically formed platform and a garage/storage building in a roofed snow trench right underneath. The advantage here is to have only one set of lifting equipment and short distances to go between garage/storage and main building. Antennae facilities and meteorological instruments can be mounted on the flat roof of the platform building. The complete building remains at
the accumulated snow level, and the lifetime will not be limited by snow accumulations and plastic deformation of ice as for the conventional tube concept.


Neumayer Station III - Longitudinal Section





Neumayer Station III - Section


The annual jacking-up of the station by about 70 to 80 cm to compensate for snow accumulation will be carried our for platform structure and garage structure in one go. The structure is designed to remain stable while any one of the legs or several legs are relieved from their loads. The floor of the garage can be filled with snow in order to restore the initial room height under the garage roof. A sophisticated building control system will provide the necessary information on all relevant stresses and deformation for timely reaction.

The detailed engineering performance is currently developed with respect to the following basic parameters for the building.

Heated (air conditioned) area:      1.360 sqm
Garage and storage area:            1.200 sqm
Accommodation for overwintering staff:  11 berths
Accommodation for summer season:   36 berths

Application of proven technologies as well as new solutions will be considered for power supply (combination of diesel generators and wind power generators with optional installations for new technologies), energy efficient HVAC solutions, biological grey and black water treatment etc.
