XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 099
Agenda Item: 14
BELGIUM
Original: English

 




New Belgian Research Base in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica





























New Belgian Research Base in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica


We are pleased to inform you that the Belgian government recently decided to construct a new scientific summer station in Antarctica. The station will be located at the foot of the Sør Rondane Mountains in Dronning Maud Land, on firm rock and close to a blue ice field, 150 km inland from the coast and from the former (1958 – 1967) Belgian base Roi Baudouin and 50 km from the former (1986 – 1992). Japanese Asuka station. The new base will thus be positioned half-way between Syowa station (600 km) and the Russian station Novolazarevskaya (450 km) and thus enforce the Belgian contribution to the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN). The exact location of the station will be determined during a site visit in November 2004. The inauguration is foreseen in 2007-2008 at the occasion of the IPY.

Both the coastal area (Roi Baudouin ice shelf) and the Sør Rondane region and surroundings have been investigated first by Belgian and later by Japanese scientists but since the closing of the Japanese Asuka station in 1992, no major scientific research activities have taken place. The new base is seen both as a an operating base for field investigations  and as an observation post of the geophysical and atmospheric observations, taking in a central position in the more than 1000 km long stretch between Syowa and Novolazarevskaya. 

The new research station and its facilities will be offered not only to the Belgian research community but also as a platform for broad international collaboration and as a monitoring station for the state of the (East) Antarctic environment. In view of the historic relationship between Japan and Belgium in this area the first contacts have already taken place between our two countries for such a collaboration. 

The scientific programme and the operation of the base will be managed by the Belgian Science Policy Office. The prefabrication, construction and concept of the base itself will be carried out during 2005-2007 by private companies in collaboration with the International Polar Foundation (IPF, Brussels) of Mr. Alain Hubert. The initial idea is a possible accommodation of maximum 20 people and a modular concept, which can evolve in function of upcoming research proposals and collaborations.

With this initiative Belgium hopes to strengthen its position within the Antarctic Treaty System, to contribute to the international scientific exploration of Antarctica and to the management and preservation of the world’s last wilderness. Further information will be presented at the next ATCM and CEP.

