XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 090
Agenda Item: CEP 4a
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original: English

 






Report on research  activities of THE Czech republic
 in the antarctic
Season 2003/2004






















XXVII ATCM
Information Paper IP- ….
Agenda Item: CEP ….
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original : English







Information paper


Report on research  activities of THE Czech republic
 in the antarctic
Season 2003/2004





    I. Research Group
James Ross Island
February - March 2004
Participants:
Dr. Petr Mixa, Dr. Bedřich Mlčoch, Daniel Nývlt (Czech Geological Survey)
Dr. Jan Košler, (Faculty of Science, Charles University Prague), 
Dr. Josef Elster, (Department of Botany, Academy of Sciences)

Research activities:
Final on-site preparation work for the future Czech base (63°48'10'' S; 57°53'00'' W), biological monitoring of the environmental impact on the construction site before the start of operation of the base, reconnaissance and documentation of geological situation in the area of the base, engineering-foundation conditions, the source of drinking water, helicopter landing place, condition for waste-water management, source of gravel for construction of the pier and for the foundations of the buildings. 
Study of provenance of glacigenic and glaciofluvial sediments on James Ross Island and their relation to the paleoclimatological and paleogeographical evolution in the region, sampling of erratic moraine materials, including heavy minerals fraction, isotopic 14Corg dating of organic matter.
Monitoring of possible contamination of soils by organic pollutants (the pilot research for the study of behavior, concentration and degradation of organic pollutants in the ice in the Antarctic environment in general).
The provenance study of Cretaceous sediments using U-Pb dating of detrital zircons.
Detailed geological and geomorphological mapping of the north-western part of James Ross Island between Cape Lachman – Crame Col - Bibby Point.

    II. Research Group
Ukrainian Vernadsky Station, Galindéz Island, Argentinean Archipelago
March 2004
Participants:
Prof. Pavel Prošek,  Ing. Miloš Barták, Dr. Kamil Láska
(Masaryk University, Faculty of Science)

Research activities:
This research was carried out under the joint Czech-Ukrainian Agreement of Scientific and Logistic Co-operation between Faculty of Science, MU Brno and Ukrainian Antarctic Center, Kyiv.
The study of the UV-radiation and its spectral parts with special interest to the biologically effective UVB radiation. The aim of this topic is an analysis of regime of UV radiation and its dynamic in context to the development of ozone depletion and regional atmospheric factors (cloudiness, Sun position, surface albedo, aerosols).
The study of moss patch energy balance and its effects in soil climate and  in boundary layer of atmosphere. Special interest was focused on function and regime of all fluxes of radiation and heat energy exchange for the environment of the typical Antarctic plant community survived in the extreme climatic and nutritive conditions.
Physiology of photosynthesis in Antarctic lichens. Ecophysiological investigations of Antarctic lichens were focused on measurements of daily courses of thalli temperature in selected lichens species as dependent on physical factors of environment. Primary processes of photosynthesis were evaluated using modern methods of induced chlorophyll fluorescence in Xanthorie elegans, Umbilicaria antarctica, and Umbilicaria decussata.


    III. research group
Peruvian Machu Picchu Station, King George Island
February - March 2004
Participants:
Dr. Zdeněk Máčka, Ondřej Marvánek (Masaryk University, Faculty of Science)

Research activities:
The research was carried out in the co-operation with the Peruvian Antarctic Institute within the Peruvian Antarctic expedition ANTAR XV. The research activities were divided into three main fields: geomorphology, soil science and climatology.
Geomorphologic part of the research involved monitoring of slope processes (solifluction, talus creep), surveying of the active layer thickness, geomorphological mapping and sedimentological investigations of lake sediments and regolith with patterned ground.
Soil science part of the research involved collecting of the samples of soil and vegetation for the analysis of the humic acids content.
Climatological part of the research involved installation of the two stations for monitoring air temperature and humidity, global radiation and soil temperatures, further data logger for the monitoring of soil temperature and humidity was installed at the sorted polygons site.

