XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 046
Agenda Item: 10
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 






THIRD INTERNATIONAL POLAR YEAR 2007/08

















Third International Polar Year 2007/08

The Russian Federation is interested in undertaking studies and activities in the framework of the International Polar Year 2007/08 (IPY 2007/08) and makes specific steps to determine its participation. In 2002-2003, the Russian “Concept of holding the International Polar Year 2007/08” was prepared, which sets forth the scientific and practical preconditions of holding the IPY 2007/08, outlines the state interests of Russia, formulates the aims and goals of the studies and measures for practical implementation and resource support of activities.
At the 14th World Meteorological Congress of WMO (May 2003), the initiative of the Russian Federation on holding the IPY 2007/08 was supported by endorsing Resolution 9.1/3 (Cg – XIV).
The Russian Federation undertakes work for preparation of the Decision of the RF Government, which will define the organization and other measures for participation in the IPY 2007/08. On the basis of the proposals developed by different agencies, a scientific program will be created and measures for its implementation will be proposed. This program will determine in detail the contribution of the Russian Federation and will be presented to the international community. The contours of the program of the IPY 2007/08 were presented at the International Meeting of Polar Experts in St. Petersburg in January 2004 with participation of the representatives of international organizations (WMO, ICSU, etc.) and interested countries (USA, Japan, etc.). The standpoint of participants is contained in the Joint Statement of this Meeting (see Annex).
The Meeting gave an additional impetus to joining efforts of WMO and ICSU in preparation of the IPY 2007/08. The Executive Councils of WMO and ICSU should approve at the nearest time the joint initiative for holding the IPY 2007/08. For developing the Scientific Program and the Plan for discussion of the IPY 2007/08, it is envisaged to set up a joint coordination body of the WMO and ICSU representatives with invitation of other governmental and non-governmental organizations to participate in the IPY 2007/08.  
 


Annex

International Meeting
“Cooperation for the International Polar Year 2007-2008”
St. Petersburg, Russia,  January 22-23, 2004

Joint Statement 

The International Meeting “Cooperation for the International Polar Year 2007 – 2008 (IPY 2007/2008) was held at the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of Roshydromet in St. Petersburg on January 22-23, 2004. The Meeting was initiated at the “Russia – EU Workshop on Polar Research” in Brussels (June 2003) and organized by Roshydromet and the Russian Academy of Science with support from the European Commission, by the International Science and Technology Centre, and the Russian Polar Foundation. Forty experts including representatives of the international organizations and programs and scientists from the national polar institutes participated in the Meeting. 
The main aim of the Meeting was to determine the potential national participation in the IPY 2007/2008 and the interested international organizations, and to define the areas of common interest and possibilities for future cooperation in holding the IPY. The participants agreed the following statement:
The participants in the Meeting recognise that available data confirm the existence of significant changes in the state of both polar regions, especially the phenomenon of global change and its many consequences, which will have a significant impact on the natural environment as well as social and economic activity, locally and globally. In this connection, the Meeting stresses the need for creating reliable methods for assessing the state and forecasting the processes in the Polar atmosphere, ionosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, ocean and socio-economic systems, based on the data of modern observing systems and methodologies. 
It is noted that in addition to natural changes, the environment of the polar regions experience anthropogenic impacts. Pollutants transferred to high latitudes through the atmosphere, river and sea waters influence the ecosystems and, ultimately, Mankind. This can affect the population of the Arctic, whose way of life is closely connected with their specific environmental circumstances.
The scientific priorities for the IPY are currently being formulated by the ICSU IPY Planning Group under three general themes:
    • Understanding Change at the Poles
    • Exploring Earth’s Icy Domains
    • Decoding Polar Processes
In the meantime, given the global character of environmental changes and their consequences in polar regions, the need for developing the forecasting systems of the processes in high latitudes of the Earth, and vulnerability of the polar ecosystems with respect to anthropogenic impacts, the Meeting believes that the IPY 2007/2008 should include but should not be restricted to :
    • Study of current and assessment of future climate changes in polar regions;
    • Development of the scientific basis for forecasting the processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere and the ocean in polar regions;
    • Determination of anthropogenic and natural environmental state changes and their influence on the ecosystems of polar regions; 
    • Ensuring the development and availability of the technical infrastructure needed for research in the Arctic, Antarctic and Southern Ocean;
    • Assessment of the social and economic consequences of the environmental state changes in polar regions primarily influencing the life activity of indigenous peoples of the Arctic.
The results of the IPY 2007/2008 will serve as a basis for developing recommendations for governmental bodies and interested organizations operating in the Arctic and the Antarctic.
Additional important aspects of the IPY will be to attract and develop the next generation of polar scientists, engineers and leaders, and to capture the interest of the public and decision-makers.
The meeting recommends to ICSU, WMO and other organizations concerned to consider the development of the IPY concept as a matter of high priority.
The participants to the Meeting believe that during the period of preparation for the IPY 2007/2008 and directly during the IPY, the interdisciplinary observing systems should be improved and enhanced and intense scientific studies in the framework of national and international scientific programs in Polar Regions should be carried out.
An extended complex of field studies during the IPY 2007/08 should provide a detailed picture of the variability of the processes within the 2007-2008 period and become a target of careful analysis. For this, it is necessary to generate databases available for a wide exchange.
The Meeting considers that participation and jointly-coordinated efforts of WMO and ICSU will contribute to involvement of their member-countries in holding the IPY 2007/2008.
The Meeting believes that participation of international organizations such as IASC, SCAR and others possibly including the IOC, UNEP and the Arctic Council, will make a substantial contribution to the preparation and holding of the IPY 2007/2008.
For the coordination and support of joint actions, the Meeting considers it necessary to develop a plan based on a wide range of inputs and the Meeting recommends the WMO and ICSU in close cooperation with IASC, SCAR and the EC undertake steps in this direction. 
The Meeting also addresses the countries carrying out polar research and the non-governmental organizations and foundations with a proposal to participate in and render comprehensive assistance to the IPY 2007/2008.
The Meeting is supportive of a member-country or a group of countries addressing the UN General Assembly with a proposal to approve a UN Resolution on holding the IPY 2007/2008.


