XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 039
Agenda Item: ATCM 11
ITALY
Original: English

 







SOME COMMENTS AND PROPOSALS ON ANTARCTIC TOURISM

	


















Some  comments  and proposals on  Antarctic Tourism

Presented by Italy
	
  Introduction

During the last ten years the problem of the Antarctic Tourism has become more and more important and has been discussed at many international meetings.
By now  about 15.000 tourists every year are visiting Antarctica and the number of tourists per year is increasing and in 2006/2007  it could easily  reach 26.000 persons per year. 
There are regulatory mechanisms that address Antarctic Tourism, key legislation and guidelines and sources are reported for many Antarctic Program on tourism issues. ( IAATO, IP 73, 85, XXV ATCM); there are reports of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), overviews of Antarctic Tourism, and rich bibliography on publications and lectures involving tourism activity in Antarctica ( IAATO, IP 71, 73, 74 XXV ATCM).
But legislation and guidelines may  not be enough if  the tourism industry continues to increase. Thousand of people in Antarctica every year may  generate real environmental pressures and impacts.  This in  normal conditions. Accident situation can increase the seriousness of the impacts.
The possibility of introduction of a new specific tourism annex to the Protocol may not be  an appropriate basis for regulation and in any case, general questions on access, purpose and propriety of activity have been resolved elsewhere. 
However the Antarctic Treaty states that the Protocol is directed to the management of human activities in order to secure comprehensive protection of the Antarctic Environment and dependent and associated ecosystem.
Perhaps, in this case, a “Measure”, that is, a text containing provisions, legally binding once   approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, could have the capacity to impose substantive obligations. (ASOC IP 83,  XXV ATCM ).   
A further step forward  was done with the “Proposals to improve the management and regulation of Antarctic Tourism” (United Kingdom WP 23 , XXVI ATCM ).
We agree with the proposed recommendation and measure  to improve the management and regulation of Antarctic tourism, but we would  like to make some specific considerations on environmental problems. In the following, some important points to consider:

Ship emergency plans 

Most tourist ships operating in Antarctica are comparatively small and diesel powered; this ensures that, even in the event of a major maritime accident any environmental impact is  likely to be relatively contained. Furthermore smaller and lighter vessels with diesel machinery use lighter fuel, not heavy bunker fuel and therefore less polluting.
In the last years large vessels ( more than 1000 persons) have begun to sail  Antarctic waters, thus increasing environmental and health and safety risks. Tourists ships are seldom ice-strengthened,  but carry  large amounts  of fuel and this could be dangerous in the case of a  serious maritime accident. An important question is if the majority of the ships is equipped with detailed environmental emergency plan,  and if they  have the capability to intervene when necessary in a hypothetical environmental disaster.
The  question can be asked if this issue is a matter  of looking in domestic law to find sufficient basis for implementing all of the relevant measures  or if is more useful  to underline the important contribution that self-regulation by the tourist industry itself  can give.
We think that on one side, domestic law could have detailed references on specific guidelines and  conditions in the case of accident   ( fuel leak or waste discharge) but, on the other side,  self-regulation by the tourist industry would be highly desirable.
It is important to underline that the establishment of the emergency plan for dangerous situation is not enough, but  is a necessary prerequisite in case of need.
The possibilities  of a fast intervention  in the case of  an environmental damage situation must be carefully evaluated and a decision has to be taken on the basis of the real possibility of action, having  means and competence available.
Sometimes hasty and unqualified actions could create  more damage that no action at all. 
In this case it would  be useful to have on board an expert environmental officer capable to evaluate  the need of intervention with respect to an  hypothetical environmental damage. 
On the other hand the environmental officer should be important in  case of  every environmental situation ( at  sea, during landing on the coast, or  in the interior of the Antarctic continent).


Possibility to keep  hypothetical spilled fuel inside the ship. 

Ships, in particular large ships, carrying large amounts of fuel, could have double hold or an additional empty tank to ensure, in case of hull damage (icebergs are very frequent and dangerous during navigation in Antarctic seas) the possibility  of keeping fuel inside the ship by transferring the fuel from a damaged tank into an available empty tank and thus avoiding the risk of an ecological disaster.
With respect to this kind of situation , a damaged ship should  evaluate the possibility to go back to the original harbour without risk for the passengers  or to ask for help from the nearest Antarctic base .
In case  of accident  it is not easy for an Antarctic station to intervene to avoid an environmental damage or to repair a possible structural damage to the vessel. An Antarctic base of medium size could have the capability to intervene in these cases.

Verification of the capability  of tourist vessels to operate in the Antarctic environment without damaging it. 

 Antarctic tourist vessels should be inspected often during their activities in Antarctica. They should also be inspected by the harbour authorities in their home or in their departure ports, in case their country of departure is an AT Party. In any case, the environmental protection in Antarctic cruises is,  by and large, an activity run by the ship staff itself.
The possibility of inspecting the ship to verify that it has appropriate equipment to protect the environment, such as waste management plan, arrangement to transfer fuel from a damaged tank into an undamaged one,  an oil spill containment plan, etc,  should  be used whenever possible.. It has not used very much, at least in the last few years, at last from the inspection reports of the last few years.  

Characteristics of vessels carrying tourist passengers in Antarctic waters

-Considerations and criteria on regulations of Antarctic Treaty System in relation  to the  characteristic of vessels carrying tourists in Antarctica are here given here, as proposal of a checklist for tourist or other vessel
-Any special problem encountered  and where it was, shall be noted;
-IAATO recommends that at least 75% of officers and crew have experience in Antarctic waters, with indication of the specific area; 
- The ship shall have an emergency plan and a back up plan;
- does the ship have insurance in case of emergencies?  Amount of insurance;
    • the ship should have an ice pilot;
    • the ship should have a low positioned radar antenna at the bows to detect growlers;

- training on Antarctic conditions shall be given to crew and to tourist passengers;
- the ship shall carry adequate and up-to date  charts;
- vessels carrying tourists shall prepare an Environmental Impact  Analysis and shall have a copy  of that on   board;
- after the visits, the vessel management shall report to the Government  whose stations they have visited;
- crew and tourists shall be aware of the regulations of the Antarctic Treaty System(Treaty, Agreed Measures, PEPAT);
-  Vessels and shall carry relevant Treaty documentation;
-  During visits ashore no more than 100 tourists shall be taken at one time;
- measures shall be taken to ensure a minimum impact of tourists on visits ashore; 

Waste management and disposal

Vessels going to Antarctic waters shall have an efficient waste management and disposal plan. The plan shall consider the separation, reduction, collection, storage and subsequent disposal of wastes (paper, plastics, glass, metals, chemicals, food remains, sewage, etc.);
-  A member of the crew shall be designated waste manager. Clear lines of waste management and disposal shall be identified and followed;
-  Wastes produced by field parties or by tourists ashore should be clearly identified and collected for disposal. The regulations of the Treaty and Protocol and of MARPOL shall be followed.;
-  if the vessel has a waste  incinerator its emissions shall be monitored;
    • Crew and passengers shall be well aware of the waste management and disposal plans.

Prevention of oil pollution
-  prevention of sea pollution by fuel oil is an extremely important aspect of operation of vessels in Antarctic waters;-  bulk fuel shall be carried in double walled tanks and there shall be provisions for transferring fuel from a damaged tank to empty tanks kept ready in case of need; 
-  an  oil spill contingency plan shall be available: it should be revised and updated frequently and exercises shall be done under the responsibility of a fuel management person;

-  the MARPOL and the Protocol oil spill prevention measures  should be  kept well present;
-  an arrangement with a port reception facility out of the Treaty are shall be made in order to  discharge all oil residues.

Adventure tourism in Antarctica

There is no precise definition of Adventure tourism. The Antarctic tourism of fifty years ago would fit in a definition of Adventure tourism today, because of the comparatively primitive and not comfortable equipment available then, more primitive radio equipment and so on. Its impact on the environment is slight. It is carefully assessed for safety in advance and in the last few years there have been a number of expeditions supported by National operators.
The risk of adventure tourism is carefully assessed beforehand and participants are carefully screened, also from a medical viewpoint.
A danger of this type of Antarctic tourism is connected with the possible need for a complex and possibly dangerous rescue operation, should something go wrong with the expedition itself. That is why this type of tourism needs very careful preparation















