XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 025
Agenda Item: 4
IUCN
Original: English

 




REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)






























REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION1
(IUCN)
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
XXVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting


The Fifth IUCN World Parks Congress (Durban, South Africa, 8-17 September 2003) highlighted recent evidence showing the value of marine protected areas as powerful tools for biodiversity conservation and sustainable fisheries. Congress participants accordingly called on the international community to devote urgent attention to creating and expanding marine protected area networks beyond national jurisdiction, including Antarctica, by 2012.  A practical first step identified at the World Parks Congress, and elaborated in an agreed Ten Year High Seas Marine Protected Areas Strategy, is to identify marine areas for priority attention and develop criteria and guidelines for a representative system of marine protected areas. 

A further issue spotlighted by marine experts at the World Parks Congress was the wealth of unique species inhabiting deep sea features such as seamounts and cold-water corals and their particular vulnerability to disturbance from seabed bottom trawling. The ATCM, through its Environmental Committee, has an opportunity to protect these “biodiversity hotspots” by establishing on a priority basis, management mechanisms, including ASPA and ASMA, to ensure that no bottom trawling occurs over such features until specific measures are in place to protect them.

Antarctic Marine Protected Areas

At the XXIIst Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (Hobart Tasmania, Australia 2003), IUCN put forward recommendations regarding Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica. Noting that MPAs may enhance both fisheries productivity and conservation of marine biodiversity, IUCN encouraged CCAMLR Members to consider developing guiding principles to assist with the selection and designation of a network of Antarctic marine protected areas. 

IUCN further noted that Articles IX.1 (f) and IX.2 (g) of the Convention on Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources in conjunction with Annex V of the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection provide a framework for CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, particularly their Committee for Environmental Protection, to develop a system of marine protected areas that can protect ecosystem services, biodiversity and productivity in the Antarctic marine environment. CCAMLR further has the opportunity to extend such a system to cover the much larger area of the Southern Ocean under its remit than is covered by the Antarctic Environmental Protocol. 

IUCN further urged CCAMLR to consider developing criteria for review of proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) that reflect how they will contribute to CCAMLR’s goals of conservation, ecosystem-based management and precautionary decision-making. The Scientific Committee agreed to refer IUCN's recommendations on marine protected areas to its Working Group on Ecosystem Management and Monitoring for further consideration.

In the past year, IUCN has further explored and developed the concept of high seas marine protected areas (HSMPAs).  It organized a session at the 5th World Parks Congress (Durban, South Africa, 8-17 September 2003) on Protecting Marine Biodiversity beyond National Jurisdiction. This meeting was hosted in conjunction with IUCN’s World Commission on Protected Areas and WWF International’s Endangered Seas Program.  At the World Parks Congress, IUCN additionally convened a special side session on Antarctic MPAs together with members of the IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society.

Based on these events, we have prepared the attached Ten-Year High Seas Marine Protected Areas Strategy to promote the development of a global representative system of high seas marine protected area networks. It incorporates World Parks Congress Recommendation 5.23 on “Protecting Marine Biodiversity and Ecosystem Processes through Marine Protected Areas beyond National Jurisdiction.  It further indicates key strategic steps to develop a global representative system using existing knowledge while recognizing that further research is necessary.  The strategy builds on the results of the international Workshop on High Seas Marine Protected Areas (15-17 January 2003, Malaga, Spain) that emphasize the need to establish demonstration MPAs beyond national jurisdiction by utilizing existing instruments such as those set forth in the Antarctic Treaty System. This is essential to build experience with the practicalities of design, implementation and enforcement of HSMPAs while a representative system of networks is under development. 

The Vth World Parks Congress2 highlighted recent evidence showing the value of marine protected areas as powerful tools for biodiversity conservation and sustainable fisheries. Congress participants accordingly called on the international community to devote urgent attention to creating and expanding marine protected area networks beyond national jurisdiction, including Antarctica, by 2012. Collaboration between and among regional fishery management organizations and other relevant regional and global bodies is recognized as key element of this process. Participants at the World Parks Congress event on Antarctic MPAs specifically urged the Antarctic Treaty Parties to ensure the establishment of a representative system of marine protected areas for the Southern Ocean south of 60 degrees S. Noting the so far largely intact nature of the Ross Sea area, the participants further urged that the Ross Seas receive priority for protection.  

The World Parks Congress Recommendation 5.23 provides the international community with a challenge of establishing five new HSMPAs by 2008. IUCN believes that in light of the purposes of this Convention, the standing and diversity of its 24 Members, the size of the CCAMLR Area, its ecological significance, and the leadership that the Antarctic Treaty System has previously shown in the development of the international protected areas system, at least one of these HSMPAs should be established within the CCAMLR Area. A practical first step, as highlighted in that Recommendation, is to identify marine ecosystems, habitats, areas, processes and biodiversity hotspots for priority attention and develop criteria and guidelines for individual sites and for a representative system of HSMPA networks using current information while determining future research needs and priorities.

At the World Parks Congress, IUCN and WCPA were identified as potentially key organizations for supporting the development of mechanisms to initiate action for Antarctic MPAs. It was hoped that this might include bringing together relevant stakeholders, researchers and data holders to synthesize and evaluate relevant scientific information for the purposes of defining an appropriate network of marine protected areas and associated conservation measures in Antarctica. IUCN accordingly offers its assistance to CCAMLR and its members for these purposes. 


Seamounts and Cold Water Coral Reefs

Scientists are increasingly concerned about the threats that bottom trawling pose to vulnerable deep-sea biodiversity hotspots, such as seamounts and cold-water corals. The biological characteristics of these deep-sea features, which typically support slow-growing, long-lived species, make them particularly sensitive to disturbance. The CCAMLR Area includes a great many seamounts. The flanks of seamounts are known to be preferred areas for longlining for Patagonia toothfish.

The 2002 UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling on the UN system to "consider urgently" the "risks to the biodiversity of seamounts" and other areas. In June 2003, the UN Informal Consultations on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (UNICPOLOS) reiterated this call and expanded upon it.  The issue was discussed again at the July meeting of the States Parties to the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. It is the subject of current discussions regarding the two 2003 UNGA resolutions on i) fisheries and  ii) Oceans and the Law of the Sea.  

At the Tenth Deep-Sea Biology Symposium in Coos Bay, Oregon in August 2003, and the Second International Symposium on Deep Sea Corals in Erlangen, Germany in September 2003, approximately one hundred and fifty scientists signed a Statement of Concern to the United Nations General Assembly underlining the risks of bottom trawling to seamounts, cold-water corals and other vulnerable ecosystems of the deep sea. Among other recommendations, the scientists urged the UN General Assembly to adopt an immediate moratorium on bottom trawl fishing on the high seas and in other areas beyond national jurisdiction.

Initial assessments indicate that bottom trawling on the high seas appears relatively limited in relation to other high seas fisheries in terms of the number of vessels, the countries involved, and the amount and value of the catch.  However, of significant concern is the fact that bottom trawling on the high seas is largely unregulated.  Only a handful of Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (e.g., CCAMLR, NAFO, NEAFC, SEAFO) have the authority to regulate bottom fishing. Few if any of these organizations have restricted bottom trawling to protect sensitive bottom ecosystems.  

The need to address this issue has been formally recognized by the UN General Assembly (UNGA Resolution A/57/171 paragraph 56), the 2002 and 2003 meetings of the UN Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea and the 2003 Ministerial Meeting of the OSPAR Commission.  At the IUCN World Parks Congress, the urgency of this issue was highlighted to delegates in several presentations stressing the vulnerability of these areas to bottom trawling.  As a result, World Parks Congress marine participants called “on the United Nations General Assembly to consider an immediate moratorium on deep sea trawling in high seas areas with seamounts, cold water coral reefs communities until legally binding international conservation measures to protect the areas are in place:”(WPC Emerging Issues: www.iucn.org/themes/wcpa/wpc2003/pdfs/outputs/wpc/emergingissues.pdf, page 5)

Part II.  Relevant IUCN Activities

IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for many years and has been participating in ATCMs and CCAMLR since the opportunity first became available in the 1980s. Some of our most recent activities relevant to Antarctic conservation are listed below.

High Seas
As reported last year, IUCN, its World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) and WWF International have commenced a High Seas Marine Protected Areas Project, as part of a major initiative to conserve marine living resources and biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction.

IUCN and partners have developed a long-term strategy and action plan to map and highlight areas of high biological diversity and productivity or rare or endangered species, bring together experts to build support for an initial demonstration HSMPA and create opportunities for expansion of the global representative network into the high seas, publicize imminent threats, engage with key industry sectors, and highlight the need for urgent action. 

IUCN is currently working with a variety of regional partners to develop a diverse set of pilot HSMPA projects in different areas of the world's oceans.

World Commission on Protected Areas

Established in 1959, the World Commission of Protected Areas (WCPA) is the world’s leading body of parks and protected areas experts. Current programmes of high relevance to protected areas in the Antarctic include the demonstration of MPAs as a tool for sustainable fisheries management as well as for the protection and restoration of marine biodiversity. 

A WCPA High Seas Working Group has been established to bring together organizations and individuals committed to high seas biodiversity and productivity conservation. The Executive Committee includes non-governmental organizations such as IUCN, WWF, Conservation International, Birdlife International and the National Geographic Society, and facets of IUCN including the Antarctic Advisory Group, the Environmental Law Center, and WCPA Mediterranean. Dr. Alex Rogers, of the British Antarctic Survey, is the scientific advisor.

The World Parks Congress: Benefits Beyond Boundaries
8 – 17 September 2003, Durban, South Africa

The World Parks Congress, convened by IUCN every ten years, is the premier global event where the big issues for the protected area profession are drawn out and debated. It provides the major forum for setting the global agenda and charting the course for Protected Areas for the next decade and beyond. The Vth World Parks Congress responds to the challenge to show how Protected Areas are relevant to the broader economic, social and environmental agenda for humankind in the 21st Century, and the importance of such areas in adapting to global change, with the theme "Benefits Beyond Boundaries".  


At the Vth World Parks Congress a special season on high seas governance issues served to inform and carry forward action by the international community. Marine experts adopted a set of recommendations for global action to conserve and maintain high seas biodiversity and productivity both within and beyond protected areas. These recommendations served as the foundation for the Ten-Year High Seas MPA Strategy annexed below. IUCN and partners recommended the establishment of expert working groups to 1) assess rare and vulnerable species in seamounts, and 2) develop criteria and guidelines for HSMPAs. A substantial portion of this session was used to explore opportunities for development of a HSMPA network under the auspices of existing mechanisms such as the Antarctic Treaty System, with particular reference to Annex V of the Environmental Protocol.  More information about the World Parks Congress is available at www.wcpa.iucn.org. 


Concluding Remarks

IUCN continues to place a high priority on helping the Antarctic Treaty System to maintain and enhance its effectiveness in conserving and protecting the Antarctic region. As always, IUCN puts its resources and expertise at the service of the ATCM towards this end.


For further information on the High Seas MPA project and the Ten-Year High Seas Marine Protected Areas Strategy, please contact:

Kristina M. Gjerde
IUCN, WCPA, WWF High Seas MPA Project Coordinator
Ul. Piaskowa 12C
05-5-1 Konstancin-Chylice, Poland
Tel:+48-22-754-1803
kgjerde@it.com.pl


For further information on IUCN’s Global Marine Programme please contact:

Carl Gustaf Lundin
Head, IUCN Global Marine Programme
IUCN World Headquarters
Rue Mauverney 28
Gland – 1196 Switzerland
Tel: +41-22-999-0001
Carl.Lundin@iucn.org


Annex 1.  Ten Year High Seas MPA Strategy prepared by marine Experts at the 5th World Parks Congress (attached)






















