
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 077
Agenda Item: 4 
SOUTH AFRICA
Original: English

 




ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT DURING THE CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW BASE FACILITY AT SUB-ANTARCTIC MARION ISLAND. PHASE ONE, 2003










Environmental management during the construction of a new base facility at sub-Antarctic Marion Island, Phase One, 2003


Introduction

In August 2003 South Africa commenced the construction of a new weather and scientific base at Marion Island, to replace the existing base first established in 1948.  Prior to the commencement of construction, a scoping study was undertaken that identified environmental issues, assessed environmental impacts and produced environmental and waste management plans and a code of conduct.  The scoping study called for the appointment of a Project Environmental Officer (PEO).  Due to a paucity of sub-Antarctic environmental expertise within the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) and the Directorate: Environmental Impact Management of the Department of Environmental Affairs & Tourism (DEAT), a PEO was appointed under contract in terms of the National Environmental Management Act (Act No. 107 of 1998) for Phase One of the construction from August to November 2003.


Duties of the Project Environmental Officer

The duties of the PEO as set out in the scoping study and contractually were to monitor all aspects of construction activities, commencing with the storing and loading of construction materials and equipment in Cape Town, and proceeding with quarantine inspections prior to and during sailing and ashore at the island.  During the four-month construction period the construction site was to be regularly inspected for the presence of alien organisms and uncontrolled construction waste.  Close liaison with the Departmental Coordinating Officer (DCO) of DEAT and the head of the construction crew was required to address any environmental issues and to set up procedures for mitigating impacts in terms of disturbance to biota, trampling of the ground and control of litter.  Activities ashore were to be carried out in accordance with the Management Plan for the Prince Edward Islands and permits issued by DEAT, acting on the advice of its Prince Edward Islands Management Committee (PEIMC).  An additional task of the PEO was to affect a skills-transfer exercise to a previously disadvantaged individual, so as to increase the pool of expertise available to DEAT.

Activities of the Project Environmental officer

Activities by the PEO commenced prior to formal appointment in May 2003 with a series of inspections in greater Cape Town of possible storage facilities for construction material.  Difficulties were encountered in finding a venue that could be adequately quarantined against invertebrate and plant propagules.  The chosen facility was cleaned and fumigated prior to use and inspected regularly up to the time materials were loaded on to the ship (the m.v. S.A. Agulhas) in August 2003.  After loading the ship’s holds were fumigated prior to sailing for Marion Island on 12 August.

On the southward voyage inspections were undertaken aboard the ship to ensure it was free of invertebrates and plant material, including of personal footwear, issued protective clothing and bags of shore-going personnel.  As a precautionary measure footwear was scrubbed in a bleach solution.

Ashore on the island each helicopter-load of construction material and equipment was inspected on landing and again when sealed containers were opened. No animal or plant propagules were found.  By regular inspections of the construction site and attendance at weekly planning meetings construction crew were educated in environmental issues.  As a consequence no serious problems were encountered in terms of littering, waste disposal or trampling, nor of disturbance to the island’s populations of birds and seals.

The same procedures as outlined above were followed on the second voyage in November 2003 that offloaded further materials at the island and recovered the construction crew.  On this voyage the ship was found to be carrying live insects of several species.  The PEO on the voyage was accompanied by a postgraduate student who had previously spent a year conducting biological monitoring on the island as part of the skills-transfer exercise.


Conclusions

Improving quarantine control to reduce further the risk of introducing new animal and plant species to the Prince Edward Islands has been identified as the main concern for future construction phases.  Subsequent to consideration by the PEIMC the following new changes and procedures will be implemented in 2004:

    1. Businesses supplying products (such as consumables) to the ship are being regularly inspected by way of HACCP (Hazard Application Critical Control Points) audits.

    2. Storage, packing and helicopter facilities in Cape Town are inspected prior to each voyage and pest-free certificates are required.

    3. Inspections for alien propagules aboard ship prior to and during southward sailings have been expanded to include hold, hangar and food storage, preparation and consumption spaces.

    4. The ship is being supplied with equipment (electric fly killers, pesticides, better-designed rat guards, etc.) to control against/eradicate any invertebrate and rodent infestations.

At its most recent meeting, the PEIMC decided that the primarily ad hoc way of addressing quarantine requirements followed up to now by SANAP needs to be changed, since it identified the introduction of new species to the islands as the single greatest threat emanating from the new base construction.  Accordingly, the PEIMC has requested that a proper risk assessment exercise be carried out in 2004 in an endeavour to improve further current quarantine procedures.

Phase Two of the base construction will commence in August 2004.  A PEO is being appointed to continue to monitor environmental effects.


Literature

Cooper, J., de Villiers, M.S. & McGeoch, M.A. 2003. Quarantine measures to halt alien invasions of Southern Ocean islands: the South African experience (Prince Edward Islands Special Nature Reserve). Aliens 17: 37-39.
Environomics 2002.  Report on the Scoping Study for the proposed new Base Facility at Marion Island.  Theresa Park:  Environomics. 113 pp + appendices.
Prince Edward Islands Management Plan Working Group 1996.  Prince Edward Islands Management Plan.  Pretoria: Department of Environmental Affairs & Tourism. 64 pp.
