
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 110
Agenda Item: 8
LIABILITY WORKING GROUP CHAIRMAN
Original: English

 







REVISED CHAIRMAN’S DRAFT OF ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

“LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL                                                       EMERGENCIES”           





2 June 2004

Dear Colleagues

As promised at the conclusion of the Liability Working Group last week, I am now circulating a revised Chairman’s draft of Annex VI, which takes into account those recent discussions.   This revised draft will be issued as a document of ATCM XXVII in the official languages.

As has been the practice, changes to the Working Paper discussed last week (WP 006) are identified in bold typescript to facilitate your consideration.

I should also like to highlight the following points for your consideration:

Preamble
This has not yet been discussed, but I have included in it a definition of the Parties as was suggested.

Article 1
I have replaced the Optional additional sentence with a formula which found broader support.   A decision will still need to be taken whether to include this.   As has been  pointed out, not to include such a sentence will considerably narrow the scope of the Annex, and will create a gap with respect to those activities which do not need to be notified under Article VII(5) (the application of which varies in practice anyway).

Article 2
I have incorporated the concept of non-retroactivity into the definition of “Environmental emergency”, although you will appreciate that there are several ways  that this could be done.   I have attempted a new definition of “operator” to take account of our discussion, and hope that this approach may work, even though some further fine tuning will doubtless be required.   I have also redefined “reasonable” to reflect the approach taken in the Chilean non paper.

Article 2 bis
There seemed to be broad support for the idea of including a general “savings” or “non-derogation” article, which might help resolve some of the concerns elsewhere.   I have accordingly included a possible provision for colleagues to consider, although as I indicated in my concluding remarks this will require further discussion.

Articles 3 and 4
We did not discuss these articles at this meeting, but they have been extensively discussed in the past and should not cause difficulties.   I suggest that the appropriate linkage between “Parties” and “operators” in these articles is that found in the new definition of “operator” in Article 2, and have accordingly made minor changes to both of these articles to reflect this.

Article 5
I would remind you that paragraph 1 is under consideration by a Contact Group, convened by Italy, which will communicate intersessionally.   

Article 6
This article was not discussed, but it has been extensively discussed in the past, with the exception of the proposed deletion of paragraph 3 which is closely connected with the need elsewhere to make provision for a further step towards a more comprehensive regime.

Article 7
This has been revised so as to make clear that only a Party may bring an action against a non-State operator pursuant to Article 6(1).   Time limits for bringing action have also been incorporated in paragraph 1.   There is a question whether these time limits should not also be applicable to paragraphs 3, 4 and 5.

Unfortunately there may be a lacuna if under paragraphs 1 and 3 action can only be  pursued in that State Party where the non-State operator is incorporated or has as its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.     What happens if the non-State operator is incorporated or resident in a State which is not a Party, even though it has organised its activities in a State Party?   While this situation does not exist at present, I believe, it is not entirely implausible.   I would suggest that in such a situation, action under paragraphs 1 and 3 should be able to be brought in the State Party where the activities have been organised (i.e. in accordance with the definition of Operator in Article 2).   Possible language would be as follows:

Insert a new sentence after the first sentence of Article 7(1):   “However, should the operator not be incorporated in a Party or have its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in a Party, the action may be brought in the courts of the Party of the operator within the meaning of Article 2(c).”

Insert a new sentence after the first sentence of Article 7(3):   “Each Party shall also ensure that there is such a mechanism in place with respect to any of its non-State operators within the meaning of Article 2(c) which is not incorporated in a Party or does not have its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in a Party.”

 I would ask you to consider this approach and possible language and, if you do not think it is suitable, come up with other suggestions.

In paragraphs 4 and 5 there is clearly a quite fundamental difference of view as to whether Article 20 of the Protocol should be applicable to disputes under the Annex.    This will require further reflection on the part of colleagues.   You will recall that there were also suggestions that an enquiry type procedure might also be utilised.

Article 8
This was not discussed, but there has been considerable discussion of the subject in the past, and I do not expect it to be problematic.

Article 9
I have maintained subparagraph (a) in square brackets, to maintain the concept with which I think there is pretty general agreement, but it seems almost certain that the language will have to change.   You will recall that this subparagraph (and also the question of appropriate limits for yachts) is under consideration by a Contact Group, convened by the United States, which will communicate intersessionally.   

There were differences of view as to whether the monetary limits set out in subparagraphs (b) and (c) were sufficiently high.   You will recall that I asked those delegations with concerns about the adequacy of these limits, to discuss with COMNAP the basis on which its worst-case scenarios were calculated.   I would suggest that there should be a technical basis for whatever figures we end up with, and colleagues who have concerns should address that aspect, and communicate with all other participants intersessionally regarding any proposals they may have.

I have amended Article 13(1) to make clear that the fast-track amendment process applies to increasing these limits, otherwise they will always be out of date by the time they are ratified.

Article 10
This was not discussed at this meeting, but has been well discussed in the past.

Article 11
I should reiterate that the concept of “self-insurance” means that a Government bears its own risk.

Article 12
In accordance with our discussion, I have expanded the situations in which the fund may provide reimbursement.   In subparagraph 3, I have also attempt to provide the “bridge” to further work for the protection of the Antarctic Environment, which was suggested by some.

Article 13
See last comment under Article 9.

As also indicated at the conclusion of our discussion last week, I believe that the excellent progress we made should enable us to conclude our negotiations at the next ATCM in Stockholm.   I would ask colleagues to approach the outstanding issues with that objective very much in mind.

Thank you once again for your excellent participation.

Kind regards

Yours sincerely


Don MacKay





							                       Revised Draft
                                                                                                             2 June 2004 

Chairman’s personal draft

DRAFT ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL     PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

LIABILITY ARISING FROM ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

	The States Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
	Recognising the importance of preventing, minimising and containing damage to the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems;
	Further recognising the desirability of establishing a comprehensive legal regime, inter alia to deter States and operators from causing such damage;
	Recalling Article 16 of the Protocol under which the Parties undertook to elaborate, in one or more Annexes to the Protocol, rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol;
	Further recalling the priority accorded to scientific research and to preserving the value of the Antarctica as an area for the conduct of such research in the Protocol;
	Noting the desire of the Parties to take action to promote environmental protection in the Antarctic Treaty area by mandating certain steps concerning prevention of damage, contingency planning and liability, with a view to further steps being taken in the future by the Parties in accordance with Article 16,
	Have agreed as follows:

Article 1
Scope

	This Annex shall apply to environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty Area which relate to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities, and to measures and plans for preventing and responding to such emergencies.  

Optional additional sentence:   It shall also apply to environmental emergencies, which arise from activities within the Antarctic Treaty Area to which the provisions of Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty do not apply, to the extent that those environmental emergencies and their consequences are not regulated by other applicable treaties. 

Article 2
Definitions

For the purposes of this Annex:

(…)

(a)	“Decision” means a decision adopted pursuant to Decision 1(1995) of the XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(…)

(b)	“Environmental Emergency” means any accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, any significant and harmful impact on the Antarctic environment after the entry into force of this Annex;

(c)	“Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non -governmental, which organises (…) activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.   Except as otherwise indicated in this Annex, the operator of a Party is an operator which organises activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in that Party’s territory, and 
    (i) those activities are authorised by that Party for the Antarctic Treaty Area, or
    (ii) in the case of a Party which does not formally authorise activities for the Antarctic Treaty Area, those activities go through a comparable regulatory process by that Party, 
and the terms “its operator” and “their operators” shall have a meaning accordingly.

 (d)	“Reasonable”, as applied to preventative measures and response action, means measures or actions which are appropriate, practicable, proportionate and based on the availability of objective criteria and information including:
    • risks to the Antarctic environment, and the rate of its natural recovery
    • risks to human life and safety
    • technological and economic feasibility.

(e)	“Response action” means reasonable measures to prevent, minimise or contain the impact of an environmental emergency, which may include clean-up in appropriate circumstances, and including determining the extent of that emergency and its impact;


Article 2 bis
Savings Provision

The provisions of the present Annex are without prejudice to any rights and obligations of the Parties under other international instruments or rules of customary international law.

Article 3
Preventative Measures

1.	Parties shall require their operators to undertake reasonable preventative measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

2.	Preventative measures may include:

a.	specialised structures or equipment incorporated into the design and construction of facilities and means of transportation;
b.	specialised procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of facilities and means of transportation; and
c.	specialised training of personnel.

Article 4
Contingency Plans

1.	Parties shall require their operators to 

a.	establish contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; and
b. 	cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans.

2.	Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a.	procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incident;
b.	notification procedures;
c.	identification and mobilisation of resources;
d.	response plans;
e.	training;
f.	record keeping;
g.	demobilisation.

3.	Parties shall establish and implement procedures for immediate notification of, and cooperative response to, environmental emergencies, and shall promote the use of notification procedures and cooperative response procedures by operators which cause environmental emergencies.

Article 5
Response Action

1.	Parties shall require their operators to take prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies arising from the activities of their operators.*

2.	In the event that an operator does not take prompt and effective response action (…), the Party of that operator and other Parties shall endeavour to take such action, but are not obliged to do so, including through their agents and operators specifically authorised by them to take such action.

3.	Other Parties taking response action shall consult the Party of the operator beforehand, unless threat to the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable in all the circumstances not to take immediate action.

4.	Parties taking response action shall consult and coordinate their action with all other affected Parties to the extent feasible, and shall take into account relevant expert guidance which has been provided by permanent observer delegations to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, and other organisations.

*Note: Paragraph (1) is under consideration by a Contact Group, which will communicate intersessionally.

Article 6
Liability

1.	An operator shall be liable to pay the costs of response action taken by other Parties pursuant to Article 5(2).

2.	When prompt and effective response action should have been taken but was not, the operator shall be liable to pay the costs of the response action which should have been undertaken, into the (…) fund established in Article 12.

3.	(deleted)

4.	Liability shall be strict.

5.	When an environmental emergency arises from the activities of two or more operators they shall be jointly and severally liable, provided that an operator which establishes that only part of the environmental emergency results from its activities shall be liable in respect of that part only.

6.	Notwithstanding that a Party is liable under this article for its failure to provide for prompt and effective response action to environmental emergencies caused by its warships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships or aircraft owned or operated by it and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial service, those vessels and aircraft of the Parties shall be immune in accordance with the provisions of Article 11(1) to (3) of Annex IV to the Protocol.

Article 7
Actions for Compensation

1.	A Party may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Article 6(1) (…) only in the courts of the Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence.   Such actions for compensation shall be brought within three years of the commencement of the response action or within three years of the date on which the Party bringing the action knew or ought reasonably to have known the identity of the operator, whichever is later.   In no event shall an action against a non-State operator be commenced later than fifteen years after the commencement of the response action.

2.	Each Party shall ensure that its courts possess the necessary jurisdiction to entertain actions under paragraph 1 (…).

3.     	Each Party shall ensure that there is a mechanism in place under its domestic law for the enforcement of Article 6(2) with respect to any non-State operator that is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in that Party.   Each Party shall inform all other Parties of this mechanism in accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol.

4.	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(1) shall be resolved only in accordance with the provisions of Articles 18, 19 [and 20] of the Protocol and as applicable the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.

5.	The liability of a Party as a State operator under Article 6(2) shall be resolved only in accordance with any enquiry procedure which may be established by the Parties, the provisions of Articles 18, 19 [and 20] of the Protocol and as applicable the Arbitration Schedule to the Protocol.
 

Article 8
Exemptions from Liability

1.	An operator shall not be liable pursuant to Article 6 if the environmental emergency was caused by:

a.    	An act necessary to protect human life or safety; or

b.	An event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character, which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally or in the particular case, provided all reasonable measures were taken to prevent harmful impacts.

2.	A Party or operator shall not be liable for an environmental emergency resulting from response action taken by it pursuant to Article 5(2) to the extent that such response action was reasonable in all the circumstances.

Article 9
Limits on Compensation

1.	The amount of compensation for which each operator shall be liable under this Annex, in respect of each environmental emergency, shall be as follows:

a	[For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving a vessel which is covered by a Certificate of Entry pursuant to IMO Guidelines

    (i) in the case of a vessel actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo, the limit shall be determined by applying the provisions of Article V of the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1969, including any amendment that is in force internationally
    (ii) in the case of any other vessel, the limit shall be determined in accordance with the International Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 1976, including any amendment that is in force internationally
    (iii) in no case shall the limit be less than that under (b) below]*

b.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event involving any vessel which is not covered under (a) above, the limit shall be [$10 million]**;

c.	For an environmental emergency arising from an event which does not involve a vessel, the limit shall be [$3 million]**. 

2.	The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall review the limits in (b) and (c) every three years, or sooner at the request of any Party.   Any amendments to these limits, which shall be determined after consultation amongst the Parties and on the basis of advice including scientific and technical advice, shall be made under the procedure set out in Article 13(1).

*Note:   Subparagraph (a) is under consideration by a Contact Group, which will communicate intersessionally.

**Note:  These figures are included as a basis for discussion in light of COMNAP’s advice at ATCM XXVI.    Final figures may be stipulated in SDR.

Article 10
State Liability

A Party shall not be liable for the failure of an operator (other than its State operators) to take response action to the extent that that Party fulfilled its obligations under this Annex in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Protocol.

Article 11
Insurance and other financial security

1.	Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance or other financial security, such as the guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability up to the limits specified in Article 9(b) and (c).

2.	Notwithstanding paragraph 1, a Party may maintain self-insurance* in respect of its State operators including those carrying out activities in the furtherance of scientific research.

* i.e. may bear its own risk

Article 12
Role of Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

1.	The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty shall maintain and administer a fund, in accordance with Decisions including terms of reference (…) to be adopted by the Parties (…), to provide inter alia for the reimbursement of the reasonable costs incurred by a Party in taking response action in accordance with Article 5(2), if:

a.	The identity of the operator cannot be established, or the operator is not subject to the provisions of this Annex; (…)

b.	The costs exceed the applicable limit of liability in accordance with article 9;

c.	A non-State operator is unable to meet its liability up to the applicable limit, because of the failure of its insurance or other financial security; or

d.	The operator is exempted from liability under Article 8.

2.	Any Party may make proposals to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting for reimbursement to be paid from the fund, which shall be approved by means of a Decision.   The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting may seek the advice of the Committee of Environmental Protection on such proposals as appropriate.

3.	The fund may also have any other function for the protection of the Antarctic Environment which may be conferred on it by any other Annex.

4.	Any State or person may make voluntary contributions to the fund.

Article 13
Amendment or Modification

1.	This Annex may be amended or modified by a Measure adopted in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.   In the case of a Measure pursuant to Article 9(2), and in any other case unless the Measure in question specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes and extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the Measure.

2.	Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.












                
