XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 067
Agenda Item: 4e
CHINA
Original: English

 





A REPORT ON THE ENVIRONMENT OF GREAT WALL STATION IN RECENT TWO YEARS 












Background

Several facilities and establishments, such as new Power House, TV Receiving Antenna and GOES Satellite Receiving Antenna have been constructed at Great Wall Station since 2001/02 season. Meanwhile, two old buildings have been removed, including old Power House and old Recreation & Medical Part. Undoubtedly, some direct and indirect environmental impacts have taken place at station area while constructing, cleaning out as well as transporting happened. 
To implement the Madrid Protocol, Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) has taken many measures to maximally decrease negative effects on Antarctic environment during these years. Most of old material and garbage including waste rolled steel, wall partitions, roof covers and so on, with gross weight of more than 90 tons, have been moved out of Antarctic Treaty region by M/V Xuelong in December 2002. However, quite a lot of waste material and remains collected were still deposited at the temporary garbage pool at the station, because M/V Xuelong didn’t go to the Antarctica in 2003.

I.  Main projects 

    1. Removing old Power House
The old Power House was built by CHINARE-3 in 1986/87. The main building plus the gate arch cover an area of 336 m2. The appendix of oil tanks and pipelines cover the area of 120 m2. The clean-up was conducted in two steps: removing the upper part of the main building in 2001/02 summer and removing the foundation of the building in 2003/04 summer. 
2.  Removing old Recreation & Medical Part:
The building had an area of 156 m2 and constructed by CHINARE-3 in 1986/87 summer. It was removed completely during by CHINARE-20 in 2003/04 summer.
3.  Removing water pump house and bridge approach
The waste including pipes, steel bridge and the container with gross weight of 5 tons, were moved away and stored at the temporary garbage pool. 
Some small parts are still remained under the water, could be likely to have very little impact on water quality.  
    4. Broad Band Seismological Observation
A close Broad Band Seismological Observation unit was built at old site after original seismic measuring point removed. The new project dug 10cm deeper and 15cm wider than old base on the bedrock, but less 50cm higher than the old one. 
    5. A concrete base of supporting gravity measuring instrument
A concrete base of supporting gravity measuring instrument for International GPS Joint Survey Program, was built to the east of GPS Antenna Rock, with a distance of 30 m far away from the GOES satellite receiver. It covers only an area of 9 m2。The environmental impact mostly is on morphological change. 

II.  Waste classification and management

1. Liquid waste, most sewage, may be discharged into the sea after treating by the Bio-chemical equipment at the station. Medical and scientific chemical liquid are collected and kept in special container, then will be carried out of ATS region. 
2. Solid waste are basically classified as 5 kinds as combusted, metals, plastics, glasses and waste batteries, collected and made record regularly. Organic waste and some small innocuous material are burned in incinerator, and the ash remains are collected with plastic bags. All the classified solid waste are stored in special container, then will be carried out of ATS region. 

III. Environment improving at the station
4 main special activities aiming at cleaning up and improving environment of the station were carried out respectively on 7th Jan., 24thJan., 31st Jan. and 15th Feb. during the summer of 2003/04 season. The results show that those impact even initially may have minor or transitory can be likely decreased when enough attention given. 

IV. Subsequent work in near future
    • Oil pollution is still the problem at the station, and the contaminations mainly occurred near the sites of oil tank and Power House. At present, we have no virtual and sound method to eliminate it entirely, except using a little of oil dispersant as permitted by CAA in some cases.
    • Waste deposits at the temporary garbage pool will be removed and transported back to China by M/V Xuelong during 2004/2005season as planned. 
    • A few construction remains and bases left by the past projects and scientific observation will be removed gradually in the following season.


















The foundation of the old Recreation & Medical Part
















The environment restored to the maximum extent after the building was removed
