
 



PUBLIC OUTREACH THROUGH MASS MEDIA




















Disseminating information about research activities in Antarctica to a large audience is of a prime importance considering the public interest for this topic. In this respect, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) recently promoted proposals that would allow the public to share the latest findings of our remotely based researchers. The young generation is especially targeted in these attempts since they represent the potential successors of the current Antarctic research. The latest projects in this regard that have been undertaken by JARE are reported here.
 In the fall of 2002, a five-man TV crew was sent to the main Japanese Antarctic research station, Syowa (69°00’S, 39°35’E) by a Japan’s primary public broadcasting source called NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation). The team wintered at the station and was in charge of transmitting regularly live TV programs from Antarctica.
 In 2003, another media team was dispatched to Syowa Station by one of the major Japanese newspaper companies, Asahi Shimbun (Newspaper). These journalists are staying at Syowa Station and reporting the activity of the members of JARE throughout the year.

1. Broadcasting Project     
In early 2003, the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR) and NHK built prefabricated housings with live, high definition (HD) broadcasting capabilities and transmission facilities at Syowa Station on East Ongul Island. The NIPR is the institution that manages the research station as a core member of JARE. Over the whole year, the NHK team stationed at Syowa Station delivered via satellite a wide variety of images, sceneries, reports and information about Antarctica and its nature to the Japanese public.
The Antarctic project also covered several scientific events that took place beyond the vicinity of Syowa Station. For instances, research programs conducted at the American stations of McMurdo and Amundsen-Scott by the NSF or at the Russian Novolazarevskaja Station, as well as field research activities conducted by the British Antarctic Survey have been programmed on the NHK channel in Japan. The team continued to capture Antarctic sceneries, along with information about the past and future of this unique, pristine region, and broadcasted them to a large number of HD TV programs in Japan.  
The Hi-Vision broadcasting started on 1 February 2003 and lasted for an entire year until January 2004. In total, the Antarctic Broadcasting Project yielded more than 150 programs, which included daily news reports, 16 hours of documentary programs, and 260 hours of live transmissions. Among the live transmissions were 20 hours of interactive lessons, during which scientists at Syowa Station were interacting with school students in an NHK studio in Japan. In conjunction with these TV broadcasts, the NIPR and NHK created a special website where people in Japan were able to post out questions and to access regularly-updated messages and images from the scientists and media team in Antarctica. 
Among all the TV programs, the two-part (60 and 74 mins) live broadcast of the total solar eclipse realized on 24 November, probably represent the biggest achievement that yielded from this project. At 23:16 UT, on 23 November, a black sun appeared above the white Antarctic continent.  
Yearlong series of broadcasts included “Antarctic School” (4 programs), “Saturday School for Science-lovers” (10 programs) and “Classroom from Antarctic” (10 programs). Although these series were created for general public, they were principally oriented towards school pupils. During these events, Syowa Station and pupils from several elementary schools in Japan were linked via satellite for interactive educational sessions.

2. Newspaper Project
 In January 2004, the Asahi Shimbun, together with JARE, established an “Antarctic Branch” in Syowa Station. The staff of this Antarctic branch consisted of a reporter and a photographer, who are to stay with over-wintering personnel until January 2005.
 Asahi Shimbun was established in 1879 and publishes 12,300,000 copies daily. It has been a powerful supporter of the Japanese Antarctic Expeditions over the years since the first Japanese Antarctic expedition of Lieutenant Nobu Shirase in 1911.
 The articles enriched by photographs are sent on a daily basis from the Syowa Station Branch to the Asahi head office in Tokyo, which distributes hot-topics from the Antarctic to the public, not only through its own newspaper but also through other Japanese newspapers.
 An Antarctic page has also been created on the web site of the Asahi Shimbun (http://www.asahi.com/nankyoku/). The site is written in Japanese only, unfortunately, the page is updated everyday using the incoming reports from the Antarctic Branch, giving a daily life picture of the Antarctic to the Japanese people. The web site supplements the printed articles in the paper, the latter being updated only daily.
 In parallel with the above-mentioned programs, the Asahi Shimbun holds “Asahi Antarctic School”, attended by Japanese school pupils, on a monthly basis in Tokyo. During this event, pupils can learn about the nature of the Antarctic and its flora and fauna. They can also communicate with JARE members through a direct, INTELSAT-based video-conference system, to obtain live and real-time knowledge of the Antarctic.         

