XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 045
Agenda Item: 4 g
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 






ORTHODOX TEMPLE IN THE ANTARCTIC


At the beginning of 2002, the Chief of the Russian Antarctic Expedition was received by the Head of the Russian Orthodox Church, Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia Alexis II. During the discussion the ways of realizing the proposals for commemorating all Russians who gave their lives for the sake of study and exploration of the Antarctic were considered. The Patriarch proposed to build a Russian orthodox church at one of the Russian Antarctic stations. This choice was in full conformity with the Russian historical traditions. The place for construction of the church was selected at Bellingshausen station on Waterloo Island (King George Island). According to the Russian legislature, the church construction is possible only from the extra-budgetary financial sources. 
The initiative of constructing an orthodox church in the Antarctic was supported by two private Russian companies and some individual persons of Russian and West European citizenship. The investors contracted specialists of ZAO “Creative workshop of the architect Anisiforov” (Barnaul) for the design and building of the church. This workshop specializes in the designs in the Russian wooden architecture style. After developing a general view of the church in the 2001-2002 summer season a group of architects and builders visited Bellingshausen station with the aim of the final geodetic linking to the locality and study of the geological structure of the Earth’s surface at the place of the foundation to calculate its engineering characteristics. The results of the engineering explorations allowed finalizing the project that was submitted for approval to the ministers of the Russian Orthodox Church, investors and RAE management. Based on the project data, the RAE prepared the Initial Environmental Evaluation and also all other necessary materials for obtaining an official permit for construction in the Antarctic. Such permit was granted on October 27, 2003 under No. 014.
In 2002 in Altai Krai of Russia, stocking up of construction timber for building the church began. As the main materials, the Siberian pine and larch were selected as the tree sorts most resistant to rotting processes. Some wooden structures in Siberia more than 200 years old can serve as an example. In spring 2003, the construction of the temple began, which was completely assembled in the Altai Krai in June 2003. In September, the wooden building of the temple was dismantled into separate structural components and prepared for transportation to the Russian port Kaliningrad for delivery by ship to the Antarctic. The ship “Akademik Sergey Vavilov” with a cargo of the temple onboard departed the port on October 2, 2003 and arrived to the roadstead of Bellingshausen station on December 10, 2003. By that time a group of builders has already arrived to the station. All expenses for transportation of cargo and people and their stay in the Antarctic were paid by the sponsors. According to the traditions of the Russian Orthodox Church, the site selected for construction of the temple had to be preliminarily consecrated by a priest. Such ceremony took place in January 2003, when a special group of clergy of the Russian Orthodox Church arrived to Bellingshausen station.
On August 18, 2003, the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia issued a decree on establishing a Patriarchy podvorie at the orthodox temple in Antarctica. The organizational issues with respect to temple erection and its clerical support were entrusted to the Confessor of the Holy Trinity St. Sergius Lavra.  The Bishop of Sergiev Posad, Deputy of the Holy Trinity St. Sergius Lavra was requested to designate a priest who will be responsible for the organization of construction and activity of the temple in the Antarctic.
On February 15, a solemn consecration of the erected Russian Orthodox Temple took place. For participating in this ceremony, a group of priests headed by the Bishop of Sergiev Posad Feognost, Deputy of the Holy Trinity St. Sergius Lavra, and a group of the Project sponsors arrived to the station. The temple was named the Holy Trinity.
This temple has become the first religious structure of the Russian Orthodox Church in the Antarctic. In the near future it is planned to erect memorial plaques on the walls inside the temple with the names of all participants of the Soviet and Russian Antarctic Expeditions who perished in the Antarctic.
A special place in the Antarctic Treaty System belongs to the historic sites and monuments, which preserve for the next generations the memorial events and the names of their participants in the exploration and study of the Antarctic. In this sense the historical significance of such a structure along with its cultural and religious importance is very highly evaluated.  
We hope that among these sites and monuments of Antarctica, the Russian orthodox temple should have its own historical and cultural- educational place and serve to strengthening the spirit of peace and mutual understanding at the Antarctic continent. 




Picture of the Orthodox Temple at Waterloo Isl. (King George Isl.) 

