




 




ESTONIA’S RESPONSE TO INFORMATION PAPER IP 042 SUBMITTED BY ITALY


							





















Estonia’s response to Information Paper 042 submitted by Italy


The Estonian Delegation would like to recall the IP-81 tabled at CEP VI Meeting in Madrid last year. This IP described the planned Estonian small summer only research station to be established at a location conditionally called Edmonson Point South. This location was selected from amongst the ice free areas at the Wood Bay coast as the most suitable for the planned activities in January 2003 in co-operation with the Italian expedition, who provided the logistical support for the reconnaissance.

During the last year Meeting in Madrid this issue was discussed around the CEP table and on a specially held meeting. A general agreement was achieved on the location of the planned station and interested Parties agreed to work intersessionally in order to exchange information and views on the environmental impact assessment of the planned activity. This is all clearly reflected in the ATCM XXVI Final Report.

As the IP-42 puts a specific stress on the Edmonson Point South ice free area, it arises certain concern for Estonia. The ideas expressed in this document are in controversy with the views expressed and conclusions made in Madrid. In these circumstances we would like to make some remarks on IP-42.

Namely:

The second page, second paragraph says: “… the three areas can be considered as belonging to the same geographical unit …”

In fact at a distance of few kilometers to the North from the Edmonson Point northern ice free area, there are at least four similar ice free areas, that are untouched and can serve as reference areas as well or even better and can also be regarded as belonging to the same geographical unit. However, defining a geographical unit in a given case is rather a philosophical question and no exact criteria exists for this judgment.

The second page, paragraph five says: “An abandoned rookery has also been localized in the southern area.”

During the site survey in January 2003, carried out by us together with the Italian environmental officer, no traces of an abandoned rookery were found. The only birds nesting in very small numbers were the south polar skuas. These birds, however, are also successfully nesting in the close vicinity of the Italian station, for instance.

The same paragraph also addresses the penguin migration routes in front of the Edmonson Point southern area. The question of potential interference of the planned Estonian activities with migration routes of penguins breeding at Edmonson Point was addressed at the special meeting in Madrid. The meeting came to a conclusion that this effect can be minimized by selecting appropriate transport routes across the fast ice of the Wood Bay.

Estonia welcomes the proposal for a new ASPA at Edmonson Point submitted by Italy as WP 7. We do share the basic idea of protecting the values existing in the whole Wood Bay area. Therefore we would like to once again underline the three key words of the planned Estonian operation: small, effective and elegant. The latter means maximum efforts put on environmental protection. At the same time we would like to address that if a consensus according to the location of the planned station has been once achieved and the further procedures agreed it is confusing to step back from these positions and express views that clearly undermine our intentions to establish a station, which in its capacity and environmental impact will be of a size of a permanent field camp in terms of common understanding.


