XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 043
Agenda Item: 13 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 






RESULTS OF THE STUDIES AND ACTIVITIES UNDER THE SUBPROGRAM “STUDY AND RESEARCH OF THE ANTARCTIC” IN THE FEDERAL PROGRAM “WORLD OCEAN”


The results of the studies and activities under the subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” are the main modern argument of the national activity of the Russian Federation in the Southern Polar Area. A complex of activities is carried out in five main directions:
    • Basic research studies of the Antarctic;
    • Scientific-applied studies and developments;
    • Environmental monitoring of the Antarctic;
    • Environmental protection of the Antarctic;
    • Logistics support of RAE activities.

In 2003, under the direction “Basic research studies of the Antarctic” of the sub-program “Study and Research of the Antarctic”, the investigations of the Antarctic were carried out on the basis of the analysis of meteorological, oceanographic, glaciological, geophysical, biological and geological data collected in the 47th and 48th (season) RAE and during the previous Antarctic expeditions; current models (mathematical and laboratory) of the Antarctic environmental processes and analysis of satellite information. 
As a result of the work performed under the direction “Basic research studies of the Antarctic”, the following main results were obtained.

Section “Normative-legal provision of the activity of Russia in the Antarctic”
Proposals for introducing changes to the Customs Code of the Russian Federation relative to the RAE cargoes were prepared. A draft new contract system of labor payment for RAE staff in Antarctica was developed. Manuals for training of RAE personnel in the basics of safe nature use were created. Training of RAE personnel in the basics of safe nature use was organized. The management plan for the area of Bellingshausen station was prepared.

Section “Modern climate”
Estimates of parameters of the spatial-temporal variability of the thermal regime of the atmosphere in the surface layer, in the troposphere strata and in the lower stratosphere over the period of instrumental observations with an assessment of significance of stability of the trends were obtained. An analysis of the thermal regime of the atmosphere of Antarctica in 2002 and an assessment of parameters of the climatic air temperature variability at the Antarctic stations for the period of instrumental observations comprising 50 years, confirmed the earlier result that in the surface layer in general the warming process, which is characterized by a significant increase of interannual oscillations and a significant spatial variability, continued. Over the period 2002, the greatest warming (with a positive anomaly comprising 1.5оС in some areas) was observed in the East and Central Antarctica. 
The interannual variability of synoptic and meso-scale eddies above the Antarctic seas was assessed for a multiyear period. Based on multiyear data of satellite images of the cloud cover received at the Russian Antarctic stations, the distribution of the number of cyclone-days depending on the sizes of polar meso-cyclones characterized by small sizes, small duration of existence and large intensity was calculated. They form when a very cold Antarctic air reaches the drifting ice edge and comes to the open water areas. For the first time it was revealed that the statistical parameters of the distribution of the number of cyclone-days depending on the sizes of the Antarctic meso-cyclones correspond to a similar distribution for the tropical typhoons. This result is important since the mechanisms of formation of the tropical cyclones have been well studied while the causes for the formation of polar meso-cyclones are poorly known. The energy exchange parameters in the “ocean-ice-atmosphere” system were derived from data of full-scale observation data at the stations and onboard the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”. Calculations of modern climate of the Antarctic were performed using a new version of the MGO global model of coupled atmosphere/ocean circulation.
The results of full-scale studies of the structure of water, currents and fronts of the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean were generalized. New versions of the models of water and ice circulation in the Southern Ocean simulating the intra- and interannual variability were elaborated. The convective circulation parameters in the shelf area of the Antarctic Peninsula were obtained. The role of canyons in the formation of trans-slope vertical and horizontal water exchange based on the laboratory and numerical modeling was determined. The parameters of surface circulation of the Southern Ocean and its intra- and interannual variability were determined from data of drifting buoys. The mean annual circulation chart reduced to the 900 m horizon was constructed using data of ARGO type buoys for the Southern Ocean. 

Section “Paleoclimate and Glaciology”
In the course of ground-based geophysical studies during the seasonal 48th RAE, determination of the sub-glacial Lake Vostok coastline was completed. According to the materials of seismic and radio-echo sounding, the geophysical charts of the lake area were updated. New data on the gaseous and isotopic composition of Lake Vostok ice core were obtained. A conclusion was made that the concentration of dissolved gases in the upper water layer does not achieve the saturation level and the possibility of formation of air hydrates in this sub-glacial water body is not realized. A mineralogical analysis of the inclusions of bottom sediments in the lacustrine ice core was performed. The molecular-biological studies by the PCR method were made on 10 specimens of the atmospheric and lake ice cores. A total of 167 clones were identified that are at present at the stage of sequencing. A long-term experiment on the study of temperature influence on the breeding intensity of bacteria extracted from different glacier horizons was initiated. An analysis of borehole thermograms (0-300 m) obtained at Vostok station allowed revealing cyclic (with a period of about 60) temperature oscillations of the glacial surface with an amplitude of about 2 °С. Using cross-spectral and wavelet-analysis methods, the diagnostics of mutual changes of the concentrations of greenhouse gases and the temperature regime in the atmosphere reconstructed from data of ice core studies was performed. It is established that variations in the СО2 concentrations in the atmosphere corresponding to the typical Earth’s orbit change modes (19-, 23-, 41- and 100-thousand cycles of Milankovich) have a lag in general relative to temperature variations. A comparative analysis of the chronology of development of diatom complexes in 5 ground cores from four sea water bodies of the Bunger Oasis allowed us to determine the sea level change variations during the period early Holocene to the present time. On the basis of micro-paleonthologic and granulometric studies of 7 cores of bottom sediments of the Cosmonauts Sea, changes of natural conditions in this Antarctic area during the Holocene were reconstructed.
Acquisition and systematizing of data of direct and remote sounding observations of the ice flow rates and thickness in the marginal part of the main outlet glaciers and the measured and calculated accumulation values of the ice catchment basins of the outlet Lambert and Fisher Glaciers and the outlet David, Drygalski and Nansen Glaciers were carried out. Calculations of the continental discharge of the Lambert, Fisher, David, Drygalski and Nansen Glaciers were made.

Section “Upper Atmosphere”
An assessment of the spatial sizes of the near-pole area, which is under the influence of energetic charged particles and solar wind dynamic variations, is given. Vertical distribution of perturbations made by energetic charged particles and solar wind dynamic variations was obtained. A comparative assessment of the influence of space rays (of solar and galactic origin) and solar wind parameters (interplanetary electric field and solar wind dynamic pressure) on the temperature regime and the atmospheric pressure in the Southern near-pole area is presented. The influence of gravity field variations on the rhythm of occurrence of the biochemical reactions under the extreme Antarctic conditions was estimated.
Based on the archive of data on the vertical sounding of ionosphere at the national Antarctic Vostok and Mirny stations and satellite data on the structure of solar wind and the interplanetary magnetic field, an estimate of the effects of perturbed solar wind in the variations of auroral magnetosphere (800 km height) and the ionosphere (200-300 km height) is given. The regularities in the polar ionosphere variability in the Antarctic governed by the non-uniform structure of the solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field were revealed. The classification of the dynamic processes in the polar ionosphere of the Antarctic initiated by the non-uniform structure of the solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field was made.

Section “Upper Atmosphere”
Data of measurements of the concentrations of ozone and greenhouse gases in the atmospheric strata and of greenhouse gases in the surface layer were obtained. An analysis of the results of measurements and supplement of the databases with the results of observations of the concentrations of ozone and greenhouse gases in the atmosphere were carried out. In general, the tendency observed in the late 1990s for some increase in the ozone concentration in the summer and spring months, is preserved.  During the 2003 summer season, the total ozone concentration in the atmospheric strata at Mirny station comprised 310 Dobson units – the highest value for the last 5 years. An analysis of the observation data indicates that changes in the ozone concentration are determined to a greater extent by the variability of the circulation processes in the upper atmosphere rather than by the photochemical processes with participation of freons.
The statistical analysis of the light dispersion indicatrix showed the calculated averages and their variations to be statistically probable characteristics of angular light dispersion distribution in the atmosphere of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic. Estimates of cross-correlation relations between the fluctuations of scattered solar and own emission of cumulus clouds in the 1.5-1.8; 2.01-2.4; 3.0-5.2; 4.5-5.2; and 8-13 µm intervals were made. New data on the semi-spherical fluxes of spectral energetic brightness density at the 0.4-2.9 µm range were obtained. On the basis of satellite sounding data sampling, estimates of the indicatrix of snow cover reflection in the scanning plane are conducted. Dependencies of the anisotropy coefficient of the snow cover reflection and coefficient of asymmetry from the Sun’s zenith angle are plotted. Charts of the radiation balance components for two typical dates with a different level of cloudiness are constructed. 

Section “GIS-Antarctic”
The schemes and descriptions of the structure and content of the integrated “GIS-Antarctic” database in different disciplines and standards for input, output and storage of information in different disciplines in the “GIS-Antarctic” were developed. The database of the local “GIS-Antarctic” segment on the “Oceanography”, “Meteorology”, “Upper-air” and “Sea ice” sections in the Access environment was generated. The operating local “GIS-Antarctic” segment, version 1.03.00 2003 was created. The data set on Antarctic environmental monitoring is formed for posting the subprogram on the site. The next issue of the Bulletin “State of Antarctic Environment” was prepared. The digital radio-echo sounding map of the surface of Antarctica was created.

Section “Ecosystems”
The annotated list of the species of invertebrates of the Weddell Sea is prepared; comparative characteristics of one cell agglutinated bi-polar foraminifera of the Antarctic and the Arctic and descriptions of new for the Antarctic species from different groups of invertebrate animals and faunistic and floristic reports on different Antarctic regions are presented. Monographs on the liparid fish of the Southern Ocean and Dragonfish and Antarctic sculpin; and descriptions of new species of Antarctic fish and squids, their morphological, biological, geographical and ecological peculiarities are prepared. The causes of multiyear fluctuations of the boundaries of spreading and variations in the numbers of krill in the commercial areas of the Atlantic sector of the Antarctic, and also of krill masses cast ashore the Antarctic and the sub-Antarctic islands are investigated. A relation of the variations of krill numbers to the El-Ninjo phenomenon is shown. It is revealed that a sharp variability of the krill biomass also influences the course of nesting of some species of Antarctic birds specializing in feeding on this food type.
A fluorimetric analysis of suspended matter collected in the 46th RAE is performed. The obtained values of chlorophyll “a” concentrations make it possible to perform a comparative analysis with available data on chlorophyll “a” for estimating the dynamics of the biological processes in the Southern Ocean ecosystem in the wintertime.

Section “Lithosphere”
The geological-geophysical database on the Indian Ocean sector of East Antarctica was generated. A map of the depth of occurrence of the foundation of the Indian Ocean continental margin was constructed. The legend to the map of the tectonic and mineragenetic regioning was prepared. A map of the tectonic and prediction-mineragenetic regioning of the Indian Ocean sector of East Antarctica was constructed. Samples for the isotope-geochemistry studies were collected. Isotopic studies on the determination of ages of the volcanic and intrusive complexes of the Early Pre-Cambrian (Rukerian) proto-craton were made. The geological-geophysical databases on the southern part of Prince-Charles Mountains were supplemented. A petrographic description of the ancient complexes of the Rukerian proto-craton was compiled. A set of the geological-geophysical maps of the scale 1: 1 000 000 and 1: 2 000 000 (map of sub-glacial relief, of potential fields, geological map, map of mineral resources) was created.
As a result of processing and interpretation of all available geophysical data, the following maps were compiled: map of the anomalous magnetic field, map of the depth of occurrence of the crystalline foundation surface, tectonic map, scheme of the oil-gas-bearing prospects of the sedimentary basins of the Indian Ocean continental margin of East Antarctica in the 0º-80º E sector with the reconstructed history of its geological development in the Late Phanerozoic (last 200 million years). As a result of the studies made an original system of the views on the structure and evolution of the Earth’s crust of East Antarctica and its mineragenetic features is proposed.
In the direction “Applied studies and developments”, the main activities were carried out on the”
    • engineering-glaciological development for the preparation and operation of the snow-ice airstrip in the Novolazarevskaya station,
    • hydrographic measurements of ship approaches to the coast of Larsemann Hills Oasis,
    • high-precision geodetic determination of the geographical coordinates of the reference geodetic network at the Russian Antarctic stations using differential GPS equipment.

The work under the section “Environmental monitoring of the Antarctic” was carried out at all Russian Antarctic Mirny, Vostok, Novolazarevskaya, Progress and Bellingshausen stations and also onboard the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”. It included performance of constant observations on surface meteorology (all stations and the ship), solar radiation (all stations and the ship), upper-air (Mirny and Novolazarevskaya), coastal oceanography (Mirny, Progress and Bellingshausen), satellite and coastal ice observations (Mirny, Progress, Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen and the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”), geomagnetism (Mirny, Vostok and Novolazarevskaya), monitoring of the state of the ionosphere (Mirny, Vostok and Novolazarevskaya), seismology (Novolazarevskaya and Mirny), monitoring of trace gases and ionosphere (Mirny, Vostok and Novolazarevskaya), micro-biology (Bellingshausen and the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”), monitoring of polluting parameters of the ocean, atmosphere and ice cover (the R/V “Akademik Fedorov”). Beginning from December 2003, the data of meteorological observations at Progress station are transmitted to the national and international networks.
The activities in the direction “Environmental protection” were continued at all Russian Antarctic stations and bases. At Progress and Novolazarevskaya stations, the garbage incinerator complexes were introduced into operation and at Progress station – a complex for water preparation and treatment and utilization of domestic waste. At Bellingshausen station, accomplishment of complex nature protection measures  for making the station infrastructure to conform to the nature protection requirements was continued (the work is performed jointly with the British non-governmental organization).
The work in the direction “Logistics activity of RAE” was carried out in compliance with the approved plans of the expedition activities for 2003. Due to force-majeure circumstances, on February 23, 2003 Vostok station was temporarily closed down. Its personnel were delivered to Mirny station by means of the sledge-caterpillar traverse. On December 30, 2003, Vostok station was opened again using the Mirny-Vostok sledge-caterpillar traverse. During the second traverse in January-February 2004, a new wintering team was delivered to Vostok station.
The work started on the capital construction of the new wintering complex of Progress station.
In December 2003-February 2004 in accordance with the instructions of the Decision of the Government of the Russian Federation, the Interagency Inspection of the Russian Antarctic Mirny, Progress and Novolazarevskaya stations and the seasonal field bases Druzhnaya-4 and Molodezhnaya was conducted.




