XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 050
Agenda Item: 13
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 





INTERNATIONAL PROJECT ON THE COOPERATIVE AIR NETWORK IN EAST ANTARCTICA “DROMLAN”










It is obvious that organization of transcontinental flights to the Antarctic significantly expands the capabilities of the national Antarctic Programs. In this respect the Antarctic can be traditionally divided into three main regions: the Ross Sea coast connected by air transport with New Zealand, area of the Antarctic Peninsula and the South Shetland Islands connected with South America and the Falkland Islands and coast of the Indian Ocean sector of the Atlantic connected with South Africa and Australia. Realization of transcontinental flights to the Antarctic can be achieved provided the following technical requirements are observed:
    • tactical-technical data of airships  allowing a non-stop flight across the ocean with cargo and passengers onboard;
    • availability of aerodromes in Antarctica adapted for landing and takeoff of such airships.
  	The latter fact restricts to a great extent the possibility of using heavy transport aircraft that are traditionally equipped with wheel undercarriage (C-130, C-141, C-5, Il-76 aircraft, etc.). The exception is the US airplanes of the LC-130 type, which are equipped with a ski-wheel undercarriage.
	While in the area of West Antarctica, for receiving heavy wheel transport aircraft three ground airfields at the Chilean President Eduardo Frei Base, Argentine Marambio station, British Rothera station and an airstrip located on the “blue ice” in the vicinity of Patriot Hills are available, on the Ross Sea coast and in East Antarctica, only snow-ice airfields exist (USA McMurdo station and Russian Novolazarevskaya station). In the spring time in the Ross Sea, one practices receiving wheel transport aircraft to the runway constructed on landfast sea ice. One should also note “blue ice” sites suitable for receiving such aircraft at a comparatively small distance from the Australian Casey station, Norwegian Troll Base and Russian Novolazarevskaya station. Experience of receiving such aircraft in these regions is available only for the latter of the enumerated sites.
	This circumstance provides an indisputable priority in arranging the transcontinental flights of the US Antarctic Program (Christchurch – McMurdo). Airplanes of the Antarctic Programs of New Zealand and Italy fly along this route to a smaller extent.
	In West Antarctica, the greatest number of transcontinental flights is made by the national Antarctic Programs of Chile, Argentina and Great Britain. Similar flights on a smaller scale are organized by the Programs of Brasilia and Uruguay using the Chilean infrastructure. 
	The pioneers of transcontinental flights in the Indian Ocean sector of the Antarctic were specialists of the Russian Aeroflot who in the 1970s-1980s in the framework of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition Program made flights to Molodezhnaya and Novolazarevskaya stations from the airports of Maputu, Mozambique and Cape Town (South Africa) on Il-18D and Il-76 aircraft. For receiving such aircraft in Antarctica, specialists of the Leningrad Design Institute “Lenaeroproject” developed a technology for construction of runways on compacted snow. This technology was successfully realized in conducting the programs of the Soviet Antarctic expeditions. The economic crisis of the early 1990s occurring in the USSR and naturally at the Russian Federation, interrupted transcontinental flights to the Antarctic and preparation of runways under the programs of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE).
	Stabilizing of the economic situation in Russia allowed us once again to consider the implementation of the projects on air communication between South Africa and the Queen Maud Land in Antarctica. However, the RAE capabilities to accomplish such aviation program independently were insufficient. At the same time, the national Antarctic Programs of such countries as Germany, Finland, Sweden and Norway showed increased interest in the possibilities of delivering specialists and part of scientific equipment for conducting summer seasonal programs at their stations and bases. The available experience of using aircraft of a private tourist agency “Antarctic Logistic”, which made flights from Cape Town to a “blue ice” site in the vicinity of Novolazarevskaya station on C-130 aircraft, was unsafe as there was no adequate air traffic control, meteorological support of the flights and other necessary attributes of air traffic. In this connection, the priority of the Novolazarevskaya air field for this Antarctic region was practically indisputable the more so as a group of countries showed interest in arranging such flights.
	The idea of establishing a cooperative air network in the Antarctic appeared as early as the beginning of the 1970s. At the VIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Recommendation VII-8 “Cooperation in transport” was adopted, which encouraged countries-participants to the Treaty to cooperate in undertaking joint marine and air operations and using common ships. In 1974, the SCAR Working Group on Logistics set up an ad-hoc sub-committee called CATSA, which was requested to consider the possible ways and specific measures for cooperation in air transport. The CATSA activity was supported by adopting Recommendation VIII-7 “Cooperation in transport” at the VIIIth Consultative Meeting and continued until 1980 when the Group terminated its activity.
	A new circuit of activity on this issue began in 1994 when at the SCALOP Symposium Russia presented a report on organizing an air network in East Antarctica. In 1995, the Seminar on Air Operations was held in Washington, the USA. As a follow-up of the agreements achieved at this Seminar, the SCALOP set up the Working Group on Air Operations which continues to work at the present time. By the initiative of the representatives of Russia, a project for creating an air network for East Antarctica was developed in the framework of this group in 1996-2000. The main component of this project was a real possibility to establish an air bridge Cape Town – Novolazarevskaya using Russian aircraft Il-76.
	Resuming in December 2001 transcontinental flights of aircraft Il-76 to the snow-ice airfield of the Russian Novolazarevskaya station played a decisive role in the development of a really effective project of the cooperative air network in East Antarctic The airfield is located in 15 km to the southeast of Novolazarevskaya station at the ice dome snow-bare slope.                         
The geographical coordinates of the airfield control point (ACP – runway center) are as follows: 11o35’44” E and 70o50’39” S. The flight time for Il-76TD from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya is 6 hours.
In 2002 at XIV COMNAP in Shanghai, the project for creating the Air Network for East Antarctica received a new name DROMLAN. Eleven countries including Russia, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Great Britain, South Africa, Holland, India, Belgium and Japan set up  a preparatory committee for developing  the Terms of Reference and Draft Project Document of DROMLAN envisaging joint financing of the aviation support for the national programs in East Antarctica in the sector from Halley station to Syowa station (Fig. 1).  In 2003 in Brest, representatives of the indicated countries signed the Terms of Reference of DROMLAN defining the principles of organization and operation of the project.
Beginning from December 6, 2001 during three summer seasons, 14 flights of Il-76 aircraft were made from Cape Town to Novolazarevskaya including 2 flights during the 2001-2002 season, 4 flights during the 2002-2003 season and 8 flights during 2003-2004. Several hundreds of participants of the national Antarctic Programs and tens of tons of cargos were transported. In addition to heavy wheel aircraft Il-76, the airfield at Novolazarevskaya was used by the national programs operating on Queen Maud Land for inland flights of small aviation. For inland flights, An-2, Dornier 228, DHC6 Twin Otter and Basler BT-67 were used. The aviation operator of the project is the “Antarctic Logistic Center International” Company from South Africa. The preparation of the snow-ice airfield, its use in the Novolazarevskaya station area and delivery of air fuel to the Antarctic by ship and further from the ice barrier to the airfield by ground caterpillar vehicles is performed by RAE. For this, the RAE prepared an environmental impact evaluation of all types of activity connected with the operation of the airfield complex and was granted a corresponding Permit for this activity up to 2007.
An important part of the DROMLAN Project functioning is provision of safety requirements to all components of this transport system. Every two years the snow-ice airfield is checked and certified by a special commission of the State Service of Civil Aviation (SS CA) of the Ministry of Transport of the Russian Federation. This service grants to RAE an official certificate about the flying suitability of the airfield of Novolazarevskaya station for receiving aircraft Il-76. The flights of other types of wheel aircraft to this aerodrome require additional certification at the SS CA. In the absence of such a certificate the flights can be made under the full responsibility of the airship leader.
Aircraft Il-76 in different modifications (TD or MD) is one of the most reliable transport airships of such class. By its flying-technical characteristics it corresponds to the US aircraft C-141, however, the design of the Il-76 undercarriage provides a much smaller specific load on the ground surface, which allows it to takeoff and land on ground airfields. The crews of aircraft Il-76 have a special permit for flights to the Antarctic. Checking of flying qualification of the crew members and if necessary training is performed every year by Russian test-pilots of the highest qualification from the State Research Institute of Civil Aviation of the Ministry of Transport of Russia.
    The indicated fact guarantees a high level of safety in providing transcontinental flights from South Africa to Antarctica and back.
The Antarctic Program of Norway develops a plan for preparation of the airstrip on the “blue ice” segment in the vicinity of Troll station for receiving heavy wheel transport aircraft. Introduction of this airfield into operation will further increase the level of safety of flights as it will provide a possibility of a spare aerodrome at a comparatively small distance from Novolazarevskaya station. To receive aircraft Il-76 on the runway of Troll station is possible only after its certification by a special commission of SS CA.
The beginning of work under the international DROMLAN Project has confirmed once again a high efficiency of international cooperation in the Antarctic when the maximum result can be achieved at minimum costs of each of the participating party.






















