XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 070
Agenda Item: 10
AUSTRALIA
Original: English

 




CIRCUM-ANTARCTIC CENSUS OF MARINE LIFE AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL FOR THE INTERNATIONAL POLAR YEAR (2007-2009)















Circum-Antarctic census of marine life 
Australian proposal for the International Polar Year (2007-2009)
    1. During the International Polar Year Australia has proposed that an international Circum-Antarctic Census of Marine Life (CircAntCML) be undertaken.  It is suggested that field work be completed during the 2007-2008 Antarctic season.  Planning for this significant event is underway.
2.	CircAntCML would be undertaken under the umbrella of the Census of Marine Life (CoML) - a ten-year international program with the goal of exploring the Earth’s oceans and to assess and explain changes in its biological diversity, and the distribution and abundance of oceanic life.  The CoML recognises society’s increasing demands for better understanding of the oceans and how oceanic changes affect their biota and the sustainability of their marine industries.  Its website contains much background information and describes its current projects (http://www.coml.org/coml.htm).  The Scientific Steering Committee of CoML is keen to identify and develop an increased focus in the southern hemisphere – a region that is currently under-represented in the program’s activities.

3.	It is envisaged that a number of Antarctic research vessels would participate, each conducting an agreed agenda of biological and oceanographic sampling routines in a defined sector of the circum-Antarctic ocean.  A strong emphasis would be put on the need to use state-of-the-art sampling techniques for the biological component and the International Planning Committee for CircAntCML would work closely with the SCOR Working Group 118 to ensure consistency of outcomes.  The use of underwater autonomous vehicles would be strongly encouraged.  Scientific data will be recorded according to agreed protocols, such as the Ocean Biogeographic Information System (OBIS) for CoML activities.  This is an internet-accessible repository for new information and analysis.  

4.	Over the past several months Australia has contacted a number of nations with research vessels capable of undertaking the work to ascertain the level of international support for CircAntCML.  It tabled an Information Paper on the proposed census at CCAMLR XXII (November 2003) which was welcomed by Germany and the UK (CCAML-XXII Report – Preliminary Version paragraphs 18.1-18.4).  Advice from Japan, France, New Zealand, Italy and the USA is strongly supportive.  Other countries are encouraged to contribute research vessels.  The International Scientific Steering Committee of CoML met in October 2003 and supports the proposal.  

5.	The scientific focus and details for the Census will be discussed at a meeting of research vessel providers to be held immediately following SCAR, in Bremen on 1-2 August 2004.
