Information Paper
Submitted by Germany

Research Project “Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic 
Specially Protected or Managed Areas”


    1. Introduction
The Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, in the south-western part of King George Island, are intensively used for scientific, logistic and tourism-related activities. Since 1968, six nations (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Russia and Uruguay) have constructed research stations and field huts in the area. In 1980, Chile additionally built a hard runway for inter- and intra-continental flights of Hercules C-130 and smaller aircraft, in order to transport cargo, station personnel, and visitors to and from stations in the region of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. Supply, research and tourist vessels anchor frequently in Maxwell Bay.
Scientific programmes include various atmospheric, glacial, geological and biological investigations. Studies on the fauna especially involve the life history of birds, such as penguins, skuas, Southern Giant Petrels, Wilson’s Storm Petrels and their interactions with humans. Due to its high species diversity, Ardley Island has been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No. 150) for intensive research, but also includes a visitor zone for station personnel and tourists. A geological site with rich fossil deposits on Fildes Peninsula forms a second ASPA (No. 125). Ship-based tourism and overflights occur on a regular basis, and a combination of air and ship-based tourism continues developing. Marathons, glacier climbing, camping and diving activities have all taken place in recent years, illustrating the diverse spectrum of non-governmental activities in the area, which will certainly continue increasing. Such human activities occur in the breeding and moulting period of birds and seals, leading to a conflict of interest between nature conservation, science, logistics and tourism. Although there have been environmental monitoring and impact studies in the past, current data are still insufficient to propose specific recommendations for integrated management of these diverse interests. A current German research project commissioned by the Umweltbundesamt (the German Federal Environmental Agency) aims to provide the substantial body of data necessary to fully evaluate the role and structure of a possible broad-scale management system which could supplement the existing regime of protection of ASPAs. Such an area-wide system would act to minimise hazards resulting from the cumulative effects of diverse human activities in the area. 
This three-year research project is currently being carried out by Dr. Hans-Ulrich Peter and others at the Institute of Ecology, University of Jena, Germany.
The project depends to a large extent on successful cooperation between scientists and the memberstates represented on Fildes Peninsula. Currently German, Chilean, Chinese, and Russian scientists are already co-operating in the collection of biological and environmental information on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. This kind of co-operation should be extended, further consultations should take place before at the end a draft of a management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas could be prepared. Therefore Germany will appreciate active support and cooperation by other states, especially those concerned by this project.

The following summary of the project is submitted for general information.


    2. Summary of the Research Plan 

2.1. Background

More than 20 years of ecological research work carried out by German, Chilean, Chinese, and Russian scientists on Fildes Peninsula (62°12' S, 58°58' W, area about 20 km2) and Ardley Island (62°13' S, 58°56' W, see Fig. 1) has provided an extensive data pool of long-term seabird monitoring, life history studies, GIS mapping of geographical, geological and biological features, and some environmental monitoring. The project will for the first time integrate all relevant data in a consistent and complete way for comparison with new data. 
To evaluate what aspects of the study area are worth managing, protection categories will be combined with quality criteria (e.g. ecological importance, diversity, special features, stability or the degree of interference in the area). An environmental risk assessment will include the documentation of possible impacts and their intensity on a spatial and temporal scale. Besides all human activities, natural processes, the biological variability and viability as well as the urgency for protection will be discussed. 

Fig. 1. Map of King George Island with the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island.

2.2. Data collection 

Between 2003/04 and 2005/06, a survey will be carried out covering the environmental situation on land and in the coastal parts of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, the frequency and distribution of fauna and flora, and the impact of station logistics (including helicopters, planes, and ships), research, and tourism on indicator species. Additionally, station members will be interviewed about their views of environmental management in the area. 

Environmental situation on land and in the coastal zones  
Besides the information collected within COMNAP, there is still a need for more quantitative data on human impact on the environment of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Therefore, historical and actual waste grounds and present waste management techniques will be documented in detail. The entry of organic material into the area will be registered. 
There is a special interest in the spatial and temporal use of the roads, paths, and lanes outside the official network, by scientists and station personnel. Major construction work in stations will be documented and possible adverse effects discussed. Flight activities by airplanes and helicopters will be recorded over the next three field seasons. Similar information will be collected for all ship movements in the Maxwell Bay, and also zodiac and boat use for short transport operations will be recorded. 

Frequency and distribution of fauna and flora on land and in the coastal areas 
All bird breeding sites of penguins, skuas, Kelp Gulls, Antarctic Terns, Southern Giant Petrels, Sheathbills, cormorants, Cape Petrels and storm petrels will be mapped, using GPS and GIS. Additionally, counts at seal resting and breeding sites will be carried out. Vegetation will be mapped, concentrating on the two flowering plants Deschampsia antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis, the main lichen and moss communities as well as introduced plant species. 

Impact of station logistic, research, and visits on indicator species 
Changes in breeding pair numbers, breeding success and the distribution of selected bird species in areas of human activity can be used for the impact assessment. There already exists a useful body of data for penguins, skuas, and Southern Giant Petrels, showing considerable population fluctuations in certain breeding sites partly caused by human impact. Especially, disturbed giant petrels changed their breeding sites to areas of low human activity. However, environmental parameters like variable food availability and weather conditions are also in need of assessment in relation to human impacts. 
For the establishment of minimum distances to be kept by humans in order to avoid disturbing breeding or resting sites, behavioural changes of animals (e.g. escape behaviour, aggression levels, reduced resting time due to human disturbance) are considered as very important indicators. Additionally, physiological data, such as heart rate and hormone level changes, can be used for the analysis. Animals living close to frequent human activities will have partly modified their behaviour through habituation, but it has still to be estimated to what extent this has happened. Studies have been carried out on Southern Giant Petrels and skuas in areas with different human disturbance levels on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, and results will be included in the assessment. 
The impact on vegetation by pedestrians and vehicles can also be seen in different parts of the study area but have not so far been systematically documented. Other potential impacts on the environment include damage to important geological and geomorphologic features. 

As field ecologists have spent a relatively long time studying the wildlife of the area, the intensity of research activities will be spatially and temporally assessed. Visiting activities from scientists and station staff in their leisure time should also be considered. 

Impact of tourism on indicator species on land and in coastal areas
Information on tourism, such as numbers, temporal and spatial distribution of tourists on land, and their diversity of activities are essential factors for the environmental risk assessment. Pros and cons will be assessed in the light of further development of the tourism in the region. 

Interviews 
The presence of stations and scientific groups from different nations on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island results, for most activities, in international co-operation in logistic and science activities. All stations consist of both members with short- and long-term experience in Antarctic and many of the station staff have repeatedly visited the study area, and are thus aware of changes in the environment and station management. Interviews about individual knowledge and perception of the environmental situation could facilitate management recommendations that are supported by a large number of the people working and living on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island all the year round. 


2.3. Data management

All spatial and temporal data will be stored in databases of ArcGIS. GIS layers will include topographical information from the King George Island GIS Project (KGIS), Chinese research work and German updates. Maps of fauna and flora will be constructed for the first time for the whole study area, showing selected bird species breeding sites, seal sites, and vegetation cover. The extent of human activities will be shown in maps of waste deposits, transportation, visitation and impact levels. Sites protected already and new ‘sensitive’ parts of the study area will be described, with all necessary site-specific information. 


2.4. Use of data sets 

During the project the following proposals will be discussed:

Prognoses
According to the actual data sets of station use, tourist development, and human activity on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, prognoses for future developments will be presented. 

Recommendations of suitable monitoring mechanisms
A regular and comprehensive monitoring of indicator parameters should be established. Particularly, areas with cumulative effects from different human activities such as scientific and logistic work near stations, tourism and aircraft use need to be looked at in greater detail. It might be useful to form a co-ordination group consisting of station leaders, experts on logistics and scientists based on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, taking responsibility for all monitoring and management activities in the area. This group could be supervised by an Intercessional Contact Group within the framework of the CEP.

Guidelines for logistic operations 
Guidelines on flight routes and heights for aeroplanes and helicopters are in need of revision, in co-operation with the active Parties to the Protocol of Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. If necessary, guidelines for shipping operations could also be discussed. Recommendations for land vehicle use and maintenance of roads and paths could be developed. 


2.5. Workshop

The project needs an intensive co-operation of all nations based at Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island during the data analysis and decision making process. Therefore, a workshop is planned to be held at the end of the final field season in 2006 to integrate all national parties for the presentation of the results and the discussion of necessary management steps.


2.6. Management plans for the designation of ASPAs or ASMAs 

Based on the data collected during the project, the necessity for increased management in the study area will be assessed. Existing conflicts of interest between station operations, scientific work, tourism and environmental protection could possibly be minimised or avoided by designing Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. According to Art. 5 (3) of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, the designation requires the proposal of management plans. 






Figure 1. Map of King George Island with the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island.
