XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 037
Agenda Item: CEP 4b
NEW ZEALAND
Original: English

 






PROGRESS REPORT ON THE ANDRILL DRAFT CEE AND AN OUTLINE OF THE PROCESS AND TIMELINE FOR THE COMPLETION OF THE FINAL CEE














Progress Report on the ANDRILL Draft CEE and an Outline of the Process and Timeline for the Completion of the Final CEE.


Background
New Zealand circulated the draft CEE for the ANDRILL project in January 2003.  The document was considered by an ICG prior to the Madrid 2003 meeting of the CEP VI, where it was then presented (WP/02).  The advice of the CEP to the ATCM on the draft CEE was very positive.  The draft CEE is currently being updated and the final CEE will be circulated at least 60 days before the commencement of the proposed activity.  The final CEE shall address and include or summarise comments received on the draft CEE.

Update
The process for the preparation of the final CEE runs parallel to ANDRILL project planning.  A number of changes have been made to the ANDRILL project, including reducing the number of selected sites for the proposed activity from four to two – New Harbour (NH)Southern McMurdo Sound (SMS) (previously called New Harbour (NH)) and the McMurdo Ice Shelf (MIS), and a decision to delay the first drill year of the ANDRILL project to the 2006/2007 summer season.  The number of sites was reduced by an international panel review after evaluating the site survey work previously completed on the four sites.  The panel concluded that only two sites have been thoroughly evaluated for drilling and that the other two sites would need more site survey work to proceed.  A one-year delay has resulted from delays relating to the procurement of the drill rig and the need for appropriate testing of the drill system before on-site drilling can commence.

The circulation of the final CEE will be timed accordingly. While there have been some operational changes, the prediction made in the draft CEE that probable environmental impacts of the proposed activity will be minor and short term, and that more major impacts which are possible can be avoided or mitigated, remains unchanged.  Overall, the projected impacts associated with the ANDRILL project are determined to be more than minor or transitory, but are considered acceptable due to the substantial benefits and significant scientific advantages that stand to be gained.  The predicted environmental impacts will not have a widespread adverse impact on the Antarctic environment.  Further fieldwork and procedural development to address the gaps and uncertainties identified in the draft CEE continue and results will be incorporated into the final CEE.  

It is still expected that additional knowledge and experience will be gained with each new drill season, and new technology may be developed over the long lifespan of the project to improve both operational potential and environmental performance.  Subsequently, any changes to the final CEE will be notified in accordance with Resolution XXI-2 (1997).   

Updated Timeline

2004
May	Information Paper tabled at ATCM XXVII.
September – December	Further fieldwork/ site assessments carried out.

2005
January – February	Further fieldwork/ site assessments carried out.
September – December	Further fieldwork/ site assessments carried out.

2006
January – February	Further fieldwork/ site assessments carried out.
January				Drill rig shipped to Scott Base.
February – September		Drill rig assembled and tested.
May – August	Final CEE prepared taking into account comments on draft CEE and results of any fieldwork.  Final CEE circulated to Parties.
