



XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 041
Agenda Item: CEP 4
UNITED STATES
Original: English

 






	
PRACTICING ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP IN ANTARCTICA






















	
Practicing Environmental Stewardship in Antarctica

Background

The United States maintains three research stations and numerous temporary field camps throughout Antarctica.  Past research sites, former waste disposal sites, and accidents, and spills are all potential candidates for clean up.  Identification and clean up of sites is governed by the Antarctic Conservation Act, as implemented in the US Federal regulations (45 CFR 670-673), and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  This paper discusses the United States Antarctic Program’s (USAP) approach to identifying and cleaning up former waste sites and areas contaminated by spills or accidents in Antarctica, and provides an example of an approach to preventing new contamination at field sites.  

The USAP has ongoing efforts to identify and characterize contaminated sites, and then remove contaminated media and debris from these sites (Fig. 1).  Because funding and equipment available for clean up are limited, projects must be prioritized, with accidents and spills receiving immediate containment and clean-up action, followed by a site evaluation to determine if further monitoring or clean up is necessary.  The next priorities for clean up are past research sites and past waste disposal areas and sites of former activity.  Clean-up activities are only undertaken if it is determined that they will not further damage the environment.  If debris or contamination at a site is limited to small, ice-covered areas inaccessible to wildlife, clean up may be a lower priority, or a decision may be made not to proceed.  Furthermore, access to some sites may be so dangerous or difficult that complete removal of all structures is not feasible.  

Since the early 1990s, all accidents and spills have been reported, with causes analyzed and subsequent actions taken based on that information to make improvements in storage, distribution systems, and operator training.  In 1998, the USAP began to utilize the “Environmental Incident Reporting System” database, as described in the Council of Managers of Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) working paper “An Assessment of Environmental Incidents Arising from Activities in Antarctica” (2002).  Audits and inspections provide additional information, which can be used with the accident and spill reports to identify preventative actions that can be taken to avoid future contamination.  Examples of actions the USAP has taken to prevent further accidents or spills include:  replacement of flanges with welded pipes, consolidation of fuel storage, secondary containment for large chemical storage tanks, best practices for storage of chemicals and waste, operator training, and education to promote awareness.  In addition, long-range site planning, zoning, and consolidation have reduced the physical footprint that is at risk of contamination.  

Case Studies

The following case studies exemplify the USAP’s actions related to site clean up and accident prevention.  

Case Study 1.  Accident Response – Fuel Line Break, McMurdo Station

A recent incident at McMurdo station involving a fuel line break illustrates the USAP’s emergency response methods and associated follow-up procedures.  

On 20 October 2003, failure of a coupling along a 15-cm fuel line occurred approximately 2 km from McMurdo Station on the annual sea ice and resulted in a spill of approximately 7,000 gallons of fuel.  Contract employees had observed that a normally inflated section of the hose was deflated.  The primary spill response team, equipment operations personnel, and fire department were notified and immediately responded.  Measures were taken to contain the spill and to identify the lateral extent of the fuel migration.  A circle of approximately 50 m in diameter was trenched around the spill; efforts were made to contain all fuel within this diameter (Figs. 2a and b).  Sumps were dug, and fuel was collected via pumping.  

Response teams were able to recover 3,200 gallons of fuel, and an estimated 580 gallons evaporated to the atmosphere.   These intensive spill recovery operations continued for nine days.  Using this combination of pumping and volatilization, over 90% of the fuel was eventually removed from the site.  Response to the accident was rapid, and recovery of fuel was well above normal expectations for a spill.

dumping for waste disposal from the 1960’s to 1988.  Since 1988 all waste has been containerized and removed from the station.  A systematic evaluation of the contents of the three waste sites was undertaken in 1990-1991, including analysis of soil and ash for contaminants.  Based on this review, a preliminary environmental assessment and an initial environmental evaluation of proposed clean up activities was prepared in 1996, prior to initiation of clean-up activities.  Clean up was conducted by trained specialists in three phases, in 1996, 1999, and 2004, respectively; removal of staged waste collection containers is ongoing.  Phase I included cleanup of the few remaining items from the former Palmer Station and the initiation of clean up at one of the three waste disposal sites at the current Palmer Station (Site 1).  Phase II completed An investigation of the spill cause was conducted, focusing on fuel hose maintenance and specifications of the material used in the cast aluminum couplings.  The investigation concluded that a number of causes contributed to the coupling failure, including the composition of the couplings, the procedure used to prevent snow burial of the fuel line, fuel line cleaning, temperature induced stress, or possibly improper bolt tightening during assembly.  

Findings from this incident led the USAP to the following actions:

    • Evaluation and field testing of forged couplings of material better suited for use in the Antarctic conditions.  This resulted in a decision to replace old couplings with the more suitable ones. 
    • Review and revision of best practices for assembling, laying and maintaining fuel lines and conducting fuel transfer operations
    • Set up an improved program to analyze failed product data, developing improved product performance tracking databases.

Case Study 2. Site Clean Up – Palmer Station

Palmer Station, the smallest USAP permanent station, practiced open burning and clean up at Site 1 at Palmer Station.  Phase III involved clean up of the other two waste disposal sites (Sites 2 and 3) at Palmer Station and staging of the waste material for removal from Antarctica. 

In Phase I of the clean up, approximately half of the ash and debris were removed from Site 1. Volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls, petroleum hydrocarbons, and some metals were detected at the site.  In the process of conducting the cleanup and removal, it was discovered that the quantity of material that required removal had been underestimated.  Future clean up plans were adjusted to reflect revised waste estimates.

During Phase II of the clean up, additional work was performed at Site 1, including removal of all ash and debris.   Wastes were appropriately containerized, labeled and staged for transport.  The approximate amount of waste removed during phase I and II was:  226 m3 of ash, 2.8 milvans of debris, 1,400 kg of suspected asbestos, 9 55-gallon drums of hazardous debris.  

Phase III of the clean up was conducted in 2004 to clean up Sites 2 and 3.  Approximately 180 m3 of ash was removed.  Before and after figures of one of the waste sites are shown in Fig. 3 and 4, respectively. 

An Approach to Preventing the Contamination of Field Camps

In order to prevent the contamination of field camps in the future, the USAP is developing standard operating procedures for planning, construction, operation, and decommissioning of field camps.  The assessment will consider alternative strategies for establishing and utilizing field camps in such a way that the environment is protected to the fullest extent and all materials brought in to the camp are removed when the useful life of the camp is over.  The procedures will be updated regularly, and adherence to them will be evaluated through audits.  

Field camp planning procedures focus on locating, designing, and planning logistical support for the camp.  Camp location planning encourages centralized campsites, avoiding snow accumulation and runoff areas, and avoiding accidental or planned releases of potential contaminants near sensitive areas, such as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA).  Camp design principles suggest minimizing the size, number of structures, and footprint of the camp, while designing space for proper storage and separation of waste.  Use of prefabricated components and renewable sources of energy are encouraged.  Logistics recommendations include minimizing disturbance to wildlife by managing the type and frequency of logistical support, planning for safe removal of hazardous wastes, using transportation appropriate to the site and reliable vehicles to minimize opportunities for spills and leaks. 

Construction and operation procedures focus on storage, handling, and documenting hazardous waste, solid waste, and wastewater as necessary.  Hazardous materials would be stored at most for the duration of the project; if multi-year storage is required, material is marked and documented as a field cache and secured away from sensitive areas (e.g., streams, lakes).  Hazardous materials are stored with secondary containment, and spill clean up materials are available at all field sites and field camp personnel are trained to use these materials.  Hazardous wastes are removed at the end of the season unless prevented by a weather-related emergency; non-hazardous wastes are removed to the extent practicable.  Wastewater is not released on ice-free land or ablation areas; where wastewater may be discharged (snow accumulation areas), the disposal pit is deep and the wastewater does not contain hazardous substances, and wastewater disposed of in to the sea is released at depth in high-mixing areas.  

Decommissioning of the camps involves restoring the site to its original condition to the maximum extent practicable.  The field camp area is inspected for accidental releases, and all designated pollutants and wastes are removed.  Coordinates of the camp and condition of the site and materials at the site are recorded.

These best practices should prevent future need for extensive clean up at decommissioned field sites, provide documentation of the location and nature of previously used sites, and provide lessons learned on problems encountered.  These lessons learned will guide any necessary revisions to the guidance for field camp planning, construction, logistics, and decommissioning.























Fig. 1. Locations of ongoing USAP clean up activities.



Fig. 2a.  Initial response to McMurdo area fuel line spill.  Spill response crew shown digging holes to determine extent of spill.



Fig. 2b. McMurdo area fuel line spill, aerial view of clean up activities.  Rectangular boards are covering holes dug to pump fuel out of spill zone.    


Fig. 3. Palmer Station waste site before clean up.






Fig 4. Palmer Station former waste site, after clean up.  Person in photo is standing approximately at the location of the primary waste pile.
























