XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 087
Agenda Item: CEP 4b
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original: English

 



COMPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
TO DRAFT CEE FOR CZECH  SCIENTIFIC STATION  IN  ANTARCTICA
(Response to comments of Australia and Germany to the Draft CEE for the Construction and Operation of Czech Scientific Station in Antarctica)






















XXVII ATCM
Information Paper IP- 087
Agenda Item: CEP 
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original : English





Information paper



complementary information
to Draft cee for Czech  Scientific Station  in  Antarctica
(Response to comments of Australia and Germany to the Draft CEE for the Construction and Operation of Czech Scientific Station in Antarctica)

Introduction
Following the publication of the Draft CEE for a Czech Scientific Station on January 23 2004, complementary  relevant information was reported by the expedition to James Ross Island in February – March 2004 (see IP - REPORT ON RESEARCH  ACTIVITIES OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC IN THE ANTARCTIC, Season 2003/2004). As the new findings match the comments to the Draft CEE issued by Australia and Germany they are presented below structured as responses to these comments. 

    1. 
Australian comment: 
It is not clear from the revised draft CEE whether on-site baseline environmental studies have been undertaken.  The draft CEE states that the proposed on-site work program for January 2003 was replaced by a desk-based analysis, however, neither the output from this analysis nor that of any fieldwork studies are provided.  Was any fieldwork undertaken in the 2003-04 season or is any proposed prior to further planning for the station.

German comment:
A systematic and current inventory of the state of the site is in our point of view very important to any estimation of the possible impact on the environmental assets to be protected. We are not sure whether the conclusions of the study that no negative impact is to be feared for the fauna and flora to be protected, or at least not in any significant way, do base on such an inventory and thus are therefore too general.
    2. 

Australian comment: 
Section 5.5 states that no systematic zoological research has been carried out on the island; a survey should be undertaken to provide base-line data as the initial environmental reference state.  This could be used to determine impacts such as potential bird strikes with the proposed wind turbines (what species nest in the vicinity of the station site, when do they breed and do they frequent the station site for other reasons such as feeding?).  Similarly, what arguments can be made to support the statement in Section 6.3 that richer benthic communities are not expected below the ice or that there are no organisms in the proposed melt-water stream (section 6.2), particularly since algae were found in similar streams on King George and Galindez islands (Section 4.1).

Response: 
The field reconnaissance of the construction site of the Czech Antarctic Station (tentatively designated Point No 4 - see CEE, parts 3.2.1, 3.3.1, 4. and Annexes 3, 4, 5, 7) was performed by group of four geologists (Czech Geological Survey and Charles University of Prague) and one biologist (Institute of Botany, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic) between February 10. - 23. 2004. The aims of this expedition were: 
1. A field reconnaissance of the potential construction site for the Czech Antarctic Station and its surroundings, 
2. The collection of biological and ecological information on the station construction area and its immediate vicinity with the aim of evaluating possible impacts of station construction and its operation on the environment of James Ross Island.
Characteristics of the potential construction site
   Geological setting of the area
The northern part of James Ross Island in the area of the projected construction site for the Czech research station, demarcated by the Cape Lachman-Crame Col and Bibby Point (Fig. 1), is made up of a large coastal depression formed by Cretaceous sediments in the James Ross Basin rimmed with basaltic effusions of a central stratovolcano, Mt.Haddington. Cretaceous sediments of the Santa Marta, Whisky Bay and Hidden Lake Formations consist mostly of siltstones, sandstones and conglomerates. Sediments of the Santa Marta Formation in particular and the Crame Col locality, the edge of which outcrops ca 1.6 km south of the future station, are rich in paleontological finds – the most abundant are fossil trees, marine fauna and shelf silty concretions. Volcanic rocks are represented by multi-generation lava flows with a maximum thickness of 200 m, and are made of alkaline basalts effusions accompanied by effusive derivatives (hyaloclastites, cinders, volcanic breccias) and numerous basalt dikes.

Cretaceous sediments are locally covered by Tertiary and Quaternary glacial sediments. Lateral and terminal moraine and periglacial frost debris prevail, whereas rock glaciers, ice-cored moraines and sorted polygons are less abundant. Basalt effusions in coastal areas form cliffs with walls as much as 100 m high. They are rimmed by thick talus piles. The surface of basalt lava flows forms flat plateaus at elevations ca 350 m a.s.l., covered by an angular skeleton of basalt blocks and rare polygonal soils.

   Characteristics of the construction site 
A detailed field reconnaissance with regard to conditions anticipated during station construction was carried out at the projected construction site of the Czech Antarctic station designated by the following coordinates: 63°48'10'' S; 57°53'00'' W (tentative designation Point No.4, see Fig. 1 - 7).

The planned station facilities are to be situated on an E-W orientated coastal elevation, dipping to the east towards the confluence of Waterwork and Algae Creeks (tentative designation) and inclined further to the north to the coast. The construction site is marked by a cut of Waterwork Creek. The elevation is made up of an uplifted sea beach covered with an angular skeleton of Cretaceous sediments and basalt fragments, on average up to 5 cm in size, with rather rare basaltic wind carved pebbles maximum 30 cm in size. The skeleton layer is 10-20 cm thick, beneath which occur well-sorted beach sands to fine-grained gravels and which extends as far as the upper boundary of the permafrost. Two test pits were dug out to observe the depth of the active layer of permafrost, which turned out to be 55 and 60 cm deep, respectively. Sands and beach gravels are somewhat water-bearing in their upper layer due to thawing snow from occasional precipitation. The layer above the permafrost is dry and well-drained. No paleontological or important geological localities were observed within a distance of ca 1 km away of the construction site, which is primarily the result of the occurrence of glacial sediments and Cretaceous conglomerates of the Whisky Bay Formation along the northern coast of James Ross Island.

The surface of the uplifted beach is solid, packed and leveled. No running water was observed in broader vicinity of the construction site. This is caused by a lack of precipitation in the northern part of James Ross Island, which is in the precipitation shadow of the Antarctic Peninsula. Occasional rapidly-thawing snowfall occurs in summer months and is fully absorbed by beach sediments.

On the south, the beach barrier is bordered by the stream bed of Waterwork Creek (Fig. 2, 3, 6), which is supplied with water from snowfields on the eastern and northern slopes of Bibby Point and Crame Col, respectively. The creek flows through a large cirque depression and its lower stretches at the construction site separate the northern uplifted coastal beach from southerly lateral moraine. Alluvial sediments consist of bimodal fractions of sandy-silty Cretaceous eluvium with quartz pebbles from conglomerates of Whisky Bay Formation and large basalt boulders max. 50 cm in size coming partly from talus of basalt lava flows (Fig. 8). They are also supplemented with skeleton and wind carved pebbles from surface of southerly moraine sediments and as a result of gravitational solifluction movement are sedimenting in the creek bed. 
Basalt gravel and boulders to blocks from the stream bed of the lower stretch of the creek or from alluvial plain (Fig. 8) are considered a possible source of building material for construction of foundations of the station and filling of gabion boxes for a pier. Boulders from the stream bed can simply be lifted so that sites of their extraction will be filled within a short period of time with a suspension, which will be carried in large volume by the thawing water of the creek. The extracted boulders can be transported directly to the construction site along the beach surface (ca 140 m). With regard to the packed surface of the beach, fairly well-drained sediments and the prevalence of precipitation in the form of snow (i.e., without the erosional effects of flowing water), no significant degradation and subsequent erosion of the surface along the course of boulder transport is expected to occur.

The area of the construction site is demarcated by the coast to the north, which is about 190 m long (Fig. 2, line a) and the creek valley to the east and south. The stream bed is incised ca 10-15 m into the surface of the adjacent terrain and is fed by thawing water from snowfields (ca 450 m, line b). The western boundary is made up of a gully ca 1 m deep (250 m, line c). The maximum elevation above sea level of the area thusly defined fluctuates in an interval between 13.5-15.0 m.
Plant ecology characterization of wider vicinity of the station construction site  

The reconnaissance covers the northwest deglaciated area of the Ulu Peninsula up to a distance of 12-15 km from the station building site. It is at best, a poorly developed, predominantly cryptogamic tundra (Fig. 4), with mosses and lichens being the principal component of the plant communities. Based on the widely accepted system of classification of the vegetation types (the classification proposed by Longton, R. E., 1988: The biology of polar bryophytes and lichens. Cambridge – Sydney, Cambridge University Press. 391 pp.; Lewis-Smith, R. I., 1993: “Dry coast ecosystem of Antarctica.” – In: E. van der Maarel (ed.), Ecosystems of the world. 2A. Dry coastal ecosystems. Polar Regions and Europe. Amsterdam  - London – New York – Tokyo, Elsevier, 51-71) the northwest area of the Ulu Peninsula is a member of the fruticose lichen and moss cushion sub-formation. This sub-formation dominated by macrolichens and short turf and small cushio-forming mosses (Andreaea-Usnea association). It is typified by large species of fruticose lichens including Usnea antarctica and Usnea fasciata together with various foliose species dominated by Umbilicaria sp. Usnea fasciata is more common on extreme localities. In contrast, Usnea antarctica, less commonly occurs in localities with milder microclimatic conditions. Frequently Xanthoria elegans and Leptogium puberulum were also found there. Moss communities produce cushion formations (Fig. 9), which commonly follow shallow local wetlands (snowmelt streams and seepages saturated by melting permafrost). Moss communities are produced by the genera Andreaea, Dicranoweisia, Syntrichia, Schistidium. These species were recorded the most frequently Schistidium antarctici-, Brachythecium astro-salebrosum-, Bryum amblyodon-, Bryum pseudotriquetrum. This sub-formation is high in species diversity and it is possible to divide it into smaller subunits according to the local microclimate, geomorphology and soil ecology properties. There are no vascular plants in this region.

The total lichen and moss cover of landscape is very heterogeneous. Dry and unstable habitats (e.g. raised sea terraces, unstable moraines) are frequently free of vegetation. The station construction site and its vicinity (with only minor exceptions at the mouth of Waterworks and Algae Creeks – see below) are mostly up to a distance of 800-1000 m without vegetation communities.

Rich communities of fruticose lichen community achieving 50-70% ground cover occur primarily on the basalt summit plateaus of Berry Hill, Lachman Crags and Cape Lachman (see Fig. 3). They can reach an area of several hundred square meters. Lichen covers the slope foot of the upland platforms are lower, however fruticose lichens are dominated as well here. Moss cushion carpets are usually much smaller, up to several or a few dozen meters square. The most frequent and largest moss carpets can be found on the lower part of Berry Hills’ northwestern slope, where they produce “moss seepages”. Smaller moss carpets also line the streams and its tributaries that lay southwest of the station construction site (Fig. 9). Other moss carpets can be found at the southwestern and northeastern bases of Bibby Point, southward of Cape Lachman, near the coast of Halozetes Valley and Bengtson Cliffs. 

There are very rich cyanobacteria and algae communities in the area of interest. These communities can be divided into the following habitats:

Shallow lotic wetlands (or streams) - There are a few streams saturated by melting waters from snow patches or small glaciers in the area of interest. Waterworks Creek (Fig. 1, 2, 4, 5) runs in close vicinity to the station construction area. The stream drains an area of several square kilometres demarcated by the summit plateau of Bibby Point in the west and by Berry Hill in the east. Stream water will be used as a source of water for the station. The stream flows around the station construction site from the south and east. It is the longest stream in the broader vicinity of the station construction area with a seasonal flow rate about 50 to 70 l.s-1 (measured by the March expedition). This stream has 12 left-side tributaries, the longest of which rises under snowfields on the upper part of the northeastern slope of Bibby Point. The stream, including its tributaries, is rich in periphyton biomass. Periphyton consists mainly of algal mucilaginous clusters and jelly biomass floating in water (Fig. 10), and less commonly cyanobacterial mats and crusts. From this stream and its tributary 21 water samples were collected for physical-chemical analyses as were 9 samples of periphyton, of algae and cyanobacteria for species diversity study. A second stream in close vicinity to the station is Algae Creek (Fig. 1, 2, 5), which flows into the sea east of the proposed station site. This stream is very rich in periophyton biomass. Nine water samples for physical-chemical analysis and 6 samples of periphyton for cyanobacterial and algal analyses were collected here.
The third stream on the north coast is a stream running close to Bibby Point.  Six water and 2 
periphyton samples were collected here for laboratory analyses. This stream erodes and transports a high quantity of material (mostly soft sand).  Periphytic communities are rather sporadic here. 
There are several streams as well on the east coast in the areas of the Halozetes Valley and Bentson Cliffs. Some of them are very short, others have the character of seepages.  This area was visited only one time and only a few water and periphyton samples were collected. 

Shallow wetlands (seepages) - Seepages frequently occur in and around the whole area of interest (Fig. 3).They can be divided into two types: a) moss seepages, b) cyanobacteria seepages. In some cases, seepages may be composed of a mosaic of mosses, cyanobacteria and algae, and in other cases they may be moss or cyanobacteria monocultures. S set of water, cyanobacteria, algae and moss samples were collected here for later analysis.  

Lentic wetlands (lakes) - Stagnant water-bodies can be divided into two types: a) shallow lakes occurring on raised coastal areas, frequently brackish or saline, b) frozen stratified lakes.
     We collected samples of water for physical-chemical analyses from lakes in the area of Cape Lachman. Many similar lakes can be also found in the areas of Brandy Bay and Abernethy Flats. However, during summer access some of these lakes is complicated by soft muddy surroundings. One of the biggest lakes of this area Phormidium Lake on the west coast of Brandy Bay can be placed in this category. Regular study of some of these lakes will be possible only after freezing.
     Frozen stratified lakes are located on the eastern part of Ulu Peninsula in the areas of Halozetes Valley, Bengtson Cliffs, and also below an ice stream on the southeastern part of the Bibby Point plateau. Frozen lakes differ in the size and most commonly occur on deglaciated moraines or bare subglacial depressions. During the summer period only shore sections melt. Water samples for physical-chemical analyses were also collected here.

Wet rocky walls and waterfalls - They can be found in upper parts of Bibby Point, Berry Hill and Lachman Crags.  The most extensive site is on the south wall of Lachman Crags. However, in all these habitats access is limited without alpinist equipment and experience. These habitats were not visited.

Soil cryptogamic crust and microbial communities of active layer of permafrost - Soil crusts represent an important component of the area of interest.  They are composed of microbial components (bacteria, fungi, cyanobacteria, algae, lichens and zooedaphon). The soil surface (crust) is conglomerated not only by the various organisms but also frequently pervaded by different salts which create a specific coloration of their surface. Soil crusts and phyto- and zoo-edaphon in the active layer create a complicated mosaic of microhabitats. No soil samples were collected.

Subglacial systems - There are several flumes and canons, which are crossed by streams in the area of interest. The streams often bore tunnels under snow patches and small glaciers. From these tunnels it is possible to collect subglacial soils for the study microbial ecosystem. However, collection of these samples requires special equipment and experienced sample collectors (speleologists). 
   
Snow and ice microbiotas – The area of interest is permanently covered by a huge icecaps at the summits. Furthermore there are many small glaciers or snow patches here. Due to the high vertical variability of the terrain there are many different snow/ice localities. Their respective microbiota differ remarkably. 
     All together 51 samples of fresh-water for physico-chemical analyses, 35 samples of periphyton and 3 snow samples were collected for species diversity analyses. In addition, 7 moss and 6 lichen samples were collected from dominant plant communities.
     The occurrence of vegetation in the area of interest is documented by a simple vegetation map (Fig. 3) and photographs (Fig. 9, 10).
Conclusion
A detailed reconnaissance showed that there is no vegetation (including cryptogamic soil crusts) (Fig. 4, 6, 7) at the station construction site and its surroundings. Similarly no vegetation has been found in wider vicinity of station construction area in both directions along the seashore (distances of 1-1.5 km). The closest occurrence of periphyton communities and moss carpets is associated with bottom the Waterworks Creek valley at a distance of about 450 m southwest of the station. It is expected that due to the prevailing westerly winds and due to elevation of the station (about 15 m a.s.l.), emissions should not negatively influence these plant communities. On the part of the stream south of the station where a semi-permeable dam for the regulated drawing of drinking water is to be built, only periphytic communities occur. The valley here is narrow, which precludes the existence of moss carpets. The dam construction will elevate the water level by less than 1 m and such an increase in water level will not significantly disturb periphyton communities. It is planed only about 2.25 m3 of water per day will be used during station operations. In addition, water consumption from the stream will be regulated with the aim of maintaining a stable water level in the stream (see CEE for Czech Station in Antarctica – Part 6.2).    

Occurrence of vertebrates in the vicinity of the potential construction site
The entire northern coast of James Ross Island is very poor in terrestrial fauna (possibly because of less nutritious sea currents). Only two small nesting colonies of Sterna vittata (Antarctic tern) were found in the surroundings of the station, both have 5 nesting pairs. One colony occurs at coordinates 63°48'22.8'' S; 57°52'15.6'' W, ca 500 m SW of the construction site. Another colony was found at the closure of glacier cirque on the eastern foot of Bibby Point, ca 2500 m west of the future station. Moreover, 4 pairs of Catharacta maccormicki and C. lonnbergi (Antarctic skua and Brown skua) were observed defending territories (the nests were not searched for) – the nearest was in an area ca 200 m south of the construction site. No colonies of penguins exist in the area between Cape Lachman and Bibby Point (a ca 9 km long section of the beach). Only single individuals of Pygoscelis adelie (Adelie penguin) and Pygoscelis papua (Gentoo penguin) were observed during the field reconnaissance. It is to be noted that the nesting season was coming to an end during the mission. A great number of young birds still occur in nesting places during February – as we have seen, for instance, on Seymour Island. The presence of Petrels (genera Procellariidae and Hydrobatudae), Gulls (Larinae) and Albatrosses (Diomedeidae) was not observed because of the late summer season. Nevertheless, the nearest rock cliffs (potential nesting places for these species) are at Bibby Point and Cape Lachman – these localities are 3200 and 4100 m away from the construction site, respectively. Nor were any colonies of sea mammals observed in the studied area. The only mammals noted were isolated stray Weddell seals with a frequency of 1 animal per ca 2 km of beach. Systematic monitoring was not done but the absence of colonies of sea mammals seems to be evident.

Risk of avian contact with the wind generators is minimal. This is in part because there are no roosts in the area of the potential station site, in part because of their small numbers. A secondary factor relates to a lack of food sources. Bench of maritime sediments (occurring on the coast towards the northeast) shield the coast from waves and the possibility of their bringing in food for the birds.
 

3.
Australian comment: 
The comparative analyses of the alternative sites for the proposed station (as summarised in Appendix 7) appears to be based more on operational parameters and constraints than on environmental parameters.  A more considered appraisal of the environmental impact likely at the alternative sites would be helpful.

Response: 
As indicated in the draft CEE, a total of twelve criteria (see CEE – Annex 7) were used in selecting the station location on the northeastern coast of the Ulu Peninsula. Several of the criteria were of necessity related to issues of station logistics and operations, in particular in relationship to offloading materials and transporting offloaded materials from the anchorage to the station construction site. This is a logical approach inasmuch as it led to selecting a site where the morphology of the coastline and terrain allow both offloading and construction to occur with the minimum impact on the environment. Additionally (as was indicated in Items 1 and 2) there are no living organisms or communities of organisms at the site that could be directly impacted by station construction or station operations. While a number of other sites at James Ross Island that were under consideration also meet this second criterion, their position would not permit the operation of the station (e.g. Items 2, 7 and 8, see CEE – Annex 7). In addition to these considerations, it would be very difficult to find another location more non-responsive to the impact of the station than a polar desert with no flora and no fauna as is the case for Item No. 4.

4.
Australian comment: 
The draft CEE does not provide a thorough assessment of the alternatives to building the station: what advantages/disadvantages are to be gained for research by building the station on James Ross Island rather than, say, Seymour Island?; could the research be undertaken using facilities from another national program and undertaking field work at James Ross Island?; more detail would be helpful of the science programs that are proposed and why they need to be undertaken in the region of James Ross Island rather than elsewhere on the Peninsula, or elsewhere in Antarctica.

Response: 
A location selected for the station should enable to carry out a research programme at the station for a period ranging from a number of years to decades in length. This programme (as presented in the CEE, Sections 3.3.2-3.3.2.2.) is multidisciplinary and its philosophy is based on the complex study of the potential of deglaciated areas for the development of coastal and terrestrial ecosystems with a particular emphasis of the study of the deglaciation process and the subsequent colonization of that area by living organisms. Associated with this basic focus are a number of more specific projects examining aspects of climate change and fluctuation and their causes, current geological, geomorphological and hydrological developments in the region, changes in the chemistry of deglaciated regions and their systematic increase in size and the reactions of vegetation to these changes in the environment. The northern part of James Ross Island provides very good conditions for the examination of all of these topics because of the size of its existing deglaciated region and its continuing expansion. Other islands in the vicinity and the Antarctic Peninsula proper do not offer conditions that would allow these issues to be addressed because of either significantly smaller surface and deglaciated regions (as is the case on the aforementioned Seymour Island, which in any event is in the domain of the Instituto Antártico Argentino), more stable glaciation or the alpine character of the relief and the associated absence or general reduction in the size of vegetational oases. This situation was confirmed by the results of two reconnaissance missions carried out (with the support of the BAC and UAC) along the western and northern coasts of the Antarctic Peninsula in the Antarctic summer 2001/2 and by knowledge of the conditions in the South Shetlands area (the danger of disturbing natural systems with an increase in an already high number of stations).
Additionally the location of the station is based on a locality selected with a maximum consideration of its relationship to the existing ecosystems, i.e. on the periphery on the island and that part of the coastline with a minimal biota. Respect for the environment was also a fundamental consideration in designing the station, both in the construction phase (construction methods and building geometry) and in the use phase (the use of renewable energy resources).
As far as taking advantage of other national programmes on James Ross Island within the framework of our own Czech research activities, contacts were established and consultations are currently being held with the Instituto Antártico Argentino and the Direcction Nacional del Antártico focused on synergy of current geological-geomorphological activities, and with the British Antarctic Survey in the fields of geology, climatology, topoclimatology, microclimatology and botany. This coordination of scientific research, which will be based on the logistic support of the Czech Antarctic Station, will not only result in a rationalization of scientific activities but also in more efficient transportation support, which will have less impact on the environment than would a series of non-coordinated individual transfers have.

5.
Australian comment: 
Some minor issues require clarification and/or additional information:
 
How will fuel be transferred to the diesel generator storage container and what precautions are to be taken to avoid spillage during transfer?

Response: 
A special storage facility with double flooring for the storing of fuel is planned. This facility will have a restricted area for working with the fuel (pumping from 200 liter barrels into smaller closable vessels using electric or hand pumps). Barrels with a weight of between 80-100 kg (for smaller quantities, plastic canisters weighing a maximum of 20 kg) will be used to move the fuel to the cargo container where the generators are located with the aid of a hand trolley. During transport, spillage cannot occur (only barrels and canisters with water-tight lids will be used). The only possibility for spillage is in the cargo containers used as a fuel storage facility or for housing the generators, where small spillages may occur. During pumping into the generators, absorbtive gauze and powder sorbents will be available. In the event they are used, they will be disposed of during waste incineration.

What studies have been or will be undertaken to assess and monitor the impacts of untreated wastewater on the benthic environment, for example to meet the requirements of Annex III of the Protocol?

Response: 
Domestic wastewater is designated for dispersal into oceanic waters in accordance with Article 5, Annex III of the Protocol. Prior to dispersal it will be pulverized, diluted and accumulated in a reservoir in order to achieve a consistency suitable for rapid dilution and dispersal. The exit into the ocean will be placed at a level below the surface at low tide. During field reconnaissance trip in February 2004, a constant SW-NE flow was observed in the tidal action of Prince Gustav Channel. This will ensure a speedy diffusion and dispersal of wastewater. Releasing wastewater into the ocean will not be a constant feature. A  flow of wastewater from a reservoir of 1m3 equipped with a grinding pump (capable of being run both electrically and manually) will allow the regulation of releases in accordance with specific conditions (high and low tide, wave action) to minimize impacts on the broader station environment.
Moreover, the bench of coastal sediments being deposited in the mouth of Waterworks Creek and Algae Creek and stretched along the coast towards northeast alters the sea bottom morphology rapidly and rule out development of benthic ecosystem. This limiting factor is enhanced by the erosive activity of icebergs and sea ice near the coast.  


What is the source of the local gravel that will be used to construct the proposed launching ramp; what are the environmental impacts of removing and relocating that gravel; and how will these impacts be mitigated? 

Response: 
Two approaches have been selected for constructing the launching ramp: 1. the one-off use of a collapsible steel pontoon (for first offloading in the season preceding station construction); 2. a gabion launching ramp. This second variant presupposes the use of stone from the joint mouths of Waterworks and Algae creeks. Recent sediment layers in the creek mouth are vegetation-free and sediment benches are dozens of meters wide and more than 100 meters long. The removal of materials will not affect the creek-mouth system. Material for the construction of the launching ramp will be transported by Scott Track vehicle (see Draft CEE, Annex 11) along the coast line of the beach.






