XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 060
Agenda Item: 5a
FRANCE AND ITALY
Original: English

 





CONCORDIA: A NEW PERMANENT, INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH SUPPORT FACILITY, HIGH ON THE ANTARCTIC ICE CAP









Concordia: A new permanent, international research support facility, high on the Antarctic ice cap.


INTRODUCTION

While there is an increasing awareness of the importance of Antarctic research, the 14 million square kilometres Antarctic continent still house only two permanent inland research stations, Amundsen-Scott and Vostok opened in Nov 1956 and Dec 1957 respectively. Recognizing the unique research opportunities offered by the Antarctic Plateau, the French and Italian Antarctic program agreed in 1993 to cooperate in developing a permanent research support facility at Dome C, high on the ice cap. The facility is named “Concordia”.

Access to Concordia is by traverse tractor trains for heavy equipment and by light ski-equipped plane for personnel and selected light cargo. Jointly operated by France and Italy, Concordia is a research facility open to the worldwide scientific community. Officially open for routine summer operation in Dec 1997, Concordia should be available year round from 2005 upon completion of the core winter buildings. Facilities are designed for a winter population of 16 expeditioners, nine persons conducting scientific experiments and seven support staff. Concordia pioneers an advanced concept in Antarctic operations, the integral self-elevating building, and introduces a new generation of regular, long-range logistic traverses.

Few months before the opening of the station for wintering parties, France and Italy would like to summarize in the present Information Paper the interest of Dome C for the scientific community and to point out some logistical and technological features which contribute to the respect for environment.


THE DOME C SITE

Dome C is located at 75°06’ South and 123°23’ East, 950 km inland from Banzare coast, at 3,220 m altitude on sub-horizontal ice ground with no crevasses. There is no local fauna or flora. While the closest station is Vostok (Russia) 560 km away, the closest coastal stations with good shipping access are well over 1,000 km away. Dumont d’Urville (France) and Casey (Australia) are about 1,100 km away to the North over the ice cap while Mario Zucchelli (formerly Terra Nova Bay Station, Italy) is about 1,200 km away to the East behind the Transantarctic mountain range. 

Meteorological conditions are characterised by low wind speeds, low precipitation and low temperatures. Fourteen years of Automatic Weather Station (AWS) records by the University of Wisconsin show an average wind speed of 2.8 m/s (5.4 knots).Typical summer  average temperatures are around –30°C (-22°F) and typical winter  average around –60°C (-76°F).


WHY DOME C?

Dome C was originally selected for glaciological research: a substantial layer of ice, about 3,300m thick, offers great potential for climatic reconstruction. Ice cores were collected by the EPICA program, a European project involving 10 countries, and more than 800,000 years of climatic records are expected from these samples. But Dome C has other valuable characteristics that support the installation of a permanent scientific station: 

    • Dome C is located inside the polar vortex where the ozone hole can be detected in the austral spring.
    • The Antarctic Plateau is a well recognised, favourable site for astronomic observations due to its geographic location and its extremely dry, cold and rarefied atmosphere.
    • Dome C, far away from any marine perturbations, is an ideal place for studying Solid Earth Geophysics, especially seismology. 
    • Dome C, at 3,233m above the continental crust, is protected from any magnetic perturbations by earth crust anomalies and is an ideal place for studying magnetism.
    • Dome C is as a very isolated site with severe climatic conditions. It will be an excellent site for evaluating techniques and procedures for future work on other planets. It is also an excellent site for studying small groups of people in conditions close to those encountered in space vehicles or orbital stations. 


SURFACE TRANSPORT

Construction of Concordia has required the delivery of some 3,000 tons of equipment – which become 4000 tons with the EPICA deep drilling associated project - while routine operation will requires the annual delivery of some 400 tons. The success of the project is critically dependent on the capacity to deliver this large quantity of equipment reliably. Bearing in mind the respect of antarctic environment, an efficient, relatively low polluting, regular long-range surface transport system (traverse) was developed between Dome C and Dumont d’Urville / Cape Prud’homme, a return trip close to 2,300 km. 

Heavy cargo is shipped by sea from Hobart in Tasmania to Dumont d’Urville then transferred to Cape Prud’homme, either over the sea-ice in winter or on barges over the water in summer. Cape Prud’homme, a nearby coastal site with easy access to the plateau, is the convoys’ formation area where a base camp has been set-up to support traverses. The traverse system is fully operational with three return trips conducted every summer season between mid November and mid February. Each convoy strictly follows the unique trail which is easily visible from year to year, due to low snow deposits in this region.

A typical convoy is composed of eight to ten tractors. Two to three snow-grading machines clear and level the ground for six to seven rubber-tracked tractors towing all cargo loads and traverse caravans. Originally designed to tow heavy loads on loose ground in agricultural applications, tractors were successfully modified for routine Antarctic traverse use. Each tractor tows a combination of tank-sleds, cargo sleds and tracked trailers, most of them specially designed for the Concordia project. Special caravans are joined to the convoy to serve as accommodation, with all facilities (kitchen-living room, toilets, shower…). Diesel fuel for both traverse operation and Dome C delivery is transported in bulk in tank-sleds while most dry cargo is in 20 foot containers on sleds and trailers. The average speed of the convoys when loaded is around 9.5 to 11km/h. A typical traverse round trip out of Cape Prud’homme takes 19 to 25 days and consumes 75 to 120m3 of Diesel fuel to deliver some 145 to 175 tons of net cargo to Dome C. 

It is worth noting that technological and organizational improvements have recently allowed to significantly increase the weight of cargo without increasing the number of traverses or the number of vehicles. The impacts on the environment are restricted to gas emissions from tractor engines and trampling of snow along the trail.


LIGHT-PLANE TRANSPORT SYSTEM

Personnel and selected light cargo are transported to and from Dome C by a ski equipped Twin Otter aircraft operating out of Mario Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay on the triangular route Mario Zucchelli   – Dome C – Dumont d’Urville. Air transportation is mostly suitable for cargo sensitive to low temperatures and to mechanical stress. Travel in and out of Antarctica for Dome C personnel is primarily by air between Christchurch in New Zealand and either Terra Nova Bay or McMurdo station and secondarily by sea between Hobart in Tasmania and Dumont d’Urville. Some 40 Twin Otter flights are received each season at Dome C on a  1500 m levelled snow runway. 


BUILDING DESIGN CONCEPT

Concordia Station consists of a core of three ‘winter’ buildings flanked by a summer camp that also acts as emergency shelter. All structures are on or above ground. Two of the three winter buildings are unique integral self-elevating buildings forming the station’s main living and working areas. The third winter building is housing the main energy and mechanical services. The summer/emergency camp and all satellite installations are modular units set low to the ground on skids. These units can be towed away to avoid progressive burial by snow accumulation. Technical services use standard, reliable technologies in a simple, streamlined system. Only one of the three 180 kVA generator sets will be needed at any time. Engine heat is recovered with boilers satisfying additional heating requirements. Annual fuel consumption is expected to be around 250m3 or 200 tons of Diesel fuel to meet average electrical and heating loads, around 110 kW and 75 kW respectively. 

Each of the two self-elevating buildings is  a roughly cylindrical body supported by six legs. Each leg is sitting on a large ‘footing’ pad spreading the load over the snow. Each leg can move up and down relative to the body of the building via a hydraulic jack. A leg can be jacked up relative to the building and snow packed under its footing. Once all six legs have been subject to this operation the body of the building can be raised above the new ground surface by jacking the legs back down relative to the body. This allows the entire structure to leapfrog its way up over the ice as the ground level rises with snow accumulation.

The originality of this design is to make the entire structure upwardly mobile to preserve its integrity. The usual jack-up building design is based on the body of the building sliding upward along fixed legs. As snow accumulates and the ground level rises, an increasingly longer section of the legs is entrapped underground and subject to differential movements of the ice. This progressively ruins the foundations and ultimately deforms the legs to the point of preventing further jacking-up operations. The self-elevating design adopted for Concordia requires a heavier, sturdier structure to allow for the variations in structural loads during elevation operations but guarantees the long term integrity of the building structure. 


ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND WASTE MANAGMENT 

From its conception, the project has incorporated methods for reducing the environmental impact. It has tried to minimize as much as possible the risks of physical and chemical pollution, at least in accordance with SCAR, Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol recommendations and regulations, with an additional emphasis on minimizing the impact on scientific observations.  

    • Fuels and lubricants used will not contain heavy metals and will have low sulfur components
    • Generators are equipped with particle filters and catalysts. 
    • Exhaust gases will be condensed, which will trap sulfuric acid and water vapour. 
    • Lubricant and other wastes will also be stored (without incineration), then repatriated.

Concerning the sewage management, requirements of Madrid Protocol leads to develop specific processes which could be used, in the future, in space vehicles or orbital stations. It is the reason why a collaboration agreement is ongoing with the European Spatial Agency to set up a special waste water treatment. All wastewater streams, including grey water from washing, and black water consisting of organic waste (food scraps from the kitchen and refectory) and excrement, will be collected by two separate networks under vacuum and transferred to two treatment systems. Grey water will undergo a 4-step treatment process - ultrafiltration, nanofiltration and two stages of reverse osmosis; black water will be treated by an anaerobic fermentation unit. In order to minimize waste production, the sludge from the grey water unit will be re-treated by the black water system and the water produced from the black water system will be taken up by the grey water treatment unit. The final waste, the sludge issuing from the black water fermenteur, will be frozen, shipped back to the coast and removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.


SCIENCE AT DOME C

Concordia Station and the surrounding facilities have been conceived to be a long term support to valuable international scientific programmes. Several programmes are being carried on at Dome C during the summer seasons, or planned for the near future. Here below, the description of the present programmes should also be taken as an example of what Dome C site can be suitable for.

Glaciology
The European Programme for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) is supported by the European Union, the European Science Foundation and ten individual European countries. Epica’s main goal is to reconstruct the history of climate and environmental changes. Coring operations started at Dome C during the 1996-97 summer campaign and should be completed by 2004-05. At present 3201 metres of ice cores have been obtained.

Atmospheric Sciences
The programmes, to be conducted in conjunction with similar programmes carried out at the coastal Stations Dumont d’Urville and Mario Zucchelli, will focus on:
    • the evolution of the ozone hole during spring and from year to year; the three stations are all integral part of the Network for the Detection of Statospheric Changes ;
    • the physics and chemistry of the troposphere and ice-air relationship ;
    • the polar boundary layer and the triggering mechanism of katabatic winds.

Astronomy and Astrophysics
Present main objective is to study the anisotropy and polarisation of the cosmological radiation at 3 kelvin; in collaboration with other countries, the Dome C site is being tested in view of future astronomical observations in the visible and infrared ranges.

Earth Sciences
The global geophysical networks suffer from lack of observatories on the Antarctic ice cap. A seismic observatory at Dome C, to be included in the GEOSCOPE network, is invaluable in the detection of earthquakes and in the study of Earth’s internal structure. On the other hand, a magnetic observatory to be included in the Intermagnet network permits studies of the Earth’s field as well as external magnetism studies, e.g. on magnetosphere and magnetic storms.

Human biology and Medicine
One of the aims is to understand how people adapt themselves to the severe conditions encountered at Dome C, such as isolation, confinement, harsh climate. Another goal is to improve techniques suitable for medicine in isolated location.

Technology
It will mainly focus on solving science needs and will include data transmission, robotics and telescience. Another aspect of technology aims at life and general support, such as renewable energy. 


ORGANISATION

Concordia Station is jointly managed by IPEV and PNRA. Further information may be obtained contacting the responsible Organisations or visiting the Concordia web site. 

Contacts:

IPEV
Institut Polaire Francais Paul-Emile Victor
Technopole Brest-Iroise
BP 75
F-29280 Plouzané, France
Tel: +33 2 9805 6500
Fax: + 33 2 9805 6555
www.ifremer.fr/ifrtp
PNRA S.C.r.l.  
Consorzio per l’attuazione del Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide
C.R. Casaccia, Via Anguillarese, 301  
I-00060 Roma,   Italy
Tel: +39 06 3048 4816
Fax : +39 06 3048 4893
www.pnra.it

Concordia URL : www.concordiastation.org


