
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 015
Agenda Item: CEP 4c
COMNAP
Original: English







AN ANALYSIS OF INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATIONS (IEES)





















Information Paper on an analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs)



INTRODUCTION

    1. At ATCM XXV in Warsaw the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) presented results in IP-026 of an analysis of initial environmental evaluations (IEEs) that had been carried out by its Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON).  During the discussion of IP-026 in CEP V, and as noted in the CEP V Minutes, “Several members requested that a more detailed analysis be provided which clearly identified strengths and weaknesses and gaps in the past IEEs.”  

    2. AEON has now completed this additional task at the request of COMNAP and has prepared the Appendix 1 to this document. 


BACKGROUND

    3. As reported in ATCM XXV / IP-026, the AEON analysis focussed on three types of activities, namely:
        ◦ The construction of a station living facility
        ◦ Bulk fuel storage
        ◦ Scientific ice core drilling.

    4. In the AEON analysis thirteen IEEs prepared after 1991, in English, were compared with criteria based on Annex I of the Environmental Protocol and also on the ATCM Guidelines for Environmental Assessment in Antarctica (1999).  The Guidelines outline procedures for conducting environmental impact assessments in general and are considered as guidance for best practice for IEEs as well as for Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs).  

    5. The aim of the analysis was to achieve a better understanding of how the EIA process is being used by national Antarctic programmes, and to identify strengths and weaknesses in the preparation of IEEs.  The results showed that different aspects of the EIA processes are being done well while other aspects can still be improved.

    6. IP-026 urged that IEE authors consult the Guidelines for Environmental Assessment in Antarctica (1999) throughout the IEE process, make IEE documents available through appropriate web sites, and concluded by noting that COMNAP would continue its focus on practical aspects of environmental impact assessments.  


IEE STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES

    7. Following ATCM XXV COMNAP tasked AEON with bringing forward a paper that drew on its previous work and further identified the strengths and weaknesses of the IEEs it had analysed.  The resulting complete AEON report is attached here as Appendix 1.  

    8. The analysis examined IEEs against the following criteria derived from Annex I of the Environmental Protocol:
        ◦ Description of the Activity
        ◦ Alternatives to the Activity
        ◦ Outputs of the Activity
        ◦ Identification of Environmental Impacts
        ◦ Evaluation of Impacts.  

    9. AEON offered recommendations for improvements in each of the above areas and concluded that the area of greatest weakness was in the Evaluation of Impacts.  Conclusions that activities would result in no more than a minor or transitory impact should be based on a more systematic approach to the evaluation of impacts than was evident in the IEEs under study.  COMNAP agrees with this conclusion and will make it a subject for discussion at our next meeting.  Turning to strengths, AEON assigned relatively high ratings to the manner in which the Description of the Activity and its Outputs were treated in the IEEs under review.  

    10. The analysis also examined IEEs against the following additional criteria for EIAs in the Guidelines:

    • Description of the Existing Environment	
    • Comparison of Alternatives
    • Corrective Measures
    • Monitoring Program
    • Process for Preparing IEE

    11. Along with the several recommendations for improvement detailed in Appendix 1, AEON noted particularly that details of monitoring programs to verify predicted impacts and to detect unforeseen impacts were described only briefly, if at all, in the IEEs that were reviewed.  This was the greatest area of weakness identified by AEON with respect to the Guidelines criteria.  Turning to strengths, the Description of the Existing Environment was identified by AEON as being particularly well documented in the IEEs and the discussions of Corrective Measures were also ranked highly.  Another positive finding of the analysis is that the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica are considered to provide excellent guidance for Antarctic EIA and provide an excellent benchmark for best practice in EIA.  



CONCLUSIONS FROM THE AEON ANALYSIS

    12. The actual evaluation of environmental impacts is a critical part of the EIA process (and is an explicit requirement in Annex I). Establishing a methodological approach to evaluation of environmental impacts is recognized as a challenge. Further guidance with respect to appropriate methodologies and systematic approaches to impact evaluation would be valuable.  

    13. Greater emphasis needs to be given to the Annex I requirements for IEEs.  Parties should actively check that all IEEs adequately meet these basic requirements.  

    14. The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica provide an excellent benchmark for best practice in Antarctic EIA and authors should be further encouraged to consult the guidelines throughout the IEE process.  

    15. When initiating an IEE process, authors should endeavour to source copies of IEEs completed for similar types of activities, particular in similar environments.  To aid this, Parties should be further encouraged to make IEE documents available through appropriate websites.  

    16. COMNAP endorses these conclusions and will work to address them.  


Appendix 1 
to COMNAP’s 2004 (ATCM XXVII) Information Paper on an analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs)


























Report to COMNAP:

An Analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) – Further Information.

Prepared by AEON / ECG February 2004

Introduction
The intention of this paper is to provide more detailed information concerning the AEON analysis of Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) that it undertook in 2001-2002.  The aim of the analysis was to achieve a better understanding of how the EIA process is being used by national Antarctic programs, and to identify strengths and weaknesses in the preparation of IEEs.  

This additional information has been provided as collaboration between the previous and current AEON Co-ordinator and in consultation with AEON members involved in the review.

The Analysis
The study analysed IEEs against requirements outlined in Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Annex 1) and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (EIA Guidelines), adopted by the CEP/ATCM in 1999.

Annex I outlines the following requirements for IEEs:

It shall contain sufficient detail to assess whether a proposed activity may have more than a minor or transitory impact and shall include:
    a) a description of the proposed activity, including its purpose, location, duration and intensity; and
    b) consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity and any impacts that activity may have, including consideration of cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned activities

The EIA Guidelines include additional criteria for IEEs that are not specifically mentioned in Annex I.   It is worthwhile noting that the additional criteria are not obligations under Annex 1, rather recommendations for best practice.  The EIA Guidelines note of these additional criteria that “their inclusion in the IEE document is often useful to communicate the results of the process in a transparent manner”.

Methodology
A Working Group comprising AEON members from seven national programs carried out the study.   The Working Group initially developed a detailed methodology and process by researching relevant aspects of EIA practice elsewhere in the world, in particular the development of techniques to review or assess the quality of EIA. An important concept to emerge from this background work was that EIA analysis should focus on “problem-solving rather than fault-finding”.  

The IEEs to be considered were selected, and then reviewed. For each criterion, the reviewer gave a ranking related to the adequacy of the IEE according to whether it was complete with  all relevant information provided, acceptable where the information provided is incomplete but omissions are not serious, or inadequate where major omissions are noted and additional information is necessary for decision making. To supplement this approach, more detailed qualitative analysis was undertaken, in which the reviewers’ notes on content and further comments were considered in compiling the results.

The results of the review were analysed and strengths, gaps, and trends identified. Finally, findings were presented to the ECG and COMNAP for their consideration.
Limitations
It is important to note the limitations of the analysis.  The thirteen IEEs selected were from nine different countries and all IEEs were in English.  Consequently, the IEEs selected may not be totally representative of current IEE documentation practice.  Furthermore, in the methodology used for the analysis, the rankings given for each aspect of the IEE documents were not weighted in any way. Clearly, some aspects of the IEE process are more important than others, such as, for example, the requirements set out by Annex I.    

It should also be noted that the review focussed on IEE documents, not the process. It is possible that some IEE processes were conducted in a more comprehensive (rigorous) fashion than their respective document records. The results of the process are also uncertain, for instance whether the proposed activity was approved and commenced, and whether the impacts were as predicted. 

The Findings
The results of the review show clear differences as well as similarities in the documentation of the EIA processes for the different activities.  The results also show that different aspects of the IEE process are documented well, while other aspects are being documented poorly or not at all. Figure 1 gives an overall sense of the findings of the analysis.

The analysis identified areas where there is room for potential improvements to the IEE documentation process. These are identified to aid in enhancing the IEE process in the future. 

Findings with Respect to Annex I Requirements for IEEs
The following findings are with respect to the requirements for IEEs that are included within Annex I.  Parties are expected to address these requirements consistent with their national implementing legislation, 

a. Description of the Activity

Strengths
Overall, the IEEs analysed covered the “description of the activity” well. Most IEEs contained good descriptions of the purpose and need for the activity, its location, extent, timing and duration.  Where detailed maps and figures were provided, these greatly assisted the understanding of the nature of the activity.  

Recommendations for improvement
Where proposed actions are to be conducted in relationship to other activities or in proximity of protected areas, this should be explicitly stated.

b. Alternatives to the Activity

Strengths
Consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity was included in almost all IEEs reviewed.  

Recommendations for improvement
Alternatives in almost all IEEs were mostly ruled out on logistical and/or scientific grounds.  It would substantially improve the IEE documentation if alternatives also were considered on environmental grounds. IEEs analyzed should also document consideration of the “no action” option. It was noted in the analysis that there was rather limited documentation showing that alternative timing or phasing for the proposed activity had been considered.

The reviewers considered that greater attention needed to be paid to this aspect of the IEEs to ensure the considerations of alternatives were adequately presented.

c. Outputs of Activities

Strengths
Identification of the outputs of activities was generally well covered in the IEEs reviewed. Some IEEs provided excellent quantitative data on outputs that aided in the analysis, particularly where alternatives were compared.

Recommendations for improvement
It would be useful if the discussion of outputs was discussed separately and explicitly instead of within descriptions of the activity or discussion of impacts. Specific identification of outputs was omitted from a many of the IEEs and there appeared to be some confusion over the terms “output” and “impacts”.  Further consideration to the issue of “outputs” versus “impacts” may be useful.

d. Identification of Environmental Impacts

Strengths
Overall, identification of environmental impacts were described adequately in the IEEs reviewed. In most cases, direct and indirect impacts were identified and well described.

Recommendations for improvement
Discussions related to aspects such as the nature, duration, and reversibility should be included in the IEE documentation. The treatment of cumulative impacts was limited or missing in most IEE documents reviewed. In considering these issues, the level of detail must be such that an actual evaluation of these impacts can be done. IEEs should also differentiate between the timing of impacts, for example those that occur during construction versus those during the operational phase of an activity.  

e. Evaluation of Impacts

Overall this element of the IEE is the one the one requiring greatest attention, considering it is the key element of the requirements set out in the Environmental Protocol.

Strengths
In those IEE documents that did contain a methodological approach to the evaluation of impacts, this was usually done in table format. This was considered a useful tool for documenting the evaluation process.

Recommendations for improvement
Weaknesses found in the IEE documents with respect to the issue of evaluation of impacts indicate that a more systematic approach to evaluation of the significance of impacts needs to be developed to provide aid to IEE proponents to reach a more logical progression to the conclusions reached.

Although most IEEs reached a similar conclusion (i.e. that the activity represented no more than minor or transitory impact), a number of IEEs used language that was not consistent with the Protocol.  Examples include “only temporary and negligible”, and “reduced significance”.    


Findings with Respect to Additional Requirements of the EIA Guidelines 
The following findings are with respect to the additional requirements for IEEs that are included within the EIA Guidelines.  As stated previously the guidelines offer additional criteria for IEEs which are recommended as best practices.  These findings merit consideration by Parties in this light.

f. Description of Existing Environment

Strengths
Description of the existing environment was documented adequately in most IEEs, with many providing very full descriptions of the existing environment and its components.

Recommendations for improvement
Information on the description of the environment should ensure that the data presented is of relevance and relates directly to the activity being evaluated. Wherever possible, this section of the IEE should include reference to the reliability or source of the data and information presented.  Consideration of “special values” such as science, wilderness, intrinsic values, etc. should be included, along with an adequate description of past activities. 

g. Comparison of Alternatives

Strengths
A few IEEs did compare the impacts of alternatives in some detail and generally presented this information in table format, which was considered to be a useful approach.  In these cases good quantitative information was also given, for example differences between alternatives in fuel use, waste generation, emissions, and area of disturbance.

Recommendations for improvement
Alternatives to the proposed activity were covered in the majority of IEEs reviewed. However, there was often limited attempt to compare the environmental impacts of the alternatives. This was an area where the reviewers considered further detail could be provided.  

h. Corrective Measures

Strengths
Corrective measures, including mitigation and remediation, were generally well discussed in the IEEs reviewed.

Recommendations for improvement
IEEs should include specific information on mitigating measures to ensure it is possible to determine how impacts are to be minimized. Furthermore IEEs should include details on planned remedial (i.e. post-activity) actions for activities at sites of established activity such as research stations, and/or for longer term (multi-year) projects.  

i. Monitoring Program

Detail on monitoring program to verify predicted impacts and to detect unforeseen impacts was only described briefly, if at all, in the IEEs reviewed.   

j. Process for Preparing IEEs

Most of the IEE documents considered did not document whether any consultation had been undertaken with relevant experts and/or from others with an interest in the area.  Although most documents had an address listed, few explicitly noted whether the documents were available and from whom.



Figure 1: Overview of findings of strengths and weaknesses (Note: The graph has been produced on the basis of the methodology used by the AEON project team responsible for the analysis, and necessarily reflects a qualified arbitrary weighting of factors. However, there is general agreement that the graph illustrates the essence of the findings related to strengths and weaknesses, the lower part of the graph showing those aspects of the IEE documentation seeming to need further attention and consideration.)  


Conclusions
Conclusions from the analysis are:

    1. The actual evaluation of environmental impacts is a critical part of the EIA process (and is an explicit requirement in Annex I). Establishing a methodological approach to evaluation of environmental impacts is recognized as a challenge. Further guidance with respect to appropriate methodologies and systematic approaches to impact evaluation would be valuable.

    2. Greater emphasis needs to be given to the Annex I requirements for IEEs.  Parties should actively check that all IEEs adequately meet these basic requirements.

    3. The Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica provide an excellent benchmark for best practice in Antarctic EIA and authors should be further encouraged to consult the guidelines throughout the IEE process.  

    4. When initiating an IEE process, authors should endeavour to source copies of IEEs completed for similar types of activities, particular in similar environments.  To aid this, Parties should be further encouraged to make IEE documents available through appropriate websites.  

