XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 059
Agenda Item: 5 a
AUSTRALIA AND NETHERLANDS
Original: English

 



RECOMMENDATIONS, MEASURES, DECISIONS AND RESOLUTIONS ON AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT, ATCM I-XXVI

BACKGROUND MATERIAL FOR ATCM XXVII - WP 31 “REVIEW OF ATCM RECOMMENDATIONS ON AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT”
	




















Recommendations, Measures, Decisions and Resolutions on Area protection and management, ATCM I-XXVI
Background material for ATCM XXVII - WP 31 “Review of ATCM Recommendations on Area Protection and Management”
IV (Santiago, 1966)
IV-1		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 1 (Taylor Rookery)
The Representatives, considering that Taylor Rookery contains a colony of Emperor Penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) which is one of 
the few, and probably the largest, of the known colonies of this species located wholly on land, recommend to their Governments that 
the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 1
Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land
Lat 67°26’S, long 60°50’E
DESCRIPTION:  The area consists of the whole of the northernmost rock exposure on the eastern side of Taylor Glacier.  The area is 
shown on the attached map.

IV-2		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 2 (Rookery Islands)
The Representatives, considering that Rookery Islands contain breeding colonies of all six bird species resident in the Mawson area, 
two of which, the Giant Petrel (Macronectes giganteus)  and the Cape Pigeon (Daption capensis), occur nowhere else in the region and 
that it is of scientific importance to safeguard this unuaual association of six species and to preserve a sample of their habitat, 
recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 2
Rookery Islands, Holme Bay
Lat 67°37’S, long 62°33’E
DESCRIPTION:  The area, 7 nautical miles west of Mawson, comprises the islands and rocks lying within the rectangle marked on the 
attached map.

IV-3		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 3 (Ardery and Odbert Islands)
The Representatives, considering that Ardery Island and Odbert Island off the Budd Coast support several breeding species of petrel 
and provide a sample of their habitat and that two of these species, Antarctic Petrel (Thalassoica antarctica)  and Antarctic Fulmar 
(Fulmarus glacioloides), are if particular scientific interest, recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, 
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 3
Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast
Lat 66°22’S, long 110°28’E and Lat 66°22’S, long 110°33’E
DESCRIPTION:  The area consists of Ardery Island and Odbert Island which lie off-shore in Vincennes Bay, 7 nautical miles south of 
Wilkes.  The off-lying rocks are not included in the area.  The area is shown on the attached map.

IV-4		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Ongoing

Summary		SPA 4 (Sabrina Island)
The Representatives, considering that the Balleny Islands, as the most northerly Antarctic land in the Ross Sea region, support fauna 
and flora which reflect many circumpolar distributrions at this latitude and that Sabrina Island in particular provides a representative 
sample of such fauna and flora, recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas,
 of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 4
Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
Lat 66°54’S, long 163°20’E
DESCRIPTION:  A small island some 2 kilometres south of Buckle Island in the Balleny Islands.  The area is shown on the attached 
map.
IV-5		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 5 (Beaufort Island)
The Representatives, considering that Beaufort Island contains subtantial and varied avifauna, that it is one of the most important 
breeding grounds in the region, and that it would be protected to preserve the natural ecological system as a reference area, 
recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 5
Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
Lat 76°58’S, long 167°03’E
DESCRIPTION:  Beaufort Island measures 6 kilometres by 3 kilometres and is located 20 nautical miles north of Ross Island.  The 
area is shown on the attached map.

IV-6		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 6 (Cape Crozier)
The Representatives, considering that Cape Crozier supports a rich bird and mammal fauna as well as microfauna and microflora and 
that the ecosystem depends upon a substantial mixing of marine and terrestrial elements of outstanding scientific interest, recommend
 to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 6
Cape Crozier, Ross Island
Lat 77°32’S, long 169°19’E
DESCRIPTION:  The area comprises all the land on the coast of Ross Island east of a line joining the summits of Post Office Hill and 
Bomb Peak, north of a line which bears 90° True from Bomb Peak to the coast and north-east of a line which bears 315° True from 
Post Office Hill to the coast; the area is also deemed to include the locality occupied at any time by the rookery of Emperor Penguins 
(Aptenodytes forsteri) immediately adjacent thereto.  Williamson Rock is also included in the area.  The area is shown on the attached 
map.
IV-7		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 7 (Cape Hallet)
The Representatives, considering that Cape Hallet includes a small patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which supports a 
variety of terrestrial fauna and that the ecosystem, which includes a rich avifauna, is of outstanding scientific interest, recommend to 
their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 7
Cape Hallett, Victoria Land
Lat 72°18’S, long 170°19’E
DESCRIPTION:  The area between the eastern side of the road, which runs along the eastern side of Willett Cove, and the western 
margin of the permanent ice sheet, to the south of a line from the road to the margin of the permanent ice sheet at the latitude of the 
head of Willett Cove, and to the north of a line from the road to the margin of the permanent ice sheet drawn 350 metres to the south 
of that latitude and parallel to it.  The area is shown on the attached map.

IV-8		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 8 (Dion Islands)
The Representatives, considering that amongst the Dion Islands is found the only colony of Emperor Penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) 
known to exist on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula and that the isolation of this colony from others of the same species makes
 it of outstanding scientific interest, recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected 
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 8
Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
Lat 67°52’S, long 68°43’W
DESCRIPTION:  A group of small, rocky, low-lying islands in Marguerite Bay, about 15 kilometres south of Adelaide Island.  The area 
is shown on the attached map.
IV-9		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 9 (Green Island)
The Representatives, considering that the vegetation on Green Island is exceptionally rich, that it is probably the most luxuriant 
anywhere on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula, that in some places the humus is 2 metres thick and that this area, being of 
outstanding scientific interest should be protected because it is probably one of the most diverse Antarctic ecosystems, recommend 
to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 9
Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula
Lat 65°19’S, long 64°10’W
DESCRIPTION:  A small island, measuring about 600 metres by 400 metres, situated 150 metres to the north of the largest of the 
Berthelot Islands.  The area is shown on the attached map.

IV-10		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?
Summary		SPA 10 (Byers Peninsula)
The Representatives, considering that Byers Peninsula supports a considerable diversity of plant and animal life, including many 
invertebrates, that a substantial population of Elephant Seals (Mirounga leonina) and small colonies of Fur Seals (Arctocephalus sp.) 
are found on the beaches, that Fur Seals breed on Window Island and that the close association of such a large variety of Antarctic 
plants and animals within a relatively small area is of outstanding scientific interest, recommend to their Governments that the 
following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 10
Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Lat 62°38’S, long 61°05’W
DESCRIPTION:  The ice-free peninsula lying to the west of the western margin of the permanent ice sheet on Livingston Island.  The 
five small ice-free areas on the south coast immediately to the east are also included.  Window Island is included within the area, but 
no other off-lying islands and rocks.  The area is shown on the attached map.
IV-11		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 11 (Cape Shireff)
The Representatives, considering that Cape Shirreff supports a considerable diversity of plant and animal life, including many 
invertebrates, that a substantial population of Elephant Seals (Mirounga leonina) and small colonies of Fur Seals (Arctocephalus sp.) 
are found on the beaches and that the area is of outstanding scientific interest, recommend to their Governments that the following be 
inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 11
Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Lat 62°28’S, long 60°48’W
DESCRIPTION:  The ice-free peninsula lying to the north of the northern margin of the permanent ice sheet on Livingston Island, 
between Barclay Bay and Hero Bay.  The area is shown on the attached map.

IV-12		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 12 (Fildes Peninsula)
The Representatives, considering that Fildes Peninsula is a biologically diverse region with numerous small lakes which are ice-free in 
summer, that it provides a representative sample of the South Shetland Islands and is an area of outstanding scientific interest, 
recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 12
Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Lat 62°12’S, long 58°58’W
DESCRIPTION:  The ice-free peninsula lying to the north-west of Maxwell Bay and west of the margin of the permanent ice sheet of 
King George Island, including Ardley Island but no other off-lying islands of rocks.  The area is shown on the attached map.
IV-13		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 13 (Moe Island)
The Representatives, considering that Moe Island provides a representative sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, that 
intensive experimental research on the neighbouring Signy Island may alter its ecosystem and that Moe Island should be specially 
protected as a control area for future comparison, recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, 
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 13
Moe Island, South Orkney Islands
Lat 60°45’S, long 45°41’W
DESCRIPTION:  A small island, about 1 kilometre long and 1 kilometre across, lying about 500 metres south-west of Signy Island, 
South Orkney Islands.  The off-lying rocks are not included in the area.  The area is shown on the attached map.

IV-14		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?
Summary		Designation of SPA 14 (Lynch Island)
The Representatives, considering that Lynch Island supports one of the most extensive and dense areas of grass (Deschampsia 
antarctica) known in the Treaty Area and that it provides an outstanding example of a rare and natural ecosystem, recommend to their 
Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 14
Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands
Lat 60°40’S, long 45°38’W
DESCRIPTION:  A small island, measuring 500 metres by 300 metres, in Marshall Bay, off the south coast of Coronation Island, 
South Orkney Islands.
IV-15		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Designation of SPA 15 (Southern Powell Island)
The Representatives, considering that Southern Powell Island and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and a 
considerable bird and mammal fauna, which is representative of the natural ecology of the South Orkney Islands, and which is 
rendered more important by the presence of the nucleus of an expanding colony of Fur Seals (Arctocephalus tropicalis gazella), 
recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 15
Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
Lat 60°45’S, long 45°02’W
DESCRIPTION:  This area in the central South Orkney Islands includes that part of Powell Island which is south of the latitude of the 
southern summit of John Peaks, together with the whole of Fredriksen Island, Michelsen Island, Christoffersen Island, Grey Island and
 the unnamed islands lying within the rectangle marked on the attached map.
V (Paris, 1968)
V-5		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Modification of SPA 12 (Fildes Peninsula)
The Representatives, considering that Fildes Peninsula has several small lakes which, being ice-free in summer, are of outstanding 
ecological interest and that the most interesting one of them should be specially protected, recommend to their Governments that, in 
place of the description in Recommendation IV-2, the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 12
Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Lat 62°11’S, long 58°52’W
DESCRIPTION:  The fresh-water lake, including the surrounding land within 100 metres of the shore, situated about 500 metres north 
of Suffield Point and 2.5 kilometres eas-north-east of Bellinghausen Station on Fildes Peninsula.  The area is shown on the attached 
map.
VI (Tokyo, 1970)
VI-8		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Introduction of permits for entry into SPAs
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora annexed to Recommendation III-VIII 
(‘the Agreed Measures’) and the need to conform with paragraph 4(a) of that Article; 
  Considering that, in order to be effective, the existing prohibitions and measures of protection relating to Specially Protected Areas 
need to be strengthened; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  They use their best endeavours to ensure compliance with those provisions of the Agreed Measures which relate to Specially 
Protected Areas; 
2.  They take such action as may be appropriate to prohibit the entry by their nationals into a Specially Protected Area, except in 
accordance with a permit issued under Articles VI and VIII of the Agreed Measures;   
3.  Until such time as this Recommendation may become effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, it shall, as far
 as feasible, be considered as a guideline.

VI-10		Status:	Effective 08-04-87; Superseded?

Summary		Coppermine Peninsula SPA
The Representatives,
Considering that Coppermine Peninsula is a biologically diverse area, supporting rich vegetation, together with a variety of terrestrial 
fauna, and that the ecosystem, which includes a rich avifauna, is of outstanding scientific interest;
Recommend to their Governments that the following be included in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
Specially Protected Area No. 16
Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island
Lat 62°23’S, long 59°42’W
DESCRIPTION:  The area comprises all the land west of a line drawn from north to south across the Peninsula, 100 metres west of the
 two shelters found on the isthmus.  The area is shown on the attached map.
VII (Wellington, 1972)
VII-2		Status:	Effective 29-05-75; Superseded?

Summary		Consultative Parties to adopt criteria for the selection of SPAs, and to ask SCAR to review the existing SPAs and the need for new ones in the light of the criteria
The Representatives, 
  Recalling: 
 1. that the purpose of Specially Protected Areas is to preserve, in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the natural ecological systems of areas of outstanding scientific interest; 
 2. that Recommendation VI-8 has notably increased the protection afforded to Specially Protected Areas by prohibiting entry into 
them except in accordance with a permit; 
  Recognizing that the existing Specially Protected Areas were designated under less strict provisions regarding entry; 
  Conscious of the need to review the existing Specially Protected Areas in the light of experience and the increased degree of 
protection they have been afforded; 
  Recalling Recommendation III-X which encouraged SCAR to continue its interest in and prepare reports from time to time on the 
conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora; 
  Noting the opinion of SCAR, expressed in the report produced at its Twelfth Meeting on the ‘Purposes and Designation of Special 
Areas’, that the existing Specially Protected Areas are not fully representative of the major Antarctic land and freshwater ecological 
systems and that some of these ecological systems are over-represented in the series so far designated; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  In due course they include in the series of Specially Protected Areas listed in Annex B of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora: 
 a. representative examples of the major Antarctic land and freshwater ecological systems; 
 b. areas with unique complexes of species; 
 c. areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any plant or invertebrate species; 
 d. areas which contain specially interesting breeding colonies of birds or mammals; 
 e. areas which should be kept inviolate so that in the future they may be used for purposes of comparison with localities that have 
been disturbed by man; 
2. They invite SCAR, through their National Committees, to review in the light of the criteria set out in paragraph 1 the existing 
Specially Protected Areas, and to make recommendations about: 
 a. the desirability of retaining each Area; 
 b. the desirability of redefining the limits of each Area retained; 
 c. creating such additional Areas as may be considered desirable; 
3. The number of Specially Protected Areas should be kept to the minimum that will meet the criteria set out in paragraph 1; 
4. The size of each Specially Protected Area should be the minimum required to serve the purpose for which the Area has been designated.
VII-3		Status:	Effective 29-05-75; Spent?

Summary		Consultative Parties to ask SCAR for advice on the concept of SSSIs and to come back to this at ATCM VIII.
The Representatives, 
  Recognizing that: 
 1. Scientific investigations may be jeopardised by accidental or willful interference; 
 2. sites where such investigations are proceeding may require a measure of protection; 
 3. because of the continuing scientific investigations in them certain localities of botanical or zoological interest are not suitable for 
designation as Specially Protected Areas under the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora; 
 4. sites of non-biological interest cannot be designated as Specially Protected Areas; 
  Considering that the application of individual management plans regulating access and use for a specified period to such sites, which 
might be called Sites of Special Scientific Interest, would enable investigations at these sites to be carried out without interference; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  They invite SCAR, through their National Committees, to consider this matter further and make suggestions for the designation of 
sites of Special Scientific Interest (together with a proposed management plan for each site); 
2.  They study the subject further with a view to its inclusion on the Agenda of the Eighth Consultative Meeting.
VIII (Oslo, 1975)
VIII-1		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Ongoing

Summary		SPA 17 (Litchfield Island)
The Representatives, 
Considering that Litchfield Island, together with its littoral, possesses an unusually rich collection of marine and terrestrial life, is unique
 amongst the neighbouring islands as a breeding place for six species of native birds and provides an outstanding example of the 
natural ecological system of the Antarctic Peninsula area;
Recommend to their Governments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the
 Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 17
Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Palmer Archipelago
Lat 66°16’S, long 64°06’W
DESCRIPTION:  A small island, about 2.5 km2 in area.  The area is shown on the attached map.

VIII-2		Status:	Effective 01-11-82; Superseded?

Summary		Terminates SPA 6 (Cape Crozier), 10 (Byers Peninsula), 12 (Fildes Peninsula)
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendations III-8 and VII-2; 
  Conscious of the need to revise the list of Specially Protected Areas in Annex B of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora in the light of experience; 
  Recalling the criteria established by paragraph 1 of Recommendation VII-2 for the selection of Specially Protected Areas; 
  Noting with appreciation the response of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph 2 of Recommendation 
VII-2; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  The following Recommendations, recommending certain defined areas for inclusion in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, be terminated: 
 a. Recommendation IV-6 (Specially Protected Areas: Cape Crozier, Ross Island) 
 b. Recommendation IV-10 (Specially Protected Areas: Byers Peninsula) 
 c. Recommendation IV-12 (Specially Protected Areas: Fildes Peninsula) 
 d. Recommendation V-5 (Specially Protect Areas: Fildes Peninsula); 
2.  The numbers 6, 10 and 12 in Annex B of the Agreed Measures should not be used for other Specially Protected Areas.
VIII-3		Status:	Effective 01-09-80; Ongoing

Summary		Institution of SSSIs (criteria, management plans required, expiry dates)
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendation VII-3; 
  Conscious of the need to protect scientific investigations which might suffer from willful or accidental interference;
  Desiring to protect only sites where harmful interference is generally recognized to be likely; 
  Recognizing the need to protect such scientific investigations irrespective of their purpose; 
  Recognizing that a limited number of sites of exceptional scientific interest may require long-term protection from harmful 
interference; 
  Noting with appreciation the interim response of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph 1 of 
Recommendation VII-3; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  They invite SCAR, through their National Committees, to have regard to the following when considering proposals for Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest:
 a. Sites should only be proposed when: 
  i. Scientific investigations are being carried out or are planned to begin before the following meeting of SCAR, and there is a 
demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardise those scientific investigations; or 
  ii. they are of exceptional scientific interest and therefore require long-term protection from harmful interference; 
 b. Sites should be proposed for designation up to a specified date, which may be extended following a review by SCAR; 
 c. Proposals for the designation of sites should be accompanied by a management plan which should include, inter alia, and where 
applicable, the following details: 
  i. a description of the Site, together with a map delimiting its boundaries and where applicable showing any existing or proposed 
demarcations on the Site; 
  ii. a statement setting out the reasons in conformity with paragraphs 1(a) (i) and (ii) above for designation of the site; 
  iii. a 
Summary of the scientific investigations being carried out or planned; 
  iv. the proposed date at which the designation will expire unless extended; 
  v. proposed points of access; 
  vi. any proposed pedestrian and vehicular routes; 
  vii. other kinds of scientific investigation which would not cause harmful interference with the investigations described at paragraph 
(c)(iii) above; 

VIII-4		Status:	Effective 01-09-80; Ongoing

Summary		SSSI 1(Cape Royds), 2 (Arrival Heights), 3 (Barwick Valley), 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes Peninsula), 6 (Byers Peninsula), 7 (Haswell Island)
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendation VII-3; 
  Noting Recommendation VIII-3; 
  Noting with appreciation the interim response of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to paragraph 1 of 
Recommendation VII-3; 
  Noting that management plans have been prepared for certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest; 
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of management plans for certain sample Sites;
 
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plans, annexed to this Recommendation, 
for the following sites: 
 Site No.1: Cape Royds, Ross Island 
 Site No.2: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island 
 Site No.3: Barwick Valley, Victoria Land 
 Site No.4: Cape Crozier, Ross Island 
 Site No.5: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands 
 Site No.6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands 
 Site No.7: Haswell Island
X (Washington, 1979)
X-5		Status:	Effective 08-04-87; Ongoing

Summary		SSSI 8 (Admiralty Bay)
The Representatives, 
  Recalling  Recommendations VII-3, VIII-3 and VIII-4; 
  Noting that a management plan has been prepared for a Site of Special Scientific Interest on the western shore of Admiralty Bay, 
King George Island; 
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the management plan prepared for this Site;
 
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plan, annexed to this recommendation, for 
Site No.8 western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island.

X-6		Status:	Effective 08-04-87; Ongoing

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), 2 (Arrival Heights), 3 (Barwick Valley), 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes 
		Peninsula) and 6 (Byers Peninsula) extended to 30-6-1985, SSSI 7 (Haswell Island) to 30-6-1983
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4; 
  Noting that: 
 i. in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3 the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), at its Fifteenth 
Meeting at Chamonix in May 1978, had reviewed the seven sites of Special Scientific Interest designated in Recommendation VIII-4; 
 ii. experience of the practical effect of the management plans for these sites had shown them to be an effective means of reducing 
the risk of harmful interference in areas of exceptional scientific interest; 
 iii. no change to these management plans had been proposed by SCAR; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  The date of expiry of designation of the following sites should be extended from 30 June 1981 to 30 June 1985: 
 Site No. 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island. 
 Site No. 2: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island. 
 Site No. 3: Barwick Valley, Victoria Land. 
 Site No. 4: Cape Crozier, Ross Island. 
 Site No. 5: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. 
 Site No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. 
2.  The date of expiry of designation of Site No. 7: Haswell Island, should be extended from 30 June 1981 to 30 June 1983. 
3. They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VIII-3, that the management 
plans of these sites are observed.
XII (Canberra, 1983)
XII-5		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), 2 (Arrival Heights), 3 (Barwick Valley), 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes 
		Peninsula), 6 (Byers Peninsula), 7 (Haswell Island) and 8 (Admiralty Bay) extended to 31-12-85
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4 and X-6; 
  Noting that, pursuant to Recommendation X-6, the designation as Sites of Special Scientific Interest of the Sites numbered 1, 2, 3, 4,
 5 and 6 will expire on 30 June 1985, and the designation of Site No.8 will expire on 31 March 1985, before the probable date of the 
Thirteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and that the designation of Site No. 7 expired on 30 June 1983; 
  Desirous that the designation of these sites as Sites of Special Scientific Interest not be allowed to expire before the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has reviewed the Sites and presented the results of its review to the Consultative Parties; 
  Noting the intention of SCAR to review all Sites of Special Scientific Interest at the Eighteenth Meeting of SCAR in 1984 and to 
present the results of its comprehensive review to the Consultative Parties for consideration at the Thirteenth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting in 1985; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  The date of expiry of the following sites should be extended from 30 June 1985 to 31 December 1985: 
 Site No. 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island, 
 Site No. 2: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island, 
 Site No. 3: Barwick Valley, Victoria Land, 
 Site No. 4: Cape Crozier, Ross Island, 
 Site No. 5: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, 
 Site No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands; 
2.  The date of expiry of Site No. 7: Haswell Island, should be extended from 30 June 1983 to 31 December 1985. 
3.  The date of expiry of Site No. 8: Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, should be extended from 31 March 1985 to 
31 December 1985; and 
4.  They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VIII-3, that the management 
plans of these sites are observed.
XIII (Brussels, 1985)
XIII-5		Status:	Did not become effective; Spent?

Summary		Consultative Parties to ask SCAR for advice on the areas system and the possible inclusion of new types of areas and to request advice from SCAR on improvement of comparability and accessibility of scientific data on Antarctica.
The Representatives, 
  Recalling the measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty for the protection of the environment, the protection of historic sites and 
monuments, the conservation of fauna and flora, and in particular the setting aside of Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest; 
  Desiring to ensure that activities in Antarctica should not harm the unique Antarctic environment, disrupt scientific investigations or 
other legitimate uses or be otherwise contrary to the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty; 
  Bearing in mind that the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research at the XVIIIth Meeting in Bremerhaven considered the question 
of the establishment of a new type of conservation area in the Antarctic; 
  Recommend to their Governments that through their National Committees they invite the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
 (SCAR) to offer scientific advice: 
 i. on the system of protected areas in the Antarctic, including Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Specially Protected Areas and 
the question of a possible additional category of area under a different form of protection; and
 ii. on steps that possibly could be taken to improve the comparability and accessibility of scientific data on Antarctica.

XIII-7		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 2 (Arrival Heights), 3 (Barwick Valley), 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes Peninsula), 6 (Byers Peninsula), 7 (Haswell Island) and 8 (Admiralty Bay) extended to various dates between 1987 and 1995
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4, X-5 and XII-5; 
  Noting that: 
 i. in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3 the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), at its Eighteenth
 Meeting at Bremerhaven in September 1984, had reviewed the eight sites of special scientific interest designated in Recommendation 
VIII-4 
 ii. experience of the practical effect of the management plans for these sites had shown them to be an effective means of reducing 
the risks of harmful interference in areas of special scientific interest 
 iii. except for Site No 1 no change to these management plans had been proposed by SCAR 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  The date of expiry of designation of Site Numbers 2-8 be extended from 31 December 1985 to the date shown below: 
 Site No 2: Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island: to 31 December 1987. 
 Site No 3: Barwick Valley, Victoria Land: to 31 December 1995. 
 Site No 4: Cape Crozier, Ross Island: to 31 December 1991. 
 Site No 5: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands: to 31 December 1991. 
 Site No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands: to 31 December 1991. 
 Site No 7: Haswell Island: to 31 December 1991. 
 Site No 8: Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands: to 31 December 1995. 
2. They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the management 
plans of these sites are observed.
XIII-8		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		SSSI 9 (Rothera Point), 10 (Caughley Beach), 11 (Tramway Ridge), 12 (Canada Glacier), 13 (Potter 
		Peninsula), 14 (Harmony Point), 15 (Cierva Point), 16 (Bailey Peninsula), 17 (Clark Peninsula), 18 (White 
		Island), 19 (Linnaeus Terrace), 20 (Biscoe Point), 21 (Shores of Port Foster)
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendations VII-3, VIII-3, VIII-4 and X-5; 
  Noting that management plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research for certain Sites
 of Special Scientific Interest additional to those already designated; 
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the management plans prepared for these 
Sites; 
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plans, annexed to this Recommendation, 
for the following Sites: 
 Site No 9: Rothera Point, Adelaide Island 
 Site No 10: Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island 
 Site No 11: Tramway Ridge, Mount Erebus, Ross Island 
 Site No 12: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land 
 Site No 13: Potter Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands 
 Site No 14: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands 
 Site No 15: Cierva Point and nearby islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 
 Site No 16: Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land 
 Site No 17: Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land 
 Site No 18: White Island, McMurdo Sound 
 Site No 19: Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land 
 Site No 20: Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago 
 Site No 21: Shores of Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands

XIII-9		Status:	Not yet effective
Summary		Modification of management plan for SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), expiry date extended to 31/12/95
The Representatives, 
  Recalling Recommendation VIII-4 and the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island 
annexed thereto; 
  Noting that at its Eighteenth Meeting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) held at Bremerhaven in September 1984
 reviewed the management plans of the eight Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated in Recommendations VIII-4 and X-5 and 
that it proposed an amended management plan for SSSI No 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island; 
  Recommend to their Governments that: 
1.  The management plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island annexed to Recommendation VIII-4 be 
terminated; 
2. They voluntarily take account of the management plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site No 1: Cape Royds, Ross Island.
XIII-10		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 18 (North Coronation Island)
The Representatives, 
Considering that the area bound by Foul Point and Conception Point on the north coast of Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands, 
extending southwards to Wave Peak and comprising Ommaney Bay and the bay between Prong Point and Conception Point embraces 
areas of coastal ice-free terrain (Conception, Prong and Foul Points) with large seabird colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and 
permanent ice rising to the Brisbane heights plateau which provides an excellent representative area of a pristine ice environment near 
the northern limit of the maritime Antarctic and the Antarctic Treaty area, and that the interrelated terrestrial, permanent ice and marine 
components of this area comprise an integrated example of the coastal, permanent ice and sublittoral ecosystems typical of the 
maritime Antarctic environment;
Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected 
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 18
North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands.  Between Lat. 60°31’S., Long. 45°41’W. and Lat. 60°37’S., Long. 45°36’W. and Lat. 
60°32’S., Long. 45°29’W.
DESCRIPTION:  The area lies on the central north side of Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands.  It is bounded to the east by Foul 
Point (lat. 60°32’S, long. 45°29’W) and to the west by Conception Point (lat. 60°31’S, long. 45°41’W); the entire area of these points is 
included in the area.  The eastern boundary follows a precipitous ridge 6 km southwards to a position at 2500 ft (750m) altitude 
immediately to the west of Mt Nivea summit (lat. 60°35’S, long. 45°29’W), thence west-south-westwards for 5,5 km to a position at 
3000 ft (900m) altitude to the north-east of Wave Peak summit (lat. 60°37’S, long. 45°35’W), and from there 2 km westwards across 
the Brisbane Heights plateau then 5 km north-west to an unnamed summit at 3532 ft (1060m) and north for 6 lm to Conception Point.  
The summits of Mt Nivea and Wave Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside the area.  Ommaney Bay and the unnamed bay 
to the west are included within the area south of the boundary between Conception and Prong Points (11.5 km).  The area is shown on 
the attached map.

XIII-11		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 19 (Lagotellerie Island)
The Representatives, 
Considering that Lagotellerie Island contains a relatively diverse flora typical of the southern Antarctic Peninsula region; that of 
particular interest is the abundance of the only two Antarctic flowering plants (Deschampsia Antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis) 
which florm closed stands up to 10 m2; that these are amongst the largest stands known south of the South Shetland Islands, being 
only 90 km north of their southern limit; that here both speices flower profusely and the seeds have a greater viability than those 
produced in the South Orkney and South Shetland Islands; that numerous mosses and lichens also form well developed communities 
on the island; that a few of the mosses are fertile, a rare phenomenon in most Antarctic localities; that the invertebrate fauna is rich 
and that the island is one of the southernmost sites for the apterous midge Belgica antarctica; that the shallow loamy soil developed 
beneath these swards and its associated invertebrate fauna and microbiota are probably unique at this latitude; that there is a colony 
of about 1000 Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) and one of the farthest south colonies of a few dozen blue eyed cormorants 
(Phalacrocorax atriceps) at the south-east corner of the island and that numerous pairs of brown and south polar skuas (Catharacta 
lonngergii and C. maccormicki) breed on the island;
Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected 
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 19
Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay.
Lat. 67°53’S., Long. 67°24’W.
DESCRIPTION:  The area consists of Lagotellerie Island which lies about 3 km west of the southern part of Horseshoe Island, 
Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.  The area is shown on the attached map.
XIII-12		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		SPA 20 (New College Valley)
The Representatives, 
Considering that the area contains some of the most luxuriant stands of vegetation (algae, mosses and lichens) and associated 
microflora in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica; that because of the susceptibility of the cryptogamic vegetation to damage from 
trampling, the designation of the area provides protection for its biota, so that the area may serve as a conservation reserve 
representative of the adjacent Site of Special Scientific Interest no. 10;
Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected 
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora:
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No. 20
'New College Valley', Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Lat. 77°14’S., Long. 166°23’W.
DESCRIPTION:  The area consists of the ice free terrain lying between the cliff top above Caughley Beach and about 100 m east of 
the Mt Bird Ice Cap, and between a line south of the main stream bed of 'Keble Valley' and the south ridge of 'New College Valley'.  It 
is surrounded on three sides by Site of Special Scientific Interest no. 10.  The area is shown on the attached map.

XIII-13		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Revision of SPA 7 (Cape Hallett)
The Representatives, 
Recalling Recommendation IV-7 in accordance with which an area between the eastern side of the road, which runs along the eastern 
side of Willett Cove, and the western margin of the permanent ice sheet, to the south of a line from the road to the margin to the 
permanent ice sheet at the latitude of the head of Willett Cove, and to the north of a line from the road to the margin of the permanent
 ice sheet drawn 350 metres to the south of that latitude and parallel to it, was designated for insertion in Annex B, Specially Protected 
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora on the grounds that Cape Hallett includes a small 
patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which supports a variety of terrestrial fauna and that the ecosystem, which includes a
 rich avifauna, is of outstanding scientific interest;
Considering that in recent years rich areas of vegetation have developed immediately outside of the existing boundaries of the area; 
that to the south is a particularly dense and extensive stand of moss below a large permanent snow patch on the talus slope below the 
north end of the ice-fall; that the main moss stand is 35 m across but plants are widely scattered on ridges and gulleys throughout the 
area; that to the north, rocki outcrops and stable scree support extensive stands of dense lichen growth (expecially Xanthoria) and 
mosses, that algae (Prasiola) are also present, and that these are some of the richest stnads of vegetation in Victoria Land;
Recommend to their Governments that the Description of Specially Protected Area no. 7, Cape Hallett, Victoria Land, inserted in 
Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora be amended as 
follows:
DESCRIPTION:  The area comprising a roughly rectangular block lies south of the northern coast of Cape Hallett between the road, 
which runs along the eastern side of Willett Cove and the western margin of the permanent ice sheet and to the north of an E-W line 
from a projection of the line of the road southward to a point 200 m south of latitude 72°18’S to the margin of the permanent ice sheet. 
 The original area and the revised boundaries are shown on the attached map.
XIII-14		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Recommendations XIII-10 to 13 to be considered as guidelines until effective
The Representatives recommend to their Governments that, until such time as Recommendations XII-10 to XII-13 may become 
effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, they should as far as feasible consider these Recommendations as 
guidelines.
XIV (Rio de Janeiro, 1987)
XIV-4		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Expiry date of SSSI 2 (Arrival Heights) extended to 31/12/97
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4, X-6, XII-5 and XIII-7;
  Noting that:
 i. in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3 the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) at its Nineteenth 
Meeting at San Diego, USA in June 1986, had reviewed the Site of Special Scientific Interest No 2 and had noted the importance of 
protecting this site from man-made electromagnetic interference over a range of frequencies from 10-2 hz to 108 hz in view of the 
value of the site for the study of  natural electromagnetic phenomena of relevance to ionospheric and  magnetospheric physics;
 ii. experience of the practical effect of the management plan for the site had shown it to be an effective means of reducing the risks 
of harmful interference with the scientific research being undertaken in it;
 iii. no change to the management plan had been proposed by SCAR;
  Recommend to their Governments that:
1. The date of expiry of designation of Site No 2 be extended from 31 December 1987 to 31 December 1997.   
2. They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VIII-3 that the management 
plan for this site is observed.

XIV-5		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		SSSI 22 (Yukidori Valley), 23 (Svarthamaren), 24 (Summit of Mt Melbourne), 25 (Marine Plain), 26 (Chile 
		Bay), 27 (Port Foster), 28 (South Bay)
The Representatives,   
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;   
  Noting that management plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for 
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest additional to those already designated;   
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the management plans prepared for these 
sites;   
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plans, annexed to this approved by the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest additional to those already 
designated;   
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the management plans prepared for these 
sites;   
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plans, annexed to this recommendation for 
the following sites: 
 Site No 22:  Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lutzow-Holm Bay.  
 Site No 23: Svarthamaren, Muhlig-ofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land.    
 Site No 24:  Summit of Mt Melbourne, North Victoria Land.   
 Site No 25:  Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land. 
 Site No 26:  Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Islands, South Shetland  Islands. Site No 27:  Port Foster, Deception Island, 
South Shetland Islands.   
 Site No 28:  South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago.
XIV-6		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Institution of Marine SSSIs (criteria, management plans, expiry dates)
The Representatives,   
  Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendation VII-3 and VIII-3;   
  Conscious of the need to protect marine scientific investigations which might suffer from wilful or accidental interference;   
  Desiring to protect inshore marine sites of scientific interest where harmful interference is generally recognized to be likely;   
  Recognizing the need to protect such marine scientific investigations;   
  Recognizing that a limited number of inshore marine sites of exceptional scientific interest may require long-term protection from 
harmful interference;   
  Recommend to their Governments that:  
1. They invite SCAR through their National Committees, to have regard to the following when considering proposals for Marine Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest:   
 a. Marine sites should be proposed only when:     
  i. Marine scientific investigations are being carried out or are planned to begin before the following meeting of SCAR, and there is a 
demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardize those scientific investigations; or     
  ii. they are of exceptional scientific interest and therefore require  a measure of long term protection from harmful interference;   
 b. Marine sites should be proposed for designation up to a specified date, which may be extended following a review by SCAR:   
 c. Proposals for the designation of Marine Sites should be accompanied by management plans which should include inter alia, and 
where applicable, the following details:     
  i. a description of the Marine Site, together with a map delimiting  its boundaries;     
  ii. a statement setting out the reasons in conformity with paragraphs  1(a)(i) and (ii) above for designation of the Marine Site;     
  iii. a description of the scientific investigations being carried out  or planned;     
  iv. the proposed date at which the designation will expire unless  extended; 
  v.  if adjacent to the coast, proposed points of access;     
  vi. other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause  harmful interference with the investigations described at paragraph  
(c)(iii) above;     
  vii. whether specific kinds of scientific sampling may take place and  guidelines for such sampling. 
2. They invite SCAR, through their National Committees, to initiate review of those Marine Sites whose designation is likely to 
terminate before the second following Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
3. They request their national offices responsible for Antarctic activities to maintain a record of activities within each Marine Site of 
XV (Paris, 1989)
XV-6		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		SSSI 29 (Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights), 30 (Avian Island), 31 (Mount Flora)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;
  Noting that management plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for 
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest additional to these already designated;
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the management plans prepared for these 
sites;
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the management plans, annexed to this Recommendation, 
for the following sites:
Site No 29 : Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights, Alexander Island.
Site No 30 : Avian Island, North-West Marguerite Bay.
Site No 31 : Mount Flora, Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula.

XV-7		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Redesignation of SPA 11 (Cape Shireff) as SSSI 32
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations III-VIII, VIII-3 and VIII-4;
  Conscious of the need to facilitate research into important aspects of the Antarctic marine ecosystem;
  Noting that there are certain long-term research programmes involving support activities which may not be appropriately provided in a
 Specially Protected Area, but which need not endanger the Antarctic ecosystem or its components;
  Noting further that the degree of environmental protection specified in the management plan of a Site of Special Scientific Interest 
need not be less than that provided in a Specially Protected Area;
  Aware that a management plan for a Site of Special Scientific Interest at Cape Shirreff has been prepared and approved by the 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
  Recommend to their Governments that :
1.  The inclusion in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora of 
Recommendation IV-11 (Specially Protected Areas : Cape Shirreff) be terminated.
2.  The number 11 in Annex B of the Agreed Measures should not be used for another Specially Protected Area.
3.  They voluntarily take account of the management plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 
32, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.
XV-8		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Modifies AM VIII by introducing the requirement for SPAs to have management plans
The Representatives,
  Noting that under Article VIII of the Agreed Measures:
i. paragraph 1 provides for designation as Specially Protected Areas, ‘areas of outstanding scientific interest ... in order to preserve 
their unique natural ecological system’;
ii. paragraph 2(c) provides that entry into a Specially Protected Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit;
iii. paragraph 4 provides that ‘such a permit shall have effect within a Specially Protected Area provided that:
 a. it was issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere; and
 b. the actions permitted thereunder will not jeopardize the natural ecological system existing in that Area’;
  Noting further that Recommendation VII-2 urges that representative examples of the major Antarctic land and freshwater ecological 
systems shall be included in the series of Specially Protected Areas;
  Desiring to provide for greater certainty in the interpretation of paragraph 4 by means of the application of management plans 
relevant to each Specially Protected Area;
  Recognizing that to be fully effective such Management Plans must be accorded the same status as the conditions in 
sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 4;
  Recommend to their Governments that the following sub-paragraph be added to paragraph 4 of Article VIII:
‘and (c) the actions permitted thereunder are in accordance with any Management Plan accompanying the description of a Specially 
Protected Area’; 
and that sub-paragraph (a) be amended to remove the word ‘and’, and that the full stop at the end of sub-paragraph (b) be changed to a
 semicolon.

XV-9		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Consultative Parties to improve the descriptions of SPAs and to develop management plans for them. SCAR to have regard to this when considering proposals for SPAs.
The Representatives,
  Recalling that:
 a. the purpose of Specially Protected Areas is to preserve both unique and representative examples of the natural ecological systems
 of areas which are of outstanding scientific interest; and 
 b. the appropriate national authority of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties may issue permits authorizing its nationals to enter 
Specially Protected Areas for compelling scientific purposes which cannot be served elsewhere;
  Noting that the descriptions of Specially Protected Areas in Annex B of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora 
and Fauna do not provide detailed descriptions of the natural ecological systems and components thereof that the Protected Areas are 
intended to preserve;
  Noting also that the descriptions of Specially Protected Areas do not indicate the types of activities that could or could not be carried 
out in the designated Specially Protected Areas without harming or damaging any of the components of the natural ecological systems 
that the areas are intended to preserve;
  Recommend to their Governments that:
1.  They review the descriptions of Specially Protected Areas in Annex B of the Agreed Measures and, for those Areas which they or 
their nationals had proposed to be listed in the Annex, they provide a more detailed description of the natural ecological system that 
the Area is intended to preserve and a provisional Area management plan for consideration at the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting;
2.  Future proposals for designating Specially Protected Areas include:
  a. a clear description of the location and the key physical and biological features of the area to be protected, including a description 
of the markers and/or natural features that delineate the  area;
  b. a map and/or photographs showing the boundaries and key  features of the proposed Specially Protected Area;
  c. a detailed description of the key components of the unique natural ecological system intended to be preserved by designating the 
Area as a Specially Protected area;
  d. descriptions of the types of activities (including activities outside the Area) that could jeopardize any of the components of the  
unique ecological system intended to be preserved; and
  e. descriptions of steps that should be taken to avoid or minimize damage in cases where access to the area may be authorized for a
 compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere;
  f. descriptions of measures necessary to ensure preservation of the area’s unique or representative natural ecological systems.
XV-10		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Institution of SRAs (Specially Reserved Areas)
The Representatives,
  Recognizing that the increasing number and scope of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area may reduce the unique scientific and 
other values of Antarctica;
  Noting that the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna established a mechanism to designate Specially 
Protected Areas to preserve the unique natural ecological systems of areas of outstanding scientific interest;
  Noting also that neither the Agreed Measures nor other Recommendations adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 
provide a specified mechanism for identifying and protecting areas of outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, 
aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value;
  Recalling that Recommendation VII-2 calls upon the Antarctic Treaty Parties to include in the series of Specially Protected Areas 
listed in Annex B of the Agreed Measures:
 a. representative examples of the major Antarctic land and fresh water ecological systems
 b. areas with unique complexes of species;
 c. areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any plant or invertebrate species;
 d. areas which contain specially interesting breeding colonies of birds or mammals; and
 e. areas which should be kept inviolate so that in the future they may be used for purposes of comparison with localities that have 
been disturbed by man;
Recommend to their Governments that:
1.  They undertake a continuing review of the geographical features and uses of Antarctica and, as appropriate propose designating 
areas of outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value as Specially Reserved Areas 
(SRAs).
2.  Proposals for designation of Specially Reserved Areas shall be accompanied by a proposed management plan which shall include:
 a. a clear description of the location and the key features of the proposed SRA, including a description of the markers and/or natural 
features that delineate the area;
 b. a map and/or photographs showing the boundaries and key features  of the proposed SRA;
 c. the rationale for the proposed visiting;
 d. descriptions of the types of activities that could be conducted in or near the proposed SRA without jeopardizing the special values 
intended to be protected;
 e. descriptions of the types of activities (including activities outside the SRA) that could adversely affect the special values intended 
XV-11		Status:	Not yet effective; Obsolete?

Summary		Institution of MPAs (Multiple-use Planning Areas)
The Representatives,
  Desiring to protect and maintain the unique biological, geological, glaciological, geomorphological, ecological, scientific, historic, 
aesthetic, scenic and wilderness values of Antarctica;
  Recalling Recommendation XIII-5 inviting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to offer advice on the system of 
protected areas in the Antarctic;
  Noting that SCAR’s response to Recommendation XIII-5, provided in its report ‘The Protected Area System in the Antarctic’, 
recommended among other things that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties create an additional category of protected area where 
coordinated management of activities would minimize harmful environmental impacts so as not to detract from the values for which 
the area was designated;
  Recalling the importance of preserving the freedom of scientific research guaranteed by the Antarctic Treaty;
  Recommend to their Governments that:
1.  They take cooperative action to ensure that on-going and planned human activities in Antarctica, through their combined or 
cumulative effects, do not result in mutual interference or in adverse impacts upon the Antarctic environment.
2.  As one means to this end, they designate, where appropriate, Multiple-Use Planning Areas (MPAs) to assist in coordinating human 
activities in those areas where such activities pose identified risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts.
3.  The number and size of MPAs be kept to the minimum necessary to meet the objectives set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2.
4.  Each Multiple-use Planning Area shall be designated pursuant to a management plan developed through consultations, as 
appropriate, among interested Parties and approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.  Such plan shall, as appropriate, 
include:
 a. a description of the purposes and objectives of the management plan;
 b. a description of the area to which its provisions apply;
 c. a description of on-going and planned human activities, including the operation of research stations and related logistics activities;
 d. identification of any Specially Protected Areas (SPAs), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Specially Reserved Areas 
(SRAs), and Historic Monuments (HMs) within the MPA;
 e. a description of the environmental characteristics and features and subjects of current and planned scientific research, if any, 
threatened by interference by on-going or planned human activities or their cumulative impacts;
 f. specific measures to avoid or minimize mutual interference and cumulative impacts, including where necessary measures 
applicable to:
XVI (Bonn, 1991)
XVI-2		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Designation of SSSI 33 (Ardley Island), 34 (Lions Rump)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;
  Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for 
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest additional to those already designated;
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans prepared for these 
sites;
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the Management Plans, annexed to this Recommendation, 
for the following sites;
 Site No. 33: Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. (Location: 62?13'S, 58?54'W).
 Site No. 34: Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. (Location: 62?8'S, 58?08'W).

XVI-3		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Designation of SSSI 35 (Western Bransfield Strait), 36 (East Dallmann Bay)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendations VII-3, VIII-3 and XIV-6;
  Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for two 
Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest;
  Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans prepared for these 
Sites;
  Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the Management Plans, annexed to this Recommendation, 
for the following Sites:
 No. 35 Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands;
 No. 36 East Dallmann Bay, off Brabant Island.
XVI-4		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Avian Island (SSSI 30) redesignated as SPA 21
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;
Noting that a Management Plan has been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
  Considering that Avian Island, together with its littoral zone is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity 
of breeding seabirds, including Adélie Penguins, Blue-eyed Shags, Giant Petrels, Dominican Gulls, South Polar Skuas and Wilson's 
Petrels, and that the colony of Adélie Penguins is the largest on the Antarctic Peninsula, and that other species are at or near the 
southern limits of their breeding range, and that the island is vulnerable to visits by tourists, and uncontrolled personnel;
  Recommend to their Governments that:
 i. the designation of Avian Island as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 30 under Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4 be terminated;

 ii. the number 30 should not be used for another Site of Special Scientific Interest;
 iii. the following area of outstanding ornithological interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), along with the Management Plan accompanying the description of the said 
Specially Protected Area: Specially Protected Area No. 21, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula (67?46'S, 68?54'W).

XVI-5		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		Revised management plan for SSSI 6 (Byers peninsula), to last until 31-12-2001
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendation VIII-4 and the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston 
Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed thereto;
  Noting that at its Twenty-First Meeting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), held at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 
1990), reviewed the Management Plan and scientific interest of SSSI No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland 
Islands;
  Recommend to their governments that:
 i. the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, 
annexed to Recommendation VIII-4 be terminated;
 ii. they voluntarily take account of the Management Plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site No. 6: Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.
XVI-6		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Management plans for SPA 8 (Dion Islands), 9 (Green Island), 13 (Moe Island), 14 (Lynch Island), 15 (Powell Island), 16 (Coppermine Peninsula), 18 (Coronation Island) and 19 (Lagotellerie Island).
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
 Research (SCAR);
  Recommend to their Governments that for the Specially Protected Sites listed below:
 i. the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna 
and Flora be deleted;
 ii. that the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in Annex 
B, specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
  The Specially Protected Areas involved are:
Site No. 8: Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
Site No. 9: Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula
Site No. 13: Moe Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 14: Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 15: Southern Powell Island, and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 16: Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands
Site No. 18: North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 19: Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

XVI-7		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes Peninsula), 7 (Haswell Island), 10 (Caughley Beach), 11 
(Tramway Ridge), 12 (Canada Glacier) and 18 (White Island) extended to 31-12-2001; for SSSI 22 (Yukidori Valley) to 31-12-2003
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendation VIII-3, VIII-4, XII-5 and XIII-7;
  Noting that:
1. in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), at its 
Twenty-first Meeting at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 1990) had reviewed the eight Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated in 
Recommendations VIII-4, XIII-8 and XIV-5;
2. experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites has shown them to be an effective means of reducing 
the risks of harmful interference in areas of special scientific interest;
3. no changes to the Management Plans of these sites had been proposed by SCAR.
  Recommend to their Governments that:
 i. The date of expiry of designation of Sites:
No. 4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island;
No. 5 - Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands;
No. 7 - Haswell Island;
No. 10 - Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island;
No. 11 - Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island;
No. 12 - Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land;
No. 18 - North-West White Island, McMurdo Sound
be extended to 31 December 2001; and that,
 ii. The date of expiry of designation of Site No. 22 - Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lutzow-Holm Bay be extended to 31 December 2003.

 iii. They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VIII-3, that the Management 
Plans of these Sites are observed.
XVI-8		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary		Establishment of SPA 22 (Cryptogram Ridge)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR):
  Considering that Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater of Mount Melbourne includes areas of geothermal 
activity which are ice-free and surrounded by numerous ice hummocks and scattered ice towers, and that the geothermal ground 
supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae and microbiota including very rare species, and that this fragile habitat is of 
exceptional biological interest and, to maintain its unique pristine state, should be afforded maximum protection from human influence;

  Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially 
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management 
Plan:
Specially Protected Area No. 22
Cryptogam Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land. Mount Melbourne (74?21'S, 164?42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell 
Glacier, northern Victoria Land, on the western side of the Ross Sea.

XVI-9		Status:	Not yet effective
Summary		Designation of SPA 23 (Forlidas and Davis Valley Ponds)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
  Considering that the Area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds known in Antarctica containing plant life, and that 
these ponds and their immediate catchments should be protected as examples of unique near-pristine ecosystems which should be 
afforded maximum protection from human influence;
  Recommend to their Governments that the following Area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially 
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management 
Plan:
Specially Protected Area No. 23
Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley Ponds, situated near the east end of the Dufek Massif at position 82?27'15’S, 51?21'W. The Area 
includes smaller ponds that occur along the ice margin at the northern edge of Davis Valley, a short distance east of Forlidas Pond.
XVI-10		Status:	Effective 24-05-02; Ongoing

Summary		Annex V (Area Protection and Management) to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
The Representatives,
  Recalling Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and Recommendations V-4, VI-14, 
VII-2, VII-9, VIII-3, XV-10, XV-11;
  Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty done at Madrid on 4th October 1991;
  Recommend to their Governments that:
 i. The Annex attached to this Recommendation form Annex V on Area Protection and Management to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
 ii. The Annex become effective upon the date on which both the Protocol on Environmental Protection shall have entered into force 
and this Recommendation shall have been approved by all Consultative Parties entitled to attend the XVIth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting.
XVII (Venice, 1992)
XVII-2			Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Annex V management plans for SPA 1 (Taylor Rookery), 2 (Rookery Islands), 3 (Ardery and Odbert Islands), and 20 (New College Valley)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
 Research (SCAR);
  Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;
  Recommend to their Governments that for the Specially Protected Areas listed below:
 i. the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna 
and Flora be deleted;
 ii. the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in Annex B, 
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
  
The Specially Protected Areas involved are:
  Area No. 1  Taylor Rookery, Mac Robertson Land;
  Area No. 2  Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land;
  Area No. 3  Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast;
  Area No. 20  ‘New College Valley’, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.
XIX (Seoul, 1995)
Measure 1 (1995)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			Revised management plans for SPA 13 (Moe Island) and 15 (S. Powell Island)
The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,   
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9 / VIII-3;    
  Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
 Research (SCAR);
  Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;
  Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:   
    For the Specially Protected Areas listed below:
    (i) the Descriptions inserted in Annex B. Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna
 and Flora shall be deleted:
    (ii) the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this measure shall be inserted in Annex B. 
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
    
    The Specially Protected Areas concerned are:
Area No. 13 Moe Island, South Orkney Islands (Annex A);
Area No. 15 Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands (Annex B)

Measure 2 (1995)		Status:	Not yet effective; Superseded?

Summary			Revised management plan for SSSI 11 (Tramway Ridge)
The Representatives of the Consultative Parties.
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty;
For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below:
(i) the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest, be deleted;
 (ii) the Management Plan of the Site of Special Scientific Interest, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific research:  Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned is:
    SSSI No. 11 Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus, Ross Island.
Measure 3 (1995)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			Establishment of SPA 24 (Pointe-Geologie)
The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that a Management Plan for the above Area has been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
  Considering that the Point Geologic Archipelago is important as a representative area of considerable biological, geological and 
aesthetic value; contains a high diversity of animals and plants and is an important area for scientific research; and that long-term 
research and monitoring programmes on bird colonies and geology have been conducted in the area since 1952.
  Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
That the following Area shall be inserted in Annex B. Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management Plan:
Specially Protected Area No. 24
Jean Rostand, Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and Breeding Marine Emperor Penguin Colony
 (140 to 140°02'E; 66°39'30" to 66°40'33"S) in the heart of Pointe-Geologie Archipelago, coastal area of Adelie Land in the vicinity of 
Astrolabe Glacier.
Resolution 7 (1995)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), 3 (Barwick Valley), 8 (Admiralty Bay), 9 (Rothera Point), 14 (Harmony Point), 15 (Cierva Point), 16 (Bailey Peninsula), 17 (Clark Peninsula), 19 (Linnaeus Terrace) and 21 (Mount Flora) extended to 31 December 2000
The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and XII-5
   Noting that:
i)  experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites has shown them to be an effective means of reducing 
the risks of harmful interference in areas of special interest;
  Recommend that:
1. The date of the expiry of Site Numbers 1, 3, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21 be extended from 31 December 1995 to 31 December 
2000.
2. The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans for these sites are complied with.
Resolution 9 (1995)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary		The format of the Management Plan for SPA 13 (Moe Island, XIX-M1) to be used as model for management plans
The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,
  Recalling the requests made by ATCM XVII and ATCM XVIII that SCAR should assist Parties in reviewing and revising Management 
Plans to conform with the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and consider how 
a model could be developed to facilitate the preparation of new and revised Management Plans;
  Recognising that a uniform model for such plans would eliminate repetition and would make them easier to use;
  Recommend that:
The structure of the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 13, adopted under Measure 1, be regarded as a model of all 
new and revised Management Plans for protected areas for the purposes of Annex V.
XX (Utrecht, 1996)
Measure 1 (1996)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			New management plans for SSSI 9 (Rothera Point) and 19 (Linnaeus Terrace)
The Representatives,
  Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty,
For the Sites of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below.
(i) the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 on the Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest be deleted;
(ii) the relevant Management Plan of the Sites of Special Scientific Interest, annexed to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIII-8 on the Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest;
The Sites of Special Scientific Interest concerned are:
SSSI No 9 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
SSSI No 19 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land;
(iii) that the Consultative Parties ensure that their nationals comply with mandatory provisions of the new Management Plans.

Resolution 3 (1996)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary		Date of expiry of SSSI 2 (Arrival Heights), 13 (Potter Peninsula), 20 (Biscoe Point), 23 (Svarthamaren), 24 (Mount Melbourne), 25 (Marine Plain), 26 (Chile Bay), 27 (Port Foster), 28 (South Bay), 29 (Ablation Point), 31 (Mount Flora) and 32 (Cape Shirreff) extended to 31 December 2000
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and XII-5, and Resolution 7(1995);
  Noting that experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites has shown them to be an effective means of 
reducing the risks of interference with science in areas of special scientific interest; and
  Conscious of the advantage of further harmonising the expiry dates of Sites of Special Scientific Interest pending the entry into 
force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Annex V to that Protocol.
  Recommend that:
1.  The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest numbers 13 and 20 which were considered at XIX ATCM be extended to 31 
December 2000.
2. The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest numbers 2, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 be extended from 31 December 1997 
to 31 December 2000.
3. The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest numbers 29, 31 and 32 be extended from 31 December 1999 to 31 
December 2000.
4. The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans for these sites are complied with.
Resolution 5 (1996)		Status:	Adopted; Superseded?

Summary		Consultative Parties recommended to adopt attached numbering system for ASPAs; collocated SPAs and 	SSSIs to be assigned separate numbers
The Representatives,
  Noting the requirement in Article 3(3) of Annex V that all SPAs and SSSIs designated as such by past ATCMs should, on entry into 
force of Annex V, be renamed and renumbered accordingly;
  Acknowledging that at the XIX ATCM the Parties agreed to adopt a numbering system based on the use of three digits;
  Taking account of the gaps in the existing numbering system;
  Recommend that:
1.  The numbering system for ASPAs annexed to this Resolution be adopted; and
2.  The three-digit numbers should be introduced at the same time as an Annex V Management Plan is adopted by the ATCM for any 
protected area.
3.  Where an SPA and SSSI are collocated that they be assigned separate numbers so as not to preempt any review of the 
Management Plans for those areas.
XXI (Wellington, 1997)
Measure 1 (1997)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			New management plan for SPA 5 (Beaufort Island)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9/VIII-3
  Noting that revised and new Area Descriptions and Proposed Management Plans have been endorsed by the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR);
  Noting also that the format of the revised and new Area Descriptions and proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex 
V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
For Specially Protected Area No. 5 Beaufort Island (Annex A)
1. That the Description inserted in Annex B. Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora shall be deleted.
2. That the Description and Management Plan of the Specially Protected Area at Annex A shall be inserted in Annex B. Specially 
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

Measure 2 (1997)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			Management plans for SPA 25 (Cape Evans) and SPA 26 (Lewis Bay Tomb)
The Representatives,
Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
Noting that Management Plans for the above Areas have been endorsed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
Noting also that the format of the Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;
Recognising that both these Areas have outstanding historic and commemorative significance which require long-term protection to 
ensure that their values are maintained and to avoid undue human disturbance;
Agreeing that pending entry into force of Annex V, proposals to designate and adopt management plans for the protection of historic or
 commemorative values should be viewed as proposals for the designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in accordance with the
 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna;
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
That the Management Plans for the Cape Evans Historic Site and its environs (SPA No. 25) and the Lewis Bay Tomb (SPA No. 26) 
annexed to this Measure be adopted.
Measure 3 (1997)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Revised management plans for SSSI 11 (Tramway Ridge), 12 (Canada Glacier), 13 (Potter Peninsula), 14 (Harmony Point), 15 (Cierva Point); establishment of SSSI 37 (Botany Bay)
The Representatives,
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
1. For the following Sites of Special Scientific Interest, that the relevant Management Plans annexed to this Measure be inserted in the 
Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 to replace those plans previously annexed to this Recommendation:
 SSSI 12: Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land (Annex A)
 SSSI 13: Potter Peninsula, 25 de Mayo Island (King George Island), South Shetland Islands (Annex B)
 SSSI 14: Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands (Annex C)
 SSSI 15: Cierva Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (Annex D)
2. For SSSI No. 37 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land, that the Management Plan annexed to this Measure (Annex E) be 
approved and adopted.
3. For SSSI No. 11 Tramway Ridge, that the term ‘restricted zone’ be changed to ‘prohibited zone’.
4. That the Consultative Parties ensure that their nationals comply with the mandatory provisions of the new and revised management 
plans.
XXII (Tromsø, 1998)
Measure 1 (1998)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			Management plans for SPA 27 (Cape Royds), 28 (Hut Point) and 29 (Cape Adare)
The Representatives,
  Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;
  Noting that Management Plans for the above Areas have been endorsed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

  Noting also that the format of the Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;
  Recognising that these Areas have outstanding historic significance which require long-term protection to ensure that their values are 
maintained, and to avoid undue human disturbance;
  Agreeing that pending entry into force of Annex V, proposals to designate and adopt management plans for the protection of 
particular historic values should be viewed as proposals for the designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in accordance with the
 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna;
  Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
That the Management Plans for the Cape Royds Historic Site and its environs (SPA No 27), the Hut Point Historic Site (SPA No 28) 
and the Cape Adare Historic Site and its environs (SPA No 29) annexed to this Measure be adopted.

Decision 4 (1998)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary		SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), 20 (Biscoe Point), 26 (Chile Bay), 27 (Port Foster), 28 (South Bay), 32 (Cape Shirreff), 34 (Lions Rump), 35 (Bransfield Strait) and 36 (Dallmann Bay) include marine areas, the draft management plans for which require approval of CCAMLR
The Representatives,
Noting the requirements in Annex V, Article 6, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(the Protocol) that the views of the Commission of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) must be sought on proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas which contain marine areas;
Recalling the adoption at ATCM XXI of a draft text on marine areas;
Noting also the endorsement by CCAMLR at its XVIth Meeting of that draft text;
Decide:
1.  To adopt the following:
For the purposes of implementation of Article 6(2) of the Environmental Protocol, draft management plans which require the approval 
of CCAMLR are those which include marine areas
- in which there is actual harvesting or potential capability for harvesting of marine living resources which might be affected by site 
designation, or
- for which there are provisions specified in a draft management plan which might prevent or restrict CCAMLR-related activities;
2.  That the sites listed in the appendix to this Decision meet the above criteria;
3.  Proposals for designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas which might have 
implications for CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP). Sites shall be submitted to CCAMLR for its consideration before 
any decision is taken on the proposals;
4.  That the above procedures should be followed pending entry into force of Annex V.
Appendix to Decision 4 (1998)
List of SSSIs with Marine Areas of Interest to CCAMLR
SSSI 1:    Cape Royds, Ross Island
SSSI 20:  Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
SSSI 26:  'Chile Bay' (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 27:  Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 28:  South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
SSSI 32:  Cape Shirreff, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 34:  Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI 35:  Western Bransfield Strait off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
Resolution 1 (1998)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary			Consultative Parties to approve XVI-10 (Environmental Protocol Annex V) as soon as possible
The Representatives,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Environmental Protocol, including its Annexes I-IV;
Conscious that this situation does not extend to Annex V on Area Protection and Management which was adopted under 
Recommendation XVI-10;
Aware that, to become effective, that Recommendation requires approval under the procedures of Article IX (4) of the Treaty;
Recommend that:
Those Consultative Parties which have yet to approve Recommendation XVI-10 under the procedures of Article IX(4), take steps to do 
so as soon as possible.
The Consultative Parties identified in the Appendix to this Resolution have responsibility for the preparation or revision of Management 
Plans for those sites listed.
Those Consultative Parties identified in the Annex should prepare a timetable for the preparation or revision of Management Plans for 
those sites for which they have principal responsibility, and should submit the timetable for information to ATCM XXIII.

Resolution 2 (1998)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing
Summary		Consultative Parties to use the attached guide for the preparation of management plans for ASPAs
The Representatives,
Noting the requirement under Recommendation XVI-10 to prepare or revise Management Plans for existing Specially Protected Areas 
and Sites of Special Scientific Interest;
Recognising that all such Management Plans need to conform to the requirements of Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol;
Conscious of the need to have in place Management Plans that provide for the adequate protection of designated sites;
Recommend that:
The Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to this Resolution, be used by 
those engaged in the preparation or revision of Management Plans.
XXIII (Lima, 1999)
Measure 1 (1999)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary			Revised management plan for SSSI 23 (Svarthamaren)
The Representatives,
  Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
1. That the Management Plan for SSSI N° 23, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 to replace 
the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
2. That the Consultative Parties ensure that their nationals comply with the mandatory provisions of the revised management plan.
SXII (The Hague, 2000)
Measure 1 (2000)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Revised management plans for SPA 14 (Lynch Island), 19 (Lagotellerie Island), 20 (New College Valley) and SSSI 8 (Admiralty Bay), 17 (Clark Peninsula), 22 (Yukidori Valley), and 34 (Lions Rump)
The Representatives,
Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) allocating responsibility among Consultative Parties for the revision of Management Plans for protected 
areas;
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
1. That the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area N° 14, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation IV-14 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
2. That the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area N° 19, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIII-11 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation. 
3. That the Management Plan for Specially Protected Area N° 20, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIII-12 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation, and that thereupon SSSI No 10, as 
designated by Recommendation XIII-8, shall cease to exist.
4. That the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest N° 8, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation X-5 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
5. That the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest N° 17, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIII-8 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
6. That the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest N° 22, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XIV-5 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
7. That the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest N° 34, attached to this Measure, be inserted in the Annex to 
Recommendation XVI-2 to replace the plan previously annexed to that Recommendation.
8. That the Parties ensure that their nationals comply with the mandatory provisions of the revised management plans.

Measure 2 (2000)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Expiry dates for SSSI 1 (Cape Royds), 2 (Arrival Heights), 3 (Barwick Valley), 16 (Bailey Peninsula), 20 (Biscoe Point), 21 (Deception Island), 24 (Mount Melbourne), 25 (Marine Plain), 26 (Chile Bay), 27 (Port Foster), 28 (South Bay), 29 (Ablation Point), 31 (Mount Flora), 32 (Cape Shirreff) extended to 31 December 2005
The Representatives,
Recalling Recommendations VIII-4, XIII-8, XIV-5, XV-6 and XV-7 adopting the Management Plans for Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
numbers 1, 2, 3, 16, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31 and 32;
Noting that the expiry date for these sites is 31 December 2000, but wishing to continue to protect these sites, until such time that 
their respective Management Plans have been revised in accordance with Annex V of the Environmental Protocol;
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty.
That the date of expiry of the management plans in the list annexed to this Measure be extended until 31 December 2005, and that this
 Measure be applied provisionally, to the fullest extent possible consistent with their Governments’ domestic laws and regulations, 
pending such approval. 
Annex to Measure 2(2000)
SSSI Number 1 Cape Royds, Ross Island
SSSI Number 2 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
SSSI Number 3 Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
SSSI Number 16 North-eastern Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast
SSSI Number 20 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
SSSI Number 21 Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI Number 24 Summit of Mount Melbourne, Northern Victoria Land
SSSI Number 25 Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills
SSSI Number 26 Chile Bay, (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island
SSSI Number 27 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI Number 28 South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago
SSSI Number 29 Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights, Alexander Island
SSSI Number 31 Mount Flora, Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
SSSI Number 32 Cape Shirreff, Livingstone Island, South Shetland Islands
Resolution 1 (2000)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary		Attached Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas to be used in developing proposals for protected areas
The Representatives,
Noting that Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol provides a framework for the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
Recognising that these Areas must conform to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex V; 
Recalling Resolution 2(1998) Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
Conscious of the need for general guidance in the assessment and definition of potential specially protected areas;
Recommend that the 'Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the 
Environmental Protocol', attached to this Resolution, be used by those engaged in the development of proposals for specially 
protected areas in Antarctica.
XXIV (St. Petersburg, 2001)
Measure 3 (2001)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Management Plans of SSSI Nos. 4 (Cape Crozier), 5 (Fildes Peninsula), 6 (Byers Peninsula), 7 (Haswell Island), 18 (Northwest White Island), 33 (Ardley Island), 35 (Western Bransfield Strait), and 36 (East Dallman Bay) extended to 31-12-2005
The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-4, XIII-8, XII-8, XVI-2, and XVI-3 adopting the Management Plans for Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest numbers 4, 5, 6, 7, 18, 33, 35, and 36;
Noting that the expiry date for these sites is 31 December 2001, but wishing to continue to protect these sites until such time their 
respective management plans have been revised in accordance with Annex V to the Environmental Protocol;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty:
That the date of expiry of the management plans in the list annexed to this Measure be extended until 31 December 2005, and that this
 Measure be applied provisionally, to the fullest extent possible consistent with their Governments’ domestic laws and regulations, 
pending such approval. 

Annex to Measure 3(2001)
SSSI Number 4 Cape Crozier, Ross Island
SSSI Number 5 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI Number 6 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI Number 7 Haswell Island
SSSI Number 18 North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound
SSSI Number 33 Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island
SSSI Number 35 Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
SSSI Number 36 East Dallman Bay, off Brabant Island
XXV (Warsaw, 2002)
Measure 1 (2002)		Status:	Not yet effective

Summary		Revised Management Plans for ASPA 106 (Cape Hallett), 107 (Emperor Island), 108 (Green Island), 117 (Avian Island), 121 (Cape Royds, subject to CCAMLR approval), 123 (Barwick and Balham Valleys), 124 (Cape Crozier), 126 (Byers Peninsula), 130 (Tramway Ridge), 137 (Northwest White Island), 147 (Ablation Point), 148 (Mount Flora), and 157 (Backdoor Bay)
The Representatives, 
Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) allocating responsibility among Consultative Parties for the revision of Management Plans for protected 
areas;
Noting that the draft Management Plans appended to this Measure have been endorsed by the Committee for Environmental Protection
 and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);
Recognizing that these Areas support outstanding natural features and biota of scientific intrest;
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 6 of Annex V to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:
That the Management Plans for the following sites:
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 106, Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 107, Emperor Island, Dion Islands;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 108, Green Island, Bertholot Islands;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 117, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 121, Cape Royds, Ross Island;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 123, Barwick and Balham Valleys, South Victoria Land;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 124, Cape Crozier, Ross Island;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 126, Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 130, 'Tramway Ridge', Mount Erebus, Ross Island;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 137, Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 147, Ablation Point - Ganymede Heights;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 148, Mount Flora, Hope Bay;
 Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 157, Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds, Ross Island.
and which are annexed to this Measure, be adopted.
That the management plan for Cape Royds, Ross Island (ASPA No 121) be approved by the ATCM subject to agreement by the 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Decision 1 (2002)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary	Naming and numbering system for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
The Representatives,
Noting the entry into force of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol on 24 May 2002;
Noting also the provision of Article 3(3) of Annex V that all SPAs and SSSIs designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) on the entry into force of Annex V, and shall be 
renamed and renumbered accordingly;
Recognising the naming and numbering system for ASPAs adopted by means of Resolution V (1996) and the need to update this 
system to include new protected areas adopted by subsequent ATCMs; 
Decide:
1. That the naming and numbering system for ASPAs annexed to this Decision be adopted;
2. That all ASPAs adopted by the present, and any subsequent ATCM, be added to the list in consecutive order of adoption and be 
numbered accordingly.
Resolution 2 (2002)		Status:	Adopted; Ongoing

Summary			Revision of Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plans
The Representatives,
Welcoming the entry into force of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol on 24 May 2002;
Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) on the allocation of responsibilities for revision of protected area management plans;
Noting that the management plans for many ASPAs have yet to be revised in the format required by Annex V;
Urge:
Those Parties that have yet to revise management plans in the format of Annex V take steps to do so at the earliest opportunity, with 
a view to their submission at CEP VII.
XXVI (Madrid, 2003)
Measure 2 (2003)		Status:	Not yet approved by any CP

Summary		Revised Management plans for ASPA 105 (Beaufort Island), 114 (Coronation Island), 118 (Cryptogam Ridge), 135 (Bailey Peninsula), 143 (Marine Plain), 152 (Western Bransfield Strait), 153 (Dallmann Bay), 154 (Botany Bay), 156 (Lewis Bay) 160 (Frazier Islands), 161 (Terra Nova Bay)
The Representatives, 

Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) of XXIV ATCM allocating responsibility among Consultative Parties for the revision of Management Plans 
for protected areas;
Noting that the draft Management Plans annexed to this Measure have been endorsed by the Committee for Environmental Protection 
and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research;
Recognising that these Areas support outstanding natural features and biota of scientific interest;
Recommend that their Governments, in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, approve the Management Plans, annexed to this Measure, for the following sites:

Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 105, Beaufort Island, Ross Sea;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 114, Northern Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 118, Cryptogam Ridge, Mt Melbourne, North Victoria Land and summit of Mt Melbourne, North 
Victoria Land;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 135, North-East Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land; 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 143, Marine Plain, Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land; 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 152, Western Bransfield Strait, Antarctic Peninsula;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 153, Eastern Dallmann Bay, Antarctic Peninsula;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 154, Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island, Ross Sea;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 160, Frazier Islands, Wilkes Land;
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 161, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea.
