

XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 054
Agenda Item: 4 e
AUSTRALIA
Original: English

 




THALA VALLEY CLEAN-UP
thala valley clean-up
    1. In the 2003-04 season, Australia removed over 1,000m3 of waste from the Thala Valley tip at Casey Station and shipped it out of the Antarctic Treaty area for disposal in Australia.  Estimated to contain about 2,000m3 of contaminated material, Thala Valley is relatively small compared with other sites in Antarctica: some, such as the abandoned Wilkes Station nearby, are estimated to be ten times this size. 
    2. Thala Valley was selected as a priority for removal principally because, as a consequence of earlier ad hoc attempts at remediation, the site was being actively eroded by melt streams carrying an estimated 4-8 m3 of contaminated material in to adjacent Brown Bay each summer. Research has shown that marine life in the bay is low in diversity compared with other similar locations and that this is most likely to be an impact of sediment and contamination leaching from the tip. 
    3. A secondary incentive was that as a small but complex site, Thala Valley is an ideal location to develop and test techniques that could be used elsewhere to satisfy obligations under Annex III of the Madrid Protocol.
    4. With the heavy plant available at many Antarctic stations, the process of excavation and removal of waste is very straightforward.  However, the requirement of the Madrid Protocol that clean-up should not cause greater adverse environmental impacts, added significantly to the complexity of the Thala Valley task. 
    5. Although operational excavation was done this year, the project commenced several years ago, with a detailed pre-planning site assessment including:
    • estimation of the quantity and type of material present; 
    • description of physical aspects of the site, such as topography, patterns of snow accumulation, meltwater flows and other issues which should influence removal strategies; and 
    • the establishment of environmental monitoring baselines.
    6. The first major program-determining decision was to select the type of ship to be used to transport the wastes to Australia, the alternatives being either to load directly into a bulk carrier, which would remain on site during the excavation phase, or to load the waste into specially designed containers for shipment in any ice-strengthened cargo ship.  The container option was selected as being operationally simpler, environmentally more secure and ultimately cheaper than the continuing additional charter costs for loading and unloading a bulk carrier. 
    7. The next key decision was the time-frame for the operational phase. The seasonal physical characteristics of the site dictated that removal of all waste within a single season was optimal, with the excavation phase to be completed during spring and early summer before the main melt, reducing the risk of further mobilisation of contaminants by meltwater. 
    8. The handling capacity of the wharf, cranes and vehicles at Casey is 10 tonnes per load. Based on the estimate of 2,000m3 of waste and the additional weight of containers and ice associated with the waste material, 400 containers were considered the minimum required for complete removal within a single season. Plans to excavate in the 2001-02 summer required the deployment of the containers early in the season to enable excavation before the melt. 
    9. An Initial Environmental Evaluation was conducted in accordance with Annex I of the Madrid Protocol, and the project was approved conditional on the preparation of an Environmental Management Plan.  The operation was planned to also satisfy Australian legal requirements, such as occupational health and safety (handling of hazardous material including the potential presence of asbestos fibres), quarantine (the import to Australia of non-sterile soil) and contaminated waste disposal. 
    10. A monitoring program was devised to test whether removing the waste caused greater adverse impacts than leaving the material in situ. The adjacent marine environment in Brown Bay was identified as the most likely site for impacts from dispersed contaminants because, as indicated by the fine sediment on the sea-bed, it is an accumulating environment and receives drainage directly from the tip. Earlier studies had demonstrated reduced biodiversity and the presence of contaminants in sediments and invertebrates in the bay.  
    11. The monitoring program set out to identify changes at three time scales in order to allow for a variety of operational responses to changes in the indicators during and after the excavation:
    a) As a short term monitor, gammarid amphipods were deployed in the water column as real-time sentinels. If there was increased mortality in Brown Bay compared with reference locations, this would indicate a deterioration of water quality and would trigger operational changes, possibly including suspension of work. In the event, no unusual mortality was observed.  
    b) Sediment traps were deployed in Brown Bay and at control locations to determine whether the operation caused increased flux of sediments or contaminants, these will also be compared with similar trap deployments from previous years. 
    c) Medium-term monitoring consisted of measuring the recruitment of benthic invertebrates to defaunated sediments to determine whether this sensitive stage in the life history was disrupted by the operation. 
    d) In the long-term, sea-bed communities will be re-surveyed to determine whether Brown Bay reverts to being more like the adjacent sites over time after the source of contamination has been removed. Sampling and analysis of snow and soils will be used to gauge the success of procedures to control incidental contaminant transport by vehicles off the site.
    12. Risk assessment indicated that mobilisation of contaminants by leachate and meltwater, and site disturbance by vehicles were the most likely mechanisms for the clean-up operation to cause additional adverse impacts. Techniques planned for controlling leachate and meltwater included the excavation of diversion channels to direct the major flow of the Thala Valley melt stream away from the contaminated site; the construction of a barrier to prevent marine ingress to the site; the use of holding ponds for leachate; and a specially designed water treatment plant to separate particulate and dissolved contaminants from run-off. As a fallback, should the other precautions fail, a silk curtain was to be used to constrain the spread of sediment plumes in the adjacent bay. The off-site dispersal of contaminants by vehicles was to be prevented by designating the site a controlled area and requiring wash-down before moving off-site. Once site works were commenced it became apparent that installing the marine-ingress barrier was operationally not feasible, and it was not installed.
    13. As a consequence of scientific priorities, cost constraints, and difficulties locating a suitable vessel, deployment of the containers was delayed and excavation did not take place until the 2003-04 season.  Waste was containerised and shipped to Australia, where it was processed in a secure compound at the wharf prior to deep burial at a site approved by the quarantine authorities for the disposal of waste designated a bio-security hazard.
    14. It was clear from the scoping phase of the project that the cost of final disposal would be significant. Within that, it was recognised that the cost of disposal of the more contaminated material would be significantly greater than the costs of disposing of only marginally contaminated waste. To contain those costs, samples from each container were analysed in the Antarctic using the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP). These measurements guided the addition of a proprietary chemical which stabilises heavy metals, reducing the potential for leaching, when the material was treated in Australia prior to disposal.
    15. As of March 2004 the project has not been fully reviewed and we are unable to report on the overall performance of the operation. The current situation is that over 1,000m3 of contaminated waste has been returned from Antarctica and disposed of in Australia at a secure site.  A similar quantity remains on site in a stockpile protected from meltwater by diversion channels and with leachate control including geofabric/membrane barrier and bunding.
    16. A number of lessons are apparent from the process thus far:
    a) clean-up is a complex operation requiring commitment over several years and careful coordination of major resources such as shipping and specialist expertise;
    b) excavation of waste is the simplest and least resource intensive aspect of the overall project;
    c) satisfying all the requirements of domestic legislation and the Madrid Protocol to determine comparative impacts and undertake monitoring, significantly adds to the complexity of the task;
    d) reporting only on the quantity of material removed is not a good measure of the success of clean-up as it gives no indication of environmental performance;
    e) all personnel involved must understand that environmental performance is the key indicator of success;
    f) monitoring must be targeted at those parts of the ecosystem most likely to be significantly impacted by the operation;
    g) monitoring is resource intensive but essential. There is always the incentive to reduce monitoring effort because the less effort directed towards monitoring, the less likely it is that an environmental impact will be detected;
    h) careful planning, including the development of new technologies if necessary, is required to mitigate site-specific environmental risks ‑ in this case uncontrolled meltwater and leachate were the prime concerns; and
    i) removal is most efficient if undertaken in manageable units that can be completed within a season without leaving disturbed sites exposed to the environment for extended periods.
    17. The contacts for further information on aspects of the this program are:  
    • Mr Chris Paterson, Chief Engineer, Australian Antarctic Division: chris.paterson@aad.gov.au; 
    • Dr Martin Riddle, Program Leader, Human Impacts Research, Australian Antarctic Division: martin.riddle@aad.gov.au; and 
    • Mr Tom Maggs, Manager Environmental Policy and Protection, Australian Antarctic Division: tom.maggs@aad.gov.au.
