			
XXVII ATCM/IP
Agenda item 5a
Japan
English
Original: English












		

Revised Scoping Paper on
intersessional consultation process between the Secretariat and ATCM









Revised Scoping Paper on
intersessional consultation process between the Secretariat and ATCM1


1.	This scoping paper relates to the question of possible intersessional consultation between the Secretariat and the ATCM.  Article 3 paragraph 3 of Measure 1 (2003) provides as follows:

“During the intersessional periods the Executive Secretary shall consult in a manner to be prescribed in the Rules of Procedure.”

This paper has been prepared to clarify the issues surrounding this question, by analysing the provisions of relevant documents establishing the Secretariat.

2.	The appendix of this paper lists the provisions that may require some kind of intersessional consultation between the Secretariat and the ATCM.  Under each such provision, some annotations have been added (in italic form).  At the end of the list, a summary of the analysis is also provided.  These annotations and the summary are provided to facilitate comments from the Consultative Parties.  

3.	Article 3 paragraph 3 of Measure 1 (2003) seems to encompass two different layers of consultation.  First is the consultation between the Executive Secretary and the ATCM.  Second is the consultation among the Consultative Parties (CPs).  For example, a matter arises during the intersession on which the Executive Secretary feels it important to consult with the ATCM before taking action.  The Executive Secretary must contact “somebody” and consult with that “somebody” as to whether he or she can proceed with the action.  This is the first layer of consultation.  Then, this “somebody” may feel it necessary to consult with the CPs and possibly to obtain a decision by them.  This is the second layer of consultation.  Finally, the result of the consultation among and/or decision by the CPs must be communicated to the Executive Secretary, using the first layer of consultation.

4.	It should be noted that the matter under consideration relates primarily to those issues that may require more “formalized” consultation between the Secretariat and the ATCM during the intersession.  It seems to be the common understanding among the CPs that the Executive Secretary has the authority to informally communicate with the CPs and receive informal advice from them regarding his or her functions during the intersession.  Thus, the first question is whether there are indeed such important issues that will necessitate a more “formalized” consultation during the intersession. 

5.	When considering the necessity for and the possible form of such consultation, the CPs are advised to take into consideration the following factors.  First is the time factor: whether there are indeed urgent issues that will require immediate consultation and/or decision by the CPs and which cannot await the official opening of annual ATCMs.  Second is the nature of consultation: some provisions seem to necessitate not only consultation, but also decision-making by the CPs.  The annotations in the appendix refer to those factors as appropriate.

6.	If the Consultative Parties consider it necessary to establish a more “formalized” consultation process between the Secretariat and the ATCM, the next question becomes how to devise such a process.  There are many different approaches to consider regarding this question.  For example, one could devise a specific consultation mechanism for specifically listed issues (e.g., by reference to specific provisions of the Measure).  Or, one could devise a general mechanism that the Executive Secretary may utilize when he or she feels it necessary or is required by law to consult with the ATCM.  

7.	Regarding the form of such a mechanism, the Chair of the WG 1 on the Secretariat reported as follows:

“Although most Delegations highlighted the need to have a common convenor to coordinate such consultations, none of them considered necessary to establish a permanent body, such as a standing committee, from which the Secretariat could seek advice.  Some delegations stressed the importance of conferring with all Consultative Parties in some cases.  The Chairman highlighted that this can now be facilitated by the use of electric instruments of communication.” (Report of the Chairman of Working Group 1 on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, XXVI ATCM IP-125 (2003), p.2.)

8.	The documents analysed in this paper are as follows:

Measure 1 (2003) Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Headquarters Agreement for the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (Annexed to Measure 1 (2003).
Decision 1 (2003) Apportioning Contribution to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Decision 2 (2003) Provisional Application of Measure 1 (2003).
Staff Regulations for the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (Annexed to Decision 3 (2003)).
Financial Regulations for the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (Annexed to Decision 4 (2003).

9.	The Consultative Parties are requested to provide comments and specific suggestions, where appropriate, taking into account all of the above.


APPENDIX
Provisions that may require an intersessional consultation process

Measure 1 (2003): Article 2 paragraph 2
   The Secretariat shall perform its functions listed in this paragraph "under the direction and supervision of the ATCM."  Many of those functions envisage intersessional work by the Secretariat.  In addition, subparagraphs (d) and (k) specifically direct the Secretariat to perform those functions "under the guidance of the ATCM." 
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary considers it necessary to receive "direction and guidance" from the ATCM relating to the performance of its functions.  It could be argued, however, that the general direction and guidance relating to the performance of the Secretariat would usually be agreed upon at the Meeting and, during the intersession, informal communications with the CPs may be sufficient.

Measure 1 (2003): Article 2 paragraph 2 (l)
   The Secretariat is to perform other functions relevant to the purposes of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol "as may be determined by the ATCM."
   There may be a case where the ATCM considers it necessary that it entrusts to the Secretariat a function not listed in Article 2 paragraph 2.  This may involve decision-making by the ATCM, with possible budgetary implications.  However, it is most likely that such determination would be made in advance at the Meeting.

Measure 1 (2003): Article 5 paragraph 3
  Except for the exercise of its capacity to contract and to acquire and dispose of movable property, for which general authorization is given in this paragraph, the Secretariat may exercise its legal capacity "only to the extent authorized by the ATCM."
   There may be a case where the Secretariat is required to exercise its legal capacity, for which a prior authorization of the ATCM is required.  Such authorization may involve decision-making.  At least in abstract, one could foresee a case where such authorization cannot await the opening of the next ATCM. 

Measure 1 (2003): Article 5 paragraph 4
   The Secretariat may not acquire or dispose of immovable property or institute legal proceedings "without the prior approval of the ATCM."
   There may be a case where such a prior approval of the ATCM is required in order to acquire or dispose of immovable property or institute legal proceedings.  Such authorization would certainly involve budgetary implications and require conscious decision-making by the ATCM.  With regard to the institution of legal proceedings, one could certainly foresee a case where such approval cannot await the opening of the next ATCM. 

------------------------------------------------------------

Headquarters Agreement: Article 3 paragraph 5
   The Secretariat shall make known to the Government the need for any changes to the location or extent of its permanent premises, etc., "through the ATCM."
   There may be a case where such a need arises, but the urgency for the ATCM to consult or decide during the intersession may not be so obvious. 

Headquarters Agreement: Article 4 paragraph 2 (a), Article 5 paragraph 2
   The immunities and privileges of the Secretariat, its property, etc., and its staff may be waived by the express notification of the ATCM.
   There may be a case where the ATCM is required to waive such immunities and privileges.  Since such waiver may entail significant impact on the functioning of the Secretariat, a conscious decision by the ATCM would be required.  One could also foresee a case where such a waiver cannot await the opening of the next ATCM.

Headquarters Agreement: Article 22
   The Secretariat shall refer a matter to the ATCM, if that matter was not promptly resolved by a consultation between the Secretariat and the Government.
   There may be a case where the Secretariat considers it important to refer the matter to the ATCM during the intersession.  However, the urgency for the ATCM to consult on this matter during the intersession may not be so obvious.

------------------------------------------------------------

Decision 2 (2003): Paragraph 1
   The Secretariat shall act in accordance with Articles 1, 3, 4 (paragraph 1) and 5 (paragraphs 1, 3 and 4) of Measure 1 (2003) on a provisional basis.
What was stated above under Article 5 paragraphs 3 and 4 of Measure 1 (2003) would also apply during the provisional application periods.

Decision 2 (2003): Paragraph 2
   The Secretariat shall fulfil, to the fullest extent possible, the functions identified in Article 2 of Measure 1 (2003) “prioritising its work in accordance with guidance by the ATCM.”
   To the extent that the Secretariat carries out its functions during the provisional application periods, what was stated above under Article 2 paragraph 2 of Measure 1 (2003) would also apply.  Moreover, there may be a case where the Executive Secretary requests the ATCM’s guidance as to the prioritization of its work.  However, such guidance would usually be provided at the Meeting during the discussion on the budget. 

Decision 2 (2003): Paragraph 3
   The Staff Regulations and the Financial Regulations shall be applied to the Secretariat provisionally and to the fullest extent possible.
   What is stated below relating to the Staff Regulations and the Financial Regulations would also apply during the intersession.

------------------------------------------------------------

Staff Regulations: Regulation 2.5
   Authorization for the release of information for official purposes shall lie with the ATCM or the Executive Secretary, as the case may require.
  There may be a case where the Executive Secretary asks for the ATCM's authorization for the release of information.  Depending on the importance of the information, it may require a decision by the ATCM, and the urgency for such a decision could be foreseen.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 2.6
   The Executive Secretary may accept other employment only with the prior authorization of the ATCM.
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary asks for the prior authorization from the ATCM.  In certain circumstances, this authorization may not await the next meeting, as the opportunity may not be kept open that long. , but this decision could well be delayed until the opening of the next Meeting.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 5.5
   The promotion of the Executive Secretary and other staff members from one level to another requires the prior approval of the ATCM.
    There may be a case where the Executive Secretary asks for promotion of its staff.  But the prior approval of the ATCM, with its budgetary implications, would usually be given at the Meeting during the discussion on the budget.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 5.8
   With the approval of the ATCM, a staff member in the executive category may be appointed at a salary higher than Step 1.
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary asks for the ATCM's approval in order to appoint a staff member at a salary higher than Step 1.  The ATCM's approval to this effect would have budgetary implications.  We may also foresee a case where such appointment could not be delayed until the opening of the next ATCM.

Staff Regulations: Regulations 6.2 and 6.3 (e)
   The Executive Secretary shall appoint other staff members.  There is no explicit requirement for consultation with the ATCM when appointing executive staff.  On the other hand, when the Executive Secretary decides to renew the period of appointment for the executive staff, consultation with the ATCM is required.
   In the case of renewal, the Executive Secretary is required to consult with the ATCM, whereas, in the case of appointment, the Executive Secretary may feel it advisable to consult with the ATCM.  Depending on the date of appointment and its termination, there may be a need for the Executive Secretary to consult with the ATCM during the intersession.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 7.2
   The taking of leave by the staff members shall not cause undue disruption to normal Secretariat operations, and "leave dates shall be subject to the needs of the ATCM."
   There may be a case where, before taking leave or approving its staff members' leave, the Executive Secretary wants to ascertain the "needs of the ATCM."  However, informal communication with CPs may suffice.

Staff Regulations: Regulations 10.1 and 10.2
   The Executive Secretary may resign at any time upon giving three months notice or such lesser period as may be approved by the ATCM.  In the event of the Executive Secretary resigning without giving the required notice, the ATCM reserves the right to decide whether repatriation expenses or any other allowance shall be paid.  
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary asks for the ATCM's approval to resign upon giving less than three months notice or where the ATCM must decide whether to pay the repatriation expenses and other allowance.  Such approval or decision by the ATCM may not be delayed until the opening of the next Meeting.
   In the case the normal 3 months notice is given, there may be a need, during the intersession, to prepare for the election of a new Executive Secretary with the ATCM’s instructions. 

Staff Regulations: Regulation 10.3
   Appointment of the Executive Secretary may be terminated upon prior written notice at least three months in advance by the ATCM.  The appointment of other staff members may be terminated by the Executive Secretary.
   There may be a case where the ATCM decides to terminate the appointment of the Executive Secretary.  But, usually, such an important decision would be made during the Meeting.  Regarding the termination of appointment of other staff members, especially of executive staff members, it is foreseeable that the Executive Secretary would consult with the ATCM before making such important decisions.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 12.1
   Any doubts arising from application of these Regulations shall be resolved by the Executive Secretary following consultation with the ATCM.
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary needs to consult with the ATCM in order to resolve a case arising from application of these Regulations.  An urgent case may also be foreseen.

Staff Regulations: Regulation 12.2
   All matters not foreseen in these Regulations shall be brought to the attention of the ATCM by the Executive Secretary.
   There may be a case where a matter not foreseen in these Regulations has arisen and the Executive Secretary needs to contact the ATCM for its attention.  Depending on the nature of the matter, consultation and possible decision by the ATCM may be required.

------------------------------------------------------------

Financial Regulations: Regulation 4.2
   Except for the specific case provided in this Regulation, the Executive Secretary may incur obligations against future years only as authorized by the ATCM.
   There may be a case where the Executive Secretary requests such authorization from the ATCM.  Such authorization with budgetary implications would usually be made at the Meeting.

Financial Regulations: Regulation 4.3
   Commitments remaining undischarged against previous appropriations shall be carried over and be included in the budget for the next financial year, unless the ATCM decides otherwise.
   The ATCM may decide not to carry over the commitments remaining undischarged, but, usually, such decision would be made at the Meeting during the discussion on the budget.

Financial Regulations: Regulation 4.5
  The ATCM shall prescribe the conditions under which unforeseen and extra-budgetary expenses may be incurred.
   Such prescription by the ATCM would usually be agreed upon at the Meeting.

Financial Regulations: Regulation 6.2 (a)
   With regard to the Working Capital Fund, the purposes for its use shall be determined by the ATCM from time to time.
   Such determination by the ATCM would usually be made at the Meeting.

Financial Regulations: Regulation 6.2 (d)
   The Secretariat may establish Trust and Special Funds at the direction of the ATCM.  The purposes and limits of each such Fund shall be clearly defined by the ATCM.
   There may be a case where the ATCM is required to provide such direction and other details to establish Trust and Special Funds.  We could also foresee a case where such direction cannot await the opening of the next ATCM. 

Financial Regulations: Regulation 7.4
   Subject to agreement by the ATCM, the voluntary contributions offered by non-Consultative Parties and non-Parties may be accepted.
   There may be a case where the ATCM's agreement is sought in order to accept the voluntary contribution from non-CPs and non-Parties.  We could also foresee a case where such an agreement cannot await the opening of next ATCM.

Financial Regulations: Regulation 8.2 (b)
   Longer-term investment may be authorized by the ATCM with regard to moneys held in Trust or Special funds.
   There may be a case where such authorization from the ATCM is sought, but the urgency is not so obvious.

(Financial Regulations: Regulation 11)
  This Regulation relates to the external auditor and not to the Secretariat.  Some provisions envisage contacts and/or consultation between the external auditor and the ATCM.


Summary of Analysis

 1.	Under several provisions, the Executive Secretary is required by law to receive the "approval" or "agreement" of the ATCM in order to pursue his or her functions.  Some of those approvals and agreements involve decision-making by the Consultative Parties.  We could also foresee cases where those approvals or agreements may not await the opening of the next ATCM.  The approval to institute legal proceedings (Article 5 Paragraph 4 of Measure 1(2003)), the waiver of immunities of the Secretariat and its staff (Article 4 paragraph 2 (a) and Article 5 paragraph 2 of the Headquarters Agreement), and agreement to accept voluntary contributions from non-CPs (Regulation 7.4 of the Financial Regulations) are clear examples of such cases.

2.	The examples provided above, however, are relatively rare cases.  At this moment, we do not envisage the institution of legal proceedings or the waiver of immunities by the Executive Secretary to occur often.  Thus, the first question is whether we would need to devise an intersessional decision-making mechanism for those rare cases. 

3.	Under some provisions, a "consultation" with the ATCM is explicitly required. Regulation 6.3(e) (renewal of executive staff) and Regulation 12.1 (resolution of doubts) of the Staff Regulations are examples.  There are other cases where, although not explicitly stipulated, the Executive Secretary will feel it necessary to consult with the ATCM before taking action.  The appointment of executive staff and their termination could be listed as such examples.  We could also foresee cases where those consultations may not await the opening of the next ATCM.  Thus, there may be a need for a process where, although decision-making is not involved, the Consultative Parties are able to "consult" during the intersession.

4.	Under some other provisions, a consultation and/or decision-making by the ATCM is required, but the urgency to do so during the intersession is not so obvious.  Many provisions in the Staff Regulations and the Financial Regulations fall under this category.  In these cases, the Executive Secretary may informally seek advice from the Consultative Parties during the intersession, but the substantive consultation and/or decision by the ATCM would most likely occur during the meeting.

5.	Therefore, it follows from the above that, in order to consider this question further, the following issues require examination, and comments and suggestions to that effect will be greatly appreciated.

	(a) Whether one would devise an intersessional decision-making mechanism for those rare cases as exemplified in paragraph 1 above?

	(b) Whether one would devise an intersessional consultation mechanism for those cases as exemplified in paragraph 3 above? 

(c) Whether one would devise a general intersessional consultation/decision-making mechanism for all issues the Executive Secretary feels it necessary or is required by law to consult with and/or refer to the ATCM?

	(d) The consultation/decision-making mechanism would consist of (1) a "somebody" to whom the Executive Secretary can contact when he or she feels it necessary and/or is required by law to consult with and/or refer to the ATCM; and (2) a consultation/decision-making process among the Consultative Parties.

(d-1) Who could be that "somebody"? 

	(d-2) How could we devise the consultation and/or decision-making mechanism among the Consultative Parties during the intersession?  Should there be any procedural difference between decision-making and consultation? 


END OF DOCUMENT
