XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 089
Agenda Item: CEP 3
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original: English

 





REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC

























XXVII ATCM
Information Paper IP- ….
Agenda Item: CEP ….
CZECH REPUBLIC
Original : English


Information paper




REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC

Annual Report pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

       Former Czechoslovakia acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in 1962 and the Czech Republic succeded to all rights and obligations arising from the Treaty in 1993. The Environmental Protocol was signed by Czech Government in 1992 and the process of the ratification of the Environmental Protocol in the Czech Republic is running at this time. 
       On 6 August 2003 the Czech Parliament approved the Act on the Antarctica and on amendment to some laws, that was published in the Czech Collection of the Legal Acts under No. 276/2003 Coll. This act will entry into force as soon as the Environmental Protocol approved by the Parliament of the Czech Republic on 7 April 2004 is published in the Collection of International Treaties. This publication is expected till the mid-year 2004. 
        There are two others acts, which were amended by the Act No. 276/2003 Coll. – the Act No. 368/1992 Coll., on administrative fees, and the Criminal Code (the Act No. 140/1961 Coll.). The Act No. 276/2003 Coll. specifies in particular the rights and duties of natural and legal persons authorised to take part in Czech expeditions arriving in the Antarctic and provides for the relevant execution of state administration with the aim to ensure the overall protection of the environment in the Antarctica, and last but not least it creates conditions for the future development of systematic scientific work of Czech experts in the Antarctica. 
        The purpose of this Act is to ensure compliance with international commitments of the Czech Republic concerning Antarctica, in particular to ensure comprehensive conservation of the Antarctic environment as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. The Act No. 276/2003 Coll. regulates the rights and duties of nationals of the Czech Republic, legal persons with the registered office in the territory of the Czech Republic and persons without state citizenship who have their place of residence in the territory of the Czech Republic if they participate in activities in Antarctica and the rights and obligations of foreigners who do not fall within the category of persons specified in Article VIII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty and who participate in an expedition to Antarctica that is organized in the Czech Republic or whose place of final departure lies in the Czech Republic.
          Czech persons shall be obliged to behave in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Protocol and other international commitments concerning Antarctica that are binding on the Czech Republic. Czech persons who intend to participate in activities in Antarctica must plan and conduct these activities so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment as far as feasible. Czech persons may carry out activities in Antarctica after their advance notice, unless this Act requires a permit. Czech persons who conduct activities in Antarctica on the date of legal force of this Act may conduct these activities without a permit for a maximum period of one year from the date of legal force of this Act. Czech person must have a permit for a stay in Antarctica exceeding 30 days or in a group of more than five persons, for performance of scientific research in Antarctica, for taking of minerals or paleontological finds in Antarctica and their export in the framework of scientific research of mineral resources in Antarctica, for construction, reconstruction or removal of a Czech station and other installations and facilities in Antarctica, for entry into an Antarctic specially protected area, for interfering with populations or habitats of native plant and animal species, for introduction of non-native species of plants, animals and microorganisms to Antarctica and for introduction of pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), polystyrene beads or chips, non-sterile soils and other substances or preparations dangerous for the Antarctic environment and stipulated by an implemeting decree, to Antarctica. A permit pursuant to this act must be also held by a Czech person who organizes tourist expeditions to Antarctica. This permits are issued by the Ministry of Environment which is competent state authority for protection of the Antarctic environment in the Czech Republic. Czech Ministry of Environment also shall control compliance with this act, designate observers and issue fines. 
Other obligation arising from the Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol (prevention of Antarctic Marine Pollution) are implemented by the Act No. 76/2000 Coll., about Maritime Navigation. 
On 26 February 2004 was approved the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment No. 104/2004 Coll., implementing the Act No. 276/2003 Coll. 

