XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 098
Agenda Item: CEP 10
SPAIN
Original: English

 







CONSERVATION OF SEABIRDS: IMPROVEMENTS AND  NEW STEPS FORWARD
















CONSERVATION OF SEABIRDS: IMPROVEMENTS AND  NEW STEPS FORWARD

In 2003, the Spanish NGO SEO-Birdlife organized an international open competition with a 18,000 Euros prize promoting best practice for fishers. It was aimed at finding new, simple and effective solutions to promote seabird friendly fishing. 

For the first time, a conservation organization and the fishing sector have been working together in the search for innovative technical solutions to solve an environmental problem. This problem of seabirds by-catch is particularly severe in the Antarctic area, since many of the impacted species breed there.

The Spanish  Ministery of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the bank  “Caixa Galicia” supported the competition .The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and Vogelbescherming Nederland  also endorsed.

The response has been positive, 87 initiatives  coming from fishers of 11 countries have been submitted to  the competition, mainly from Spain and New Zeland, as well as the United States, Australia, Canada , Ecuador and Uruguay. 

A Panel consisting of 12 experts on fishing and  seabird conservation from different countries have selected an innovative method of keeping  seabirds away from baited hooks during line-setting presented by two fishers, from New Zeland and  Australia, respectively.

These fishers discovered that birds avoid oil on the water surface .The oil formed a slick behind the vessel that degraded within minutes, enough time for baited hooks to sink out of reach of birds. The method allows baits setting during daytime, which previously caused large number of seabirds to be drowned while  stealing baits. The grease obtained
from livers of fish that would otherwise be discarded overboard was used to form a slick  astern of the vessel, acting as a deterrent and keeping  birds well away.

SEO-Birdlife now is inviting all fishers to test the idea, to make sure it does not have any negative collateral effects on seabirds. Some Spanish fishers have accepted to participate on the trial when fishing in the CCAMLR Area.
In conclusion, it is hoped to promote further cooperation between NGOs and the fishers, with the support of States and relevant International Governmental Organizations (IGOs) aimed at solving environmental problems of particular concern in the Antarctic System. 

 For further information:

www.seo.org
www.aad.gov.au

Carlos Carboneras : ccarboneras@seo.org
