
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 023
Agenda Item: 11
NEW ZEALAND
Original: English

 






TOURISM AND NON-GOVERMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA: MONITORING COMPLIANCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT



















TOURISM AND NON-GOVERMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA: MONITORING COMPLIANCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT


Information Paper
New Zealand

At the recent Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica New Zealand was tasked to develop the question of the establishment of a framework for having observers on board tourist vessels (ATCM XXVII WP 004 refers).  Two possible approaches were suggested by the Meeting: either establishing an Antarctic Treaty System observation scheme or relying instead on a national ATCP initiated observer scheme.

The paper submitted by New Zealand to the Meeting of Experts, Practical Experience of an Observer Scheme for Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic Tourism – ATME#10, described how the requirement for a private expedition to be accompanied by a National Representative (as New Zealand “observers” are called) may be made a condition of the authorisation or permit which is granted for the proposed activity by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade under New Zealand’s Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.  This Act implements the Protocol on Environmental Protection in New Zealand law.  National Representatives are designated by the Minister and are also appointed by him or her as general inspectors under the Act.  As is set out in the Act (s39), the role of the general inspector is to report to the Minister whether the provisions of the Act, and any regulations made under the Act, have been complied with.

New Zealand considers that the framework already exists within the Antarctic Treaty System, in particular through the Environmental Protocol, for all Parties to make a similar requirement of private expeditions and to appoint observers to monitor compliance should they wish to do so.  Article 13 of the Protocol in particular makes clear that each Party has an obligation “to take appropriate measures within its competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance” with the Protocol. 

New Zealand therefore sees the responsibility for appointing observers to monitor compliance with the Protocol as belonging to individual Parties.  There may be scope for establishing common approaches in some areas.  We have appended an outline of New Zealand’s National Representative Scheme, which was also included in document ATME #10, in case some of the practical arrangements for the Scheme are of interest to other Parties.  We would not wish to suggest however that there should be any formal prescription as to how others might arrange for the functions of the observer to be performed.

New Zealand believes that reaching a common understanding of the outputs to be delivered by an observer scheme is of much greater importance.  The Protocol indicates that compliance monitoring is a key output as has been noted above.  Annex 1 to the Protocol also suggests that environmental impact monitoring would be an appropriate output from an observer scheme.  Most private expeditions are conducted on the basis of an Initial Environmental Evaluation.  Article 2.2 of Annex 1 makes clear that if an IEE indicates such an activity may proceed, “appropriate procedures, which may include monitoring” must be put in place “to assess and verify the impact of the activity”.   Finally, if the proposal by Australia for an industry accreditation scheme to ensure consistent standards of operation among tour operators is accepted, the monitoring of operator standards against the criteria established for accreditation could be a further useful output of the deployment of observers.

New Zealand also suggests that the reports of observers to their authorities might be made available to the Committee on Environmental Protection, perhaps in connection with the submission of Annual Reports by Parties under Article 17 of the Protocol.  This would provide an opportunity for review and discussion by all the Parties.

Appendix 1
The New Zealand National Representative Scheme

    1. National Representatives accompany tourist expeditions that have been authorised to undertake activities in Antarctica by the New Zealand Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade under the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994. This authorisation process requires the submission and approval of an Environmental Impact Assessment, which for tour vessels is usually at the Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) level. The requirement to carry a National Representative may be made a condition of the authorisation or permit granted by the Minister. 

    2. National Representatives are designated by the Minister and are also formally appointed by the Minister as general inspectors under the Act, which provides them with the necessary statutory authority to carry out their role of observation and reporting on compliance with the requirements of the Act.  National Representatives are generally drawn from the staff of Antarctica New Zealand or the Department of Conservation (DoC). As expeditions that visit New Zealand’s sub-Antarctic islands are usually accompanied by a DoC representative, this same individual may also be designated as the National Representative for the Antarctic leg of the journey. National Representatives are required to have sufficient:

        ◦ knowledge about Antarctic legislation, management, science and conservation; 
        ◦ experience in the Antarctic and/or Sub Antarctic regions; 
        ◦ experience in outdoor safety requirements (i.e. survival/field training); and 
        ◦ to be physically fit and proficient in communication and public relations skills.

    3. As an aside, it is worth noting here that the visitor regulations in place for New Zealand’s sub-Antarctic islands provide an indirect mechanism for regulating visitation to the Ross Sea, given that virtually all tour ship visits to the Ross Sea include visits also to the sub-Antarctic islands. Notable among these regulations are the limitation on one ship visit per site per day; a restriction on 600 visitors per site per annum for “large sites” and 150 visitors per site per annum for all other sites.





The Role of the National Representative

Functions

    4. The primary role and responsibilities of the National Representative are to observe and report to the Minister on compliance with the requirements of the Antarctica (Environmental protection) Act, with the undertakings contained in the tour operator’s Initial Environmental Evaluation, with any Ministerial directions regarding the proposed activities and with relevant Antarctic Treaty Measures. A Handbook is provided detailing these functions. The National Representative’s report is addressed to the Head of the Antarctic Policy Unit, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  

    5. The tasks undertaken by National Representatives therefore include:

        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with any approvals and/or permits issued for the visit;
        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with permits relating to conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna, protected areas and marine mammals;
        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with any management plans and/or permits applying to any Antarctic Specially Protected Area and or any Antarctic Specially Managed Area, or to any other restricted area or site;
        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with any Ministerial direction in respect of EIA for the tour operator’s or the vessel’s activities;
        ◦ to observe and report on the general conduct of the tour operator and visitors, including noting any significant departures from activities specified in the environmental impact assessment and the relevant legislation;
        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with Recommendation XVIII-1, and
        ◦ Resolution 3 of the Antarctic Treaty;
        ◦ to observe and report on compliance with any plant or animal quarantine
        ◦ regulations or procedures;
        ◦ to observe and report on any other activities relating to the implementation of the Act or other New Zealand Antarctic law or policy.

    6. As an aside it is noted that to assist New Zealand’s surveillance efforts against illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing in support of CCAMLR, National Representatives are asked also to report the sighting of any fishing vessels in Antarctic waters as soon as possible to the Ministry of Fisheries.

    7. It is important to note that the role of the National Representative is that of an environmental observer and that they are not to attempt to take responsibility for the safety of passengers and crew. These matters are the responsibility of the vessel’s Master and/or the Expedition Leader. They are also advised that if they have any concern about their ability to participate safely in any activity they should not take part. Nor is the National Representative’s role one of enforcement. Any breaches that are noted are raised with the operator at the time if appropriate, and reported on at the end of the cruise. If the breach is serious, it is reported to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (or DoC, or Antarctica New Zealand if required) immediately. No direct action is, however taken by the observer. It is the responsibility of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade to take any formal action as necessary.


Benefits and Challenges

    8. In its many years of operation the National Representative Scheme has ably demonstrated its effectiveness. Key advantages of the scheme are that it provides: 

        ◦ a direct mechanism for monitoring compliance with approvals and permit conditions issued under New Zealand law;
        ◦ a means for constructive dialogue with the tour operators;
        ◦ an advocacy role for New Zealand and its involvement in Antarctic affairs;
        ◦ fuller understanding by Government of the nature and potential impacts of tourism in the Ross Sea including environmental impacts;
        ◦ reassurance to the general public regarding oversight of tourism activities.

    9. Some of the challenges the system has faced during its evolution include the ongoing need for:

        ◦ a high quality selection and training process for National Representatives;
        ◦ clear definition of their role and responsibilities;
        ◦ the opportunity for tour operators to provide constructive feedback including in end of season debriefs and for operators to be provided with copies of the observer reports.

Costs

    10. Salaries and absence from normal duties for staff of Antarctica New Zealand and DoC would normally be covered by those organisations. Tour operators would normally provide for:

        ◦ the full cost of board and lodging and any appropriate allowances for National Representatives while they are on board tour vessels;
        ◦ reimbursement of the full costs of any airfares, accommodation, meals and incidental expenses incurred in getting National Representatives to and from the point of embarkation and disembarkation for the tour vessel to their place of work or residence;
        ◦ use of radiotelephone, fax, email, INMARSAT or telex services required by the Representative in carrying out their duties.

