
Information Paper
Submitted by Germany

International Polar Year 2007/8  –  Vision of Scientific Break-Through

The International Polar Year 2007/8 (IPY), which is coordinated through a joint effort by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), will provide an opportunity to combine logistic and scientific forces of the international polar research communities in order to enable research programs which could not be conducted otherwise. As one of the consultative parties of the Antarctic Treaty and as an advisory of the Arctic Council, Germany has a long and ongoing tradition in polar sciences and is one of the most active nations in Antarctic and Arctic research disciplines, including geology, geophysics, glaciology, oceanography, meteorology, biology and social sciences as well as their integration into research fields such as climate/global change and polar ecology. It can be expected that a substantial contribution to IPY activities will be made by the involvement of German scientists and the logistical and infrastructural capabilities of Germany.
To organize the planned activities for the IPY, the German Committee for the IPY 2007/8 was constituted in 2003. Its task is to act as a direct link to the international planning and coordination bodies for the IPY and to coordinate and focus the numerous research proposals from the German science community. From a total of 200 ideas and proposals submitted to the international planning group, more than 40 have been submitted from individuals and groups of German research institutions, which expresses the strong interest of the scientists in Germany to participate in the IPY. Many of the proposals developed from discussions within internationally cooperating science groups.
A brief outline of a vision for the IPY is presented here. The IPY should be seen as an opportunity for an internationally coordinated effort for which Germany suggests to concentrate on the following objectives of polar research:
    1) Present change of environment, climate and ecosystems:  An internationally orchestrated effort over two field seasons should make possible the installation of autonomous as well as networked observatories at relative dense spacing. These stationary and mobile observatories will record physical, chemical and biological parameters of the polar lithosphere, cryosphere, oceans and atmosphere at high temporal and spatial resolution in order to obtain an accurate state of conditions for present and short-term environmental and climatic change.
    2) Learning from the past – predictions for the future:  The polar regions play a key role in long-term processes of planetary change in time-scales from millennial to millions of years. In order to maximise the scientific outcome of decoding such processes, the participating countries should focus their means of logistics and infrastructure to build research capacities within selected polar regions on land and at sea for the duration of the IPY. International groups of scientists will study geological, geophysical and biological parameters in those selected areas which are identified for having been critical for global change in Earth history.
    3) New technology for exploring:  Due to its difficult and expensive accessibility, most of the polar regions still remain unknown, and their polar oceans are largely unexplored. This lack of knowledge of our planet cannot be accepted by our modern societies. The IPY provides an opportunity to start-off the development, installation and operation of new observational technologies, ranging from space observations to autonomous observatories and remote-controlled rovers in order to exploring the poles and their oceans from geosphere to biosphere through a concentrated and coordinated international effort.
    4) Public awareness and education:  Not alone that these objectives address critical questions on the history as well as the present and future state of our planet, the associated scientific work is very much predestined to catch the public awareness in a similar way as the exploration of space does. The IPY can provide an excellent opportunity for the public as well as for school and university teachers and students to take part in polar science and exploration via summer schools, remote classes via internet and life shows and public media documentaries.






Contact:	Prof. Dr. Reinhard Dietrich, Chair of the German Committee for the IPY 2007/8
	Technical University of Dresden
	Institute for Planetary Geodesy
	Helmholtzstrasse 10
	D-01062 Dresden
	Germany
	Tel. 0351-463 34652
	e-mail: dietrich@ipg.geo.tu-dresden.de

	Dr. Karsten Gohl, Secretary of the German Committee for the IPY 2007/8
	Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research
	Postfach 120161
	D-27515 Bremerhaven
	Germany
	Tel. 0471-4831 1361
	e-mail: kgohl@awi-bremerhaven.de


