XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 010
Agenda Item: CEP
United States
Original: English









ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: 1994-2004



























ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: 1994-2004
by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc.
Principal investigator, Antarctic Site Inventory

This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2004. The Antarctic Site Inventory has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994. The project's methodology and results from previous field seasons have been described and discussed in XIX ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 100, XX ATCM/INF 102, XXI ATCM/INF 114, XXII ATCM/INF 27, XXIII/INF 32, XXV ATCM/INF 25, and XXVI ATCM/INF 53.
Introduction. Following a year of examining methodologies and logistics, the Antarctic Site Inventory began fieldwork in November 1994, intending to:
    • determine whether opportunistic visits can be used to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists;
    • begin collecting baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and 
    • determine how best to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which, among other things, requires a priori environmental impact assessments for all human activities, including tourism, and for monitoring to be done, as and when necessary, to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts. There is a focus on the “initial environmental reference state” of particular locations, which in the case of tourism, would refer to places where shipboard passengers are visiting.
The environmental concern is to identify changes to the baseline reference state and, if possible, determine whether any detected changes are naturally occurring or are anthropogenic, perhaps caused by tourism or other human activities. Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative. (Benninghoff and Bonner, 1985; Abbott and Benninghoff, 1990; SCAR, 1996; Emslie, 1997; Hofman and Jatko, 2002).
Results. The Antarctic Site Inventory has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on expedition tour vessels and the United Kingdom ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance for logistics support. Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data (Naveen, 1997a; Naveen, et. al, 2001).
In ten seasons from November 1994 through February 2004, the Inventory has made 570 visits to 89 Peninsula locations. There have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, and to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and which are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors. (Naveen: 1997a; Naveen: 2003; Naveen, et. al, 2001; Naveen, unpublished field data, 2003-04).
Logistics. Site visits are achieved by placing research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer. With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004).
Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with: (a) the longest Peninsula itineraries (b) whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities; and (c) whose operations and expedition personnel enable Inventory researchers to reach the most heavily visited sites and to collect data at key census times (the peak of egg-laying for nest counts and the peak of chick-crèching for chick counts). Site visits and aerial photodocumentation also have been undertaken in cooperation with HMS Endurance. (Naveen: 1996, 1997a, 1999, 2003)
At each site researchers attempt to identify and census prospective control colonies (i.e. those that are seldom disturbed) and experimental colonies (i.e. those that are frequently visited). The intent is to repeat regular censuses both near and far from landing beaches where visitors access a particular location. This will allow comparisons, over time, between areas where there are more and less human activity.
In the 2003-04 field season, pursuant to a new, 5-year grant award from the U.S. National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar Programs, the Inventory began a focused assessment and monitoring program at Petermann Island (65°10’S, 64°10’), a highly visited Peninsula location that is diverse in species composition and sensitive to potential environmental disruptions from visitors.
Methodology. The Inventory’s methodology (fully described in Naveen: 1996, 1997a, 2003) involves the collection of three categories of data and information:
    • Basic Site Information, which includes descriptions of key physical and topographical characteristics; latitude and longitude; distribution of flora, seal haul-out and wallow locations, and discrete groups of breeding penguins and flying birds;
    • Variable Site Information and Data, which includes weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and speed), biological variables (number of occupied nests, number of chicks per occupied nest, ages of chicks), and the nature and extent of any observed visitor impacts (footprints or paths, cigarette butts, film canisters, and litter); and
    • Maps and Photodocumentation, which portray the major features of each site, particularly the locations of colonies and assemblages of resident fauna and flora.
With respect to key biological variables, data collection follows Standard Methods established by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) (Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004). Data also are collected with reference to other pertinent authorities, in particular, The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea (Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979) and The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins (Woehler, E.J., 1993).
The Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into six subareas: South Orkney Islands, including Laurie, Coronation, and Signy Islands (SO); Elephant Island and nearby islands (EI); Northeast Antarctic Peninsula/northwestern Weddell Sea (NE), from Cape Dubouzet (63˚16’S  64˚00’W) to James Ross Island; South Shetland Islands, including Deception, Low, and Smith Islands (SH); Northwest Antarctic Peninsula (NW), from Cape Dubouzet (63˚16’S  64˚00’W) to north end of the Lemaire Channel; and Southwest Antarctic Peninsula (SW), from the north end of the Lemaire Channel to the northern part of Marguerite Bay (68˚18’S 67˚11’W).
Publications. Biological data and site descriptions collected by the Antarctic Site Inventory have been published and routinely made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications. The most recent of these is the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency (2003), which compiles site descriptions and data relating to the 82 sites visited/censused by the Antarctic Site Inventory through February 2003. 
Part I of the Compendium, pp. 11-46, describes the: design, purpose, and goals of the Inventory; results over nine field seasons, 1994-2003; the project’s methodology and rationale; subareas of the Peninsula in which data are collected; data categories; indicator species; census strategies; control and experimental colonies; logistics; long-term monitoring at key sites; and recent publications stemming from Inventory data collection. Part II of the Compendium, pp. 47-242, contains descriptions of the 82 sites the Inventory has visited/censused, 1994-2003. Part III of the Compendium, pp. 243-346, examines the numbers and distribution of zodiac landings and visitors in the Antarctic Peninsula, 1994-2003. Part IV of the Compendium, pp. 347-374, examines the species diversity of these sites and their sensitivity to potential environmental disruptions. Part V of the Compendium, pp. 375-378 reviews recommendations presented in the 1st edition of the Compendium, followed by a complete bibliography on pp. 379-381.
 Key details from the 2d edition of the Compendium were reported at Antarctic Treaty Meeting Of Experts (ATME) convened in Norway, 22-25 March 2004, which considered issues relating to tourism and nongovernmental activities in Antarctica.1 These details included:

• Tourism activities; number of visitor landing sites. The Compendium focuses on visitor landings by zodiacs — the most frequent form of visitor activity. Over 14 seasons, 1989-2003, 245 Antarctic Peninsula sites have experienced zodiac landings, with a total of 9,443 zodiac landings during this period and an average of 675 landings per season.
• Concentration of visitor sites. For each season in the 14-year period, 1989-2003, the 10 sites experiencing the most number of zodiac landings account for >50% of each season’s zodiac landings and visitors participating in such zodiac landings. The “Top 15” sites account for 65-80% of seasonal zodiac landings and participating visitors, and the “Top 20” sites for 73-93% of seasonal zodiac landings and visitors.
• Presence/absence of fauna/flora. From its inception, the Antarctic Site Inventory has collected data regarding the presence or absence of nesting species of penguins and flying birds, wallows of southern elephant seals, and large patches or beds of lichens and mosses at all sites visited. Inventory researchers also record whether nests, wallows, and large floral patches/beds may be readily/easily accessed and/or trampled.
• Species diversity. With respect to species diversity, the Inventory has identified: five sites with high species diversity — Hannah Point (SH), Penguin Island (SH), the Aitcho Islands (SH), Cuverville Island (NW), and Fort Point (SH); seventeen sites with medium species diversity —  Arctowski Station (SH), Astrolabe Island NW), Baily Head (SH), Brown Bluff (NE), False Head (Island) Point (NE), Half Moon Island (SH), Heroína Island (NE), Jougla Point, Mitchell Cove, Robert Island (SH), Port Lockroy (NW), Point Lookout (EI), Orne Island (NW), Paulet Island (NE), Petermann Island (SW), Pléneau Island (SW), Turret Point (SH), Whaler’s Bay (SH), and Yankee Harbor (SH); and 60 sites with low species diversity.
• Sensitivity to potential environmental disruptions. With respect to sensitivity to potential disruptions, the Inventory has identified: four highly sensitive sites — Hannah Point (SH), Penguin Island (SH), the Aitcho Islands (SH), and Turret Point (SH); twelve moderately sensitive sites — Booth Island, Port Charcot (SW), Brown Bluff (NE), Detaille Island (SW), Fort Point (SH), Gourdin Island (NW), Neko Harbor (NW), Orne Island (NW), Paulet Island (NE), Petermann Island (SW), Pléneau Island (SW), Georges Point, Rongé Island (NW), and Waterboat Point (NW); and 66 low sensitivity sites.
• Restricted visitor space. The Inventory also has identified seventeen sites with restricted visitor space have been identified: Amphibolite Point (SO), Astrolabe Is. (NW), Brown Bluff (NE), Cuverville Island (NW), Fort Point, Greenwich Is. (SH), Gourdin Island (NW), Half Moon Island (SH), Hannah Point (SH), Heroina Island (NE), Hope Bay/Esperanza Station Vicinity (NE), Hydrurga Rocks (NW), Jougla Point, Port Lockroy (NW), Neko Harbor (NW), Paulet Island (NE), Point Lookout, Elephant Island (EI), Point Wild (EI), and Waterboat Point (NW).
• Population trends. With respect to blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps): the Inventory has identified a downward trend in blue-eyed shag populations throughout the Peninsula, irrespective of whether sites experience many or few tourist visits, suggest that shag populations be further monitored. These declines may be indicative of some underlying environmental change affecting shag nesting success. The statistical trends are fully described in the Inventory-based paper, Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36(199): 323-334 (2000). With respect to penguins: the Compendium references a recent paper (Cobley, N. D. and J. R. Shears, 1999. Breeding performance of gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua) at a colony exposed to high levels of human disturbance. Polar Biology 21: 355-360), which examined effects of visitor disturbance on the breeding performance of gentoo penguins by comparing pairs in experimental areas (visited by tourists) and control colonies (not visited by tourists). The researchers found no differences between the two groups in the proportion of birds that laid, in hatching success, the proportion of single-chick broods, and overall breeding success.

References
Abbott, S. and Benninghoff, W.S., 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner, 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Croxall, J. P. and E.D. Kirkwood, 1979. The Distribution of Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, England.
Emslie, S., 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Forrest, S. and Naveen, R., Prevalence of Leucism in Pygoscelid Penguins of the Antarctic Peninsula, Waterbirds 23 (2): 283-285 (2000).
Hofman, R.J. and Jatko, J., (eds.), 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Naveen, R., 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R., 1997a. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., 2003. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites (2d edition): A Report to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, US Environmental Protection Agency.
Naveen, R., 1997b. The Oceanites Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula, Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.
Naveen, R., 1999. Visitor landings in the Antarctic Peninsula, 1989-99. Unpublished report submitted to the US Environmental Protection Agency, November 15, 1999.
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334 (2000).
Naveen, R., Forrest, S. C., Dagit, R. G., Blight, L. K., Trivelpiece, W. Z., and Trivelpiece, S. G., Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132 (2001).
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall), 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.
Woehler, E. J., 1993. The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, Eng­land. 
