						

								



report BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE 
TWENty SEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEEETING
report BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE 
TWENTY-SEVENTH ANTARCTIC CONSULTATIVE PARTY MEETING 
1.	During its Twenty-Second Meeting (27 October to 7 November 2003), the Commission for the Conservation Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) addressed a wide range of issues, most notably:
    • Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area;
    • Implementation of the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp.;
    • Development of a pilot centralized vessel monitoring system (c-VMS);
    • Compilation of a list of vessels engaged in IUU fishing;
    • Further development of an electronic-based catch document system (e-CDS);
    • Further development of an integrated fisheries management framework;
    • Management of the krill fishery in the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean;

    • Development of ecosystem management, including decision making;

    • Elimination of seabird by-catch in longline fisheries, and
    • Co-operation with various international organizations including the FAO, ATCM and CITES.
2.	These issues are relevant to several items on the agendas of ATCM-27 and CEP-VII. 
Fisheries in 2002-2003
4.	Fisheries in the CAMLR Convention Area during 2002-2003 targeted Patagonian and Antarctic Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni), mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) and krill (Euphausia superba).
5.	The reported finfish catch was 21 936 tonnes in 2002/2003, compared to 21 113 tonnes in 2001/2002. Dissostichus spp. (Toothfish), predominantly from longlining, accounted for 16 808 tonnes in 2002/2003, compared to 16 019 tonnes in the previous season.  It is believed that, in addition to reported catches, some 10 070 tonnes of Dissostichus spp were taken as a result of IUU fishing in the Convention Area during 2002/2003, compared with 10 898 tonnes in 2001/2002. 
6.	The reported catch of krill in 2002/2003 was 110 334 tonnes until 3 October 2003, compared to 118 705 tonnes in the previous season.  The annual krill catch has remained relatively stable since 1992/93 in the range 80 000 to 120 000 tonnes. The projected krill catch for the 2003/04 season is 30% higher than the 2002/03 season.
7.	The Commission has adopted conservation measures for all fisheries being conducted in the 2003/04 season, as well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting fisheries information from the Convention Area.  These are published in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force – 2003/2004, available from the CCAMLR Secretariat or on website: http://www.ccamlr.org.
Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) Fishing 
in the Convention Area
8.	IUU fishing for Patagonian Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in the Convention Area has been a major issue for the Commission over the past seven years (1997–2004). At its past three meetings, CCAMLR has attached high priority to eliminating IUU fishing in the Convention Area. It continues to develop and implement an integrated suite of administrative, political and enforcement-related measures aimed at eliminating the problem in the Convention Area and at ensuring that fishing in closely adjacent areas follows international best practice.
9.	CCAMLR annually reviews Members’ implementation of enforcement-related measures and evaluates their performance in combating IUU fishing in the Convention Area
10.	The above initiatives have taken place against a background of vigorous action by individual CCAMLR Contracting Parties to combat IUU fishing in areas under their national jurisdiction.  Key examples of such action include the arrest of the fishing vessel Viarsa by the Australian authorities after a 21-day (3000 n. mile) “hot pursuit” and extensive legal steps against illegal Toothfish operators by the United State and South Africa.  
11.	In addition to the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp. (see paragraphs 16-25 below) and measures to manage specific fisheries directly (e.g. setting catch limits and other conditions affecting fishing), CCAMLR conservation and management measures include:
•	The CCAMLR System of Inspection:
•	Scheme to Promote Compliance by both Contracting and Non-Contracting Party Vessels, including provisions for compiling a list of IUU vessels;
•	Licensing and Inspection Obligations of Contracting Parties with regard to their Flag Vessels Operating in the Convention Area;
•	Procedures for port inspections of vessels carrying Toothfish;
•	Marking of Fishing Vessels and Fishing Gear; 
•	Automated Satellite-Linked Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS); and
•	Various Resolutions – (a) “Banning Driftnet Fishing in the Convention Area”, (b) “Harvesting Species Occurring Both within and Outside the Convention Area”, (c) “Implementation of the CDS by Acceding States and Non-Contracting Parties”, (d) “Use of Ports not Implementing the CDS”, (e) “Application of VMS in the CDS”, (f) “Use of VMS and Other Measures to Verify CDS Catch Data for Areas Outside the Convention Area, Especially FAO Statistical Area 51; (g) “Harvesting of D. eleginoides in Areas Outside Coastal State Jurisdiction Adjacent to the Convention Area in FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57, and (h) “Vessels Flying Flags of Non-Compliance and Ice Strengthening Standards in High Latitude Fisheries”. 
12.	To facilitate exchange of relevant information amongst its Members, CCAMLR maintains a database on vessels known to have fished in contravention of CCAMLR Conservation Measures. It has also initiated a pilot program to set up a centralized, satellite-based vessel monitoring system (c-VMS) in the CCAMLR Secretariat.
13.	CCAMLR has welcomed the entry into force of such international instruments as the 1995 Fish Stock Agreement and FAO Compliance Agreement. It has urged its Members to accept and ratify these Agreements and to promote implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the International Plans of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (IPOA-IUU) and For Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries (IPOA-Seabirds). In particular, effective implementation of the former is essential for combating IUU fishing in the Convention Area.
14.	CCAMLR continues to provide input into the FAO’s work on IUU fishing and encourages all its Members to participate in this work to ensure that a comprehensive and integrated international approach to the problem is developed (see also paragraphs 40 to 42 below).
15.	CCAMLR continues to request international and regional fisheries organisations, especially those with responsibility for waters adjacent to the Convention Area, to participate in the exchange of information on such issues as IUU fishing and other matters relevant to CCAMLR (e.g. seabird by-catch, see paragraph 33 below).
CCAMLR Catch Documentation Scheme for Dissostichus spp.
16.	Implementation of the CDS (which became binding on CCAMLR Members on 7 May 2000) has been one of the most important steps taken by CCAMLR to address IUU fishing in the Convention Area.  The Scheme is designed to track Toothfish landings and trade flows from catches in the Area and, where possible, adjacent waters.  It strives to identify the origin of Toothfish entering the markets of all Parties to the Scheme so as to facilitate determination of whether catches in the Convention Area have been taken in a manner consistent with CCAMLR’s Conservation Measures. 
17.	During 2003, development of the CDS continued, with:
•	Further development of a pilot scheme to develop an electronically-based CDS, and
•	Development of various other enforcement measures (see paragraph 11 above).
18.	Non-Contracting Parties cooperating in the implementation, or partial implementation, of the CDS include the People’s Republic of China, Republic of Mauritius, Republic of Seychelles and the Republic of Singapore. Positive contacts continue with a number of other Non-Contracting Parties, most of which participate in Toothfish trade. 
19.	By January 2004, about 8600 Dissostichus Catch Documents (DCDs) and 14 000 Export and Re-Export documents have been issued by CDS Flag States.  Copies of these are verified whenever a shipment of Toothfish is traded to allow all Contracting and CDS Parties (fishing or not fishing for Toothfish) to track such trade across their borders. 
20.	CDS information is processed and analyzed to assess the volume and location of Toothfish trade. It also gives some indication of fish taken legally and provides a barrier to fish taken illegally entering the marketplace.
21.	The CCAMLR Secretariat has developed as system to process, store and access CDS information. This system takes into account the Scheme’s immediate objectives as well as its future potential for integration into a suite of related compliance and enforcement measures. The relevant information is available in close to real-time on the CCAMLR Website so allowing CDS participants to assess the veracity of reported Toothfish landings. On-going development of the e-CDS system clearly illustrates CCAMLR’s commitment to improving the CDS’ effective implementation overall.
22.	Application of the CDS has prevented a number of Toothfish landings and transshipments in the absence of valid DCDs and has identified fraudulent Documents.  There is evidence to indicate that introduction of the CDS has made trading in illegally-caught fish less profitable since such higher prices are generally paid for fish accompanied by valid DCDs. 
23.	CCAMLR promotes the on-going use of the CDS and provides information on its implementation to various intergovernmental and non-governmental fisheries, environmental and scientific organizations. These include: FAO, IOC, IWC, SCAR, SCOR, NAFO, ICCAT, FFA, CCSBT, SPC, I-ATTC, WTO, ASOC, IUCN and UNEP.
24.	Having noted the decisions and outcome of the Eighth Session of the COFI Sub-Committee on Fish Trade held in Bremen in February 2002, CCAMLR has fully endorsed the development of uniform catch documentation and reporting measures that make use of appropriate technologies (as demonstrated by CCAMLR’s development of the e-CDS noted in paragraph 21 above). CCAMLR continues to improve co-operation with the WTO and World Customs Organization (WCO), particularly the latter, in developing and implementing harmonized customs code for Toothfish products.  
25.	Finally, attention is again drawn to various resolutions identified in paragraph 11 which strive to improve the CDS’s broader application. Attention is also drawn to CCAMLR’s on-going efforts to improve co-operation with CITES in respect of broadening the CDS’ implementation.
Development of an Integrated Fisheries 
Management Framework
26.	CCAMLR continues to pursue the development of an integrated fisheries management framework. Fishery Plans have been produced for all key fisheries in the Convention Area, particularly the krill, Toothfish and icefish fisheries. 
Ecosystem Management and Decision Making
27.		The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) collects long-term data from various Antarctic marine ecosystem components as well as the environment. Such data are used in analyses to provide annual assessments of ecosystem status. Advice on long-term ecosystem trends and changes can then be incorporated into management advice.
28.	The CCAMLR scientific community continues to explore ways in which ecosystem advice (such as described in paragraph 27 above) can be formally incorporated into management decisions. CEMP was reviewed at a workshop in 2003 and efforts to study functional relationships between krill and its dominant predators continue. The latter will be the topic of scientific workshop in mid-2004 while a workshop in February 2004 continued examining the application of small-scale management units as a means to approach and study relationships between krill, krill predators and the fishery.
Seabird By-catch in Longline and Trawl Fisheries
29.	Over the past few years CCAMLR has taken a leading role in the creation and implementation of measures to reduce seabird mortality during longline fishing. Many of CCAMLR’s measures, particularly the provisions of Conservation Measure 25-03 (first adopted in 1992 as Conservation Measure 29), have been incorporated into the FAO International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries (IPOA-Seabirds) adopted by COFI. A number of CCAMLR Members have also developed and implemented national plans of action to address the seabird by catch issue.
30.	Compliance with the provisions of CCAMLR Conservation Measure 25-02 has improved to such an extent that seabird by-catch levels in regulated fisheries in the Convention Area are now extremely low. However, there is still considerable concern about the levels of such by-catch attributable to the IUU fishery. Furthermore, many of the important species breeding in the Convention Area (particularly albatrosses and petrels) remain affected by high levels of mortality associated with longline fishing on a global basis. To this extent, CCAMLR has supported, and has urged its Members to support, the entry into force of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP). 
31.	CCAMLR’s efforts to reduce seabird by-catch continue to require, or strive for:
    • Compulsory placement of international and scientific observes on board all vessels licensed to fish in the Convention Area;
    • Full compliance with mitigation measures set out in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 25-02, especially suitable line weighting, and
    • Continuing development of underwater longline setting devices. 
32.	CCAMLR also monitors incidental by-catch of seabirds and marine mammals in trawl fisheries for krill and finfish. Conservation Measure 25-03 has been substantially revised to include regulations on offal disposal, cleaning of nets before shooting and minimizing the time that the net is lying on the surface. This Measure also encourages Members to develop gear configurations to minimise the chance of birds encountering the part of the net to which they are most vulnerable.
33.	CCAMLR exchanges information with various international fisheries and conservation organizations on the prevention of seabird incidental mortality during fishing operations, the state of Antarctic seabird populations, incidental catches of seabirds in these fisheries, CCAMLR experience with mitigating techniques and the formulation of associated conservation action. In this respect emphasis is being given to high seas areas adjacent to the Convention Area and to species falling within CCAMLR’s management remit. In the latter regard, CCAMLR has approached a number of other RFO’s (particularly those managing tuna, such as ICCAT, IOTC and CCSBT) in an effort to secure more global information on incidental by-catch of seabird species breeding in the Convention Area. It should be noted that many of these organizations do not mandate the collection of such data.
Co-Operation with Non-CCAMLR Contracting Parties (NCPs)
34.	In applying the CDS, CCAMLR has done much to encourage, and liaise with, a number of NCPs considered to have an interest in CCAMLR’s work or in the resources that it manages. Such encouragement has included inviting NCPs to attend and participate in CCAMLR meetings under Rule 30(c) of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure.
35.	The above does not only promote transparency in CCAMLR’s activities, but has also enabled the Commission’s membership and work to expand. A clear example of the former was evidenced by Namibia becoming the 24th Commission Member in 2001.
36.	Co-operation with NCPs assists CCAMLR to manage better the resources for which it is responsible. Not only is awareness of CCAMLR Conservation Measures enhanced, the organization’s status as a regional management body of repute is promoted in keeping with the more global responsibilities of a number of recent environmental/fisheries agreements (most notably the United Nations Fish Stock Agreement which entered into force in December 2001).
37.	CCAMLR is considering ways that Developing States can be encouraged to participate in is work and be invited to the Commission’s meetings. It has noted the concerns of its Standing Committee on Administration and Finance on the financial problems encountered by Developing States invited to Commission meetings. The Commission has agreed that access to special-purpose trust funds in the UN system should be considered as a way to facilitate the attendance of such States at its meetings.
CCAMLR Rules of Data Access
38.	CCAMLR has revised its rules governing access to, and use of, data held in its Database. Copies of the new rules are available from the CCAMLR Secretariat (email: ccamlr@ccamlr.org) or on the CCAMLR Website (http://www.ccamlr.org).
CCAMLR Educational Package
39.	CCAMLR has embarked on the development of a web-based educational package.  
Co-Operation with Other International Organizations
40.	FAO is one of several international organizations explicitly referred to in Article XXIII of the Convention, as an organization with which CCAMLR should cooperate.  Both the CCAMLR Commission and Scientific Committee continue to enjoy a productive cooperative working relationship with FAO in general and with several FAO-sponsored activities such as the work of the Coordinating Working Party on Fisheries Statistics (CWP), the Sub-Committee on Fish Trade and the Meeting of the Regional Fisheries Bodies, in particular.
41.	As highlighted last year, CCAMLR is continuing development of an institutional plan of action to address IUU fishing (CPOA-IUU) consistent with that produced by FAO and outlined in FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries No. 9.
42.		Along with FAO and a number of other sponsors, CCAMLR co-sponsored the Conference on the Management and Governance of Deep-Sea Fisheries held in Queenstown, New Zealand in December 2003.
Co-Operation with the ATCM
43.	CCAMLR has expressed satisfaction in the growing co-operation between CCAMLR, and the ATCM/CEP	
44.	The CCAMLR Secretariat continues to provide advice on development of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in Buenos Aires. Subject to Paragraph 8 of ATCM-XXVI Decision 2, voluntary contributions to be used in the setting up of the Treaty Secretariat are to be paid to a temporary, interest-bearing account, held by the CCAMLR Secretariat. This account was established in November 2003. It will remain open until the monies are transferred to the Treaty Secretariat under the conditions of Decision 2 above. 
45.	CCAMLR has expressed interest in the CEP’s current debate on Antarctic Protected Species.
46.	It has also noted the participation of the CCAMLR Scientific Committee Chair in the CEP Intersessional Contact Group on the State of the Antarctic Environment Report.
47.	CCAMLR-XXII adopted a resolution (Resolution 20/XXII) on ice-strengthening standards in high-latitude fisheries. This implies a minimum acceptable safety standard of ICE-IC (as defined in the Det Norske Veritas [DNV] Rules for Classification of Ships or an equivalent standard of certification as defined by a recognized classification authority) should be required for vessels licensed by CCAMLR Members to fish in the Convention Area.
48	CCAMLR has adopted terms of reference for an Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas to advice its Scientific Committee. The Subgroup’s tasks include developing advice on draft ASPA and ASMA management plans that include marine elements and which have been forwarded to CCAMLR by the ATCM following the agreed procedures. It will also consider marine protected areas that might be established under Article IX.2.(g) of the CAMLR Convention. 
49.	Finally, it should be noted that the Management Plan for ASPA No. 145 (Deception Island) has been referred by CCAMLR to its Subgroup on Protected Areas for review at this year’s meeting of the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management’s in July 2004. Consequently, CCAMLR’s advice on this particular Management Plan is not available at ATCM-XXVII 


