XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 071
Agenda Item: 4 d
AUSTRALIA
Original: English

 




Australia’s Antarctic quarantine practices



























Australia’s Antarctic quarantine practices

Introduction

1.	Australia recognises that the introduction of alien species to Antarctica by human agency is an increasingly significant environmental risk associated with the conduct of Antarctic operations. The approach taken to the quarantine management of the Australian Antarctic Program (AAP) activities reflects Australia’s commitment to Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

2.	The key protection strategies adopted are outlined in this paper and reflect:

    • the desirability of delivering a high level of biosecurity while maintaining operational efficiency in the logistical support of Antarctic science programs;
    • the desirability of focussing on the application of measures prior to departure for Antarctica;
    • the need to adopt a precautionary approach; and
    • the importance of expeditioner participation in, and understanding of, quarantine management initiatives.

Inspection measures

3.	Inspections of AAP vessels leaving Hobart are conducted by Tasmania’s (State government) quarantine body, Quarantine Tasmania, under a Memorandum of Understanding with the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD). The inspections include an examination of the vessels’ accommodation, storerooms, galley, waste management areas, helicopters, workboats, cargo holds and machinery spaces for conditions of quarantine concern. Specific checks are undertaken for indicators of the presence of rats, a particular concern with respect to Australia’s subantarctic islands. Although ‘clean ship status’ is ascertained on a voyage-by-voyage rather than seasonal basis, rat baits are placed on all AAD-chartered vessels.

4.	Program cargo is consolidated and packed in a dedicated ship-side facility that is accredited to ‘Class One Sea and Air Freight Depot’ standard by Australia’s national quarantine authority, the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS). The cargo facility is regularly audited against prescribed security, hygiene, isolation, staff quarantine training, and administration standards. 

5.	Cargo containers and their contents are also routinely inspected. Gas bottles, vehicles, machinery, and other items recognised to be particularly prone to contamination, are brushed, steam-cleaned and/or hot washed before loading to dislodge any encrusted soil and organic matter including hitch-hiking invertebrates. In view of the environmental and occupational health and safety issues associated with the use of fumigants and chemical sprays, and the practicalities of protecting large volumes of cargo in the period between treatment and shipment, only the highest risk items are treated using these methods.

6.	Fresh fruit and vegetables are inspected in accordance with internationally recognised phytosanitary protocols – 600 units or a 2 per cent sample for each consignment. The inspections address quality and contamination issues, requiring that fruit and vegetables are intact, clean, and free from abnormal external moisture, foreign smell or taste, disease, insect infestation, soil and other foreign matter.
7.	Dressed poultry products are inspected for evidence of disease, in particular, Newcastle’s disease, avian tuberculosis, yeast infection, avian encephalomyelitis and salmonella infection under existing arrangements for the inspection of commercial Australian poultry. Poultry meat and eggs are restricted to station use in recognition of the difficulties in the application of complicated food handling protocols in remote field conditions.

8.	Expeditioners’ hand/cabin luggage is subject to inspection by Quarantine Officers and/or passive quarantine detection dogs that are trained to react to a wide range of organic scents. The dogs also screen mail shipped to the stations. Their presence at ship departures readily attracts the attention of the public and therefore plays an important role in heightening quarantine awareness. 

9.	Compulsory pre-disembarkation procedures include closely monitored gear cleaning sessions that are repeated at each landing. Seams, pockets, tripods, back-packs, and tool boxes are among areas or items that are targeted.

Administrative measures

10.	The potential for Antarctic operations to introduce alien species and translocate endemic species is among the issues examined in the environmental impact assessment (EIA) process. The conduct of hydroponics, an activity identified as a potentially significant refuge for unintentional introductions, has been assessed at the Initial Environmental Evaluation level. Protection measures in place include the supply of only sterilised seeds and growing media, the incineration of waste plant matter and growing media, and monitoring for invertebrates using a range of trapping methods.

11.	Expeditioners are briefed on quarantine issues at nominated stages in their pre-departure preparations and, along with the ship crews, receive additional training during their voyage to Antarctica. Subject matter covered includes the means by which plant material, alien species and disease agents may be inadvertently introduced; measures necessary to prevent transfers between aggregations of wildlife; waste management; and procedures for dealing with any cargo infestations.

12.	The AAD sources a wide variety of goods and services from the commercial sector. Guidelines for contractors and purchasing officers specify environmental protection considerations and processes supporting the AAD’s environmental management policy. Recent AAD staff and suppliers’ innovations that have helped minimise introductions include changes to the design of cage pallets such that they are less susceptible to contamination and are easier to clean, the redesign of clothing to avoid the use of seed-attracting fastenings, such as Velcro, and the deployment of fumigating ozone units in containers of produce being shipped to Antarctica. 

On-site management activities

13.	Station leaders, field leaders and voyage leaders are responsible for the on-site management of environmental issues. They are also appointed Inspectors under Australian legislation enacting the Protocol, namely the Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act (1980). 

14.	Feeding wildlife is strictly prohibited. Food waste is stored indoors prior to its high temperature incineration. Liquid drained from thawing poultry products is boiled for twenty minutes before its entry into station sewerage systems. The by-products of these systems are returned to Australia for further treatment and disposal. 

15.	Expeditioners are required to report quarantine issues – discoveries of introduced species, soil contamination of equipment, supplier non-compliance with environmental requirements – via AAD’s incident reporting scheme. 

16.	An unusual mortality event response plan provides instructions to expeditioners on actions to be undertaken if sick or dead animals are discovered in unusually high numbers or with signs that suggest disease. The plan includes procedures to reduce the likelihood of station personnel spreading the infectious agent if disease is involved, information on personal safety precautions, and debriefing procedures. An associated response kit contains equipment necessary to record an event, undertake post-mortem examinations and prepare samples for transport and subsequent analysis.

Summary

17.	Australia’s Antarctic quarantine protection practices are reviewed regularly as new threats and pathways for introductions are identified, as quarantine management technologies are advanced, as risks analyses are completed, and as the review of incident reports suggest that existing procedures require improvement. While no amount of activity will provide absolute protection against introductions, the measures described in this paper are expected to individually and cumulatively reduce the environmental risks that alien species pose. A vigilant approach to pre-voyage quarantine management measures provides a major line of defence. Inspection and education strategies are primary mitigation tools.

18.	For further information on Australia’s Antarctic quarantine management activities please contact: Ms Sandra Potter, Environmental Policy Officer at the Australian Antarctic Division, Channel Highway, Kingston Tasmania 7050, Australia, or by email: sandra.potter@aad.gov.au.


