XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 013
Agenda Item: CEP   4a
COMNAP
Original: English









ENVIRONMENTAL TRAINING IN NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS: A WORKSHOP BETWEEN THE COMNAP NETWORKS AEON AND TRAINET




























Information Paper on
Environmental training in national Antarctic programs:  a workshop between the COMNAP networks AEON and TRAINET





INTRODUCTION

    1. In connection with its 2003 annual meeting, COMNAP held a workshop on Environmental Education and Training in National Antarctic Programs.  The workshop was held jointly by two of COMNAP networks: the Antarctic Environmental Officers’ Network (AEON) and the Training Officers’ Network (TRAINET).  The workshop was productive and successful, and a good example of positive, valuable interaction between different networks or working groups.  The workshop’s main outcomes were a Voluntary Checklist for Environmental Training as well as a series of recommendations and considerations, mainly to further facilitate information exchange and development of environmental training, e.g. through various web-related services.  

BACKGROUND

    2. COMNAP in its continuing discussions on environmental issues recognised that education and training were an essential part of COMNAP’s efforts to improve on environmental protection.  Since environmental awareness should be integral to all national program activities, environmental training should be a key component of the induction training provided to programme participants.  

    3. This issue is mostly addressed by two active COMNAP networks: the Antarctic Environmental Officers' Network (AEON) and the Training Officers' Network (TRAINET).  COMNAP networks regroup national programme staff specialists in particular fields. These networks have two functions: (1) to exchange information in these fields with the view to continuously further members’ knowledge and expertise and (2) to undertake specific tasks as required by COMNAP.  

    4. The original idea of having a workshop on the theme Environmental Education and Training came from a discussion between members of the Antarctic Environmental Officers' Network (AEON). Following the Training Officers' Network's (TRAINET) workshop on overall training and education programs of the national operators, it followed very naturally that the two networks should benefit from a joint workshop. The idea was approved and actively supported by COMNAP and the workshop was held in connection with the 2003 annual COMNAP meeting in Brest, France.  


WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES

    5. The objectives for the workshop were: 
    • To obtain an overview of the status of environmental training programs;
    • Exchange ideas and experiences with regard to implementing environmental training and education in national Antarctic programs;
    • Consider whether there is a need for a common framework for environmental training;
    • Consider mechanisms for exchange of information on current and new training initiatives;
    • Inspiring / encouraging operators who are still in the beginning of developing training and educational material;
    • Consider how best to incorporate environmental issues into the overall training program of a national program.


PARTICIPATION

    6. Twenty-nine participants from both AEON and TRAINET networks and representing the national programmes from 18 member countries took part in the one-and-a-half-day workshop with additional observers attending on a casual basis.  A large proportion of the participants gave presentations, from general presentations on topics relevant to environmental education and training to specific presentations on aspects of their national programmes’ environmental education and training.  This was complemented by a series of discussions in small groups then in plenary.  

    7. The workshop participants noted that to meet in a forum like this workshop is a very important and useful way of exchanging information and ideas. The participants considered the workshop both productive and successful.  


WORKSHOP OUTCOMES

    8. The main outcome of the workshop was a Voluntary Checklist for Environmental Training.  Participants reviewed a voluntary training checklist as previously developed by TRAINET as the basis for considering environmental training requirements.  They developed a framework for a checklist on environmental training through a series of discussions in small groups and in plenary.  A checklist was produced, that can be used as a guide by national programmes in developing, reviewing or assessing their environmental training requirements and procedures.  


    9. It was noted that not all personnel need to be trained with respect to all elements identified in the checklist, and that in defining a training program, national programs should give careful attention to who needs what level of training with regards to the various environmental topics.  
    10. The Voluntary Checklist for Environmental Training is provided as a table as follows:  

Topic
Sub-topics
1. Legal Framework
    a. Antarctic Treaty 
    b. Environmental Protocol
    c. National legislation
    d. Permitting

2. EIA 
  (Annex I)
    a. Requirement
    b. Level (PA, IEE, CEE)

3. Flora & Fauna
  (Annex II)
        a. Disturbance to wildlife (code of conduct)
        b. Alien introductions
- Quarantine
-  Code of Conduct
-  Microorganisms

4. Waste Management
  (Annex III)
    a. Segregation and recycling
    b. Packaging and labelling
    c. Equipment/tools
    d. Handling (hazardous/non-hazardous)
    e. Minimization
    f. Field waste
    g. Prohibited items

5. Prevention of Marine Pollution
  (Annex (IV)
    a. Risk of oil and chemical spills
    b. Spill contingency plans
    c. Chemical spill response
    d. Marine waste disposal

6. Protected Areas
  (Annex V)
    a. Protected areas in vicinity
    b. Management Plans and permits
    c. Visit Reports

7. Energy Management
    a. Oil spill prevention and clean up
- terrestrial
    b. Fuel management procedures
- terrestrial
- marine
- vehicle
    c. Energy management
- Reduced energy consumption and production
- Designs

8. Environmental Incidents
    a. Understanding and evaluating environmental risk related to planned activities
    b. Reporting system 
- EIRS
- national systems



    11. In addition to the checklist, the workshop issued a series of recommendations and considerations, mainly to further facilitate information exchange and development of environmental training tools, e.g. through various web-related services.  Recommendations and considerations covered a range of aspects including but not limited to: 
    • compiling a list of training material from the various national programmes and providing or facilitating access to the material;  
    • providing up-to-date information on national training programs and on courses that are or could be open to international collaboration;  
    • developing common basic environmental training material and tools that could be used in all national programmes;  and
    • collating and publishing information on best practice and innovative new projects on issues related to terrestrial and marine waste management, pollution and energy management.  



CONCLUSIONS


    12. The workshop, held jointly by two of COMNAP’s active networks was considered productive and successful.  It not only produced practical, constructive outcomes but also provided a good example of positive, valuable interaction between different networks or working groups.  

    13. COMNAP discussed the conclusions of the workshop at its 2003 annual meeting in Brest and endorsed them unanimously. 


