XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 052
Agenda Item: 5 a
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 





RUSSIAN VOLUME OF LEGAL ACTS AND COMMENTS ON THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM










In recent years, a range of specialists and public representatives showing interest in the Antarctic regions has significantly expanded. This is a result of significant changes in the geopolitical situation on our planet in the late 20th century, new data of fundamental and applied scientific studies, discovery of natural processes leading to global climate changes and increased attention to the nature protection problems.
For a long time after the Antarctic Treaty has come into force, the process of its development and improvement remained to be a responsibility of international law specialists and scientists specializing in the organization of activity of the National Antarctic Programs. However, blocking the introduction into force of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities leading to the development and endorsement of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, discovery of the “ozone hole” effect and records of positive tendencies in the temperature regime of the atmosphere over vast territories of Antarctica resulted in the phenomenon of increased interest in all diverse Antarctic problems. Such processes have become typical not only of the countries-participants to the Antarctic Treaty, but also of the other members of the international community. It is obvious that a qualified discussion of the majority of these issues is impossible without the comprehensive information on legal aspects determining the character of practical activity of the countries and international relations between them in the given region of the globe. Russia is not an exception of this rule.
In this connection, the staff of the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of the Federal Service of Russia for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring has prepared a reference handbook “Antarctic Treaty System, Legal Acts and Comments” in the framework of the project of the subprogram “Study and Research of the Antarctic” of the Federal Program “World Ocean”, which was published in Russian by the Gidrometeoizdat Publishing House in St. Petersburg in 2002. 
The Book sets forth chronologically the formation of the Antarctic Treaty System and presents statistical data on the introduction into force of the main legal acts and also data on the membership of the countries-participants to the Treaty in the international organizations of the System and comments on the mechanism of its action. The volume includes a list of modern Antarctic stations and their national belonging.
Brief historical background information provides understanding of the main stages of the discovery of Antarctica, occurrence of the territorial claims for much of the mainland and the negotiation processes following it resulting in the signature of the Antarctic Treaty. In particular, a significant role of scientists in establishing the international regime of Antarctic management is noted. A successful implementation of the largest scientific project in the Southern Polar area -holding of the International Geophysical Year (IGY), which lasted from July 1, 1957 to December 31, 1958, was a turning point in the dispute about the Antarctic. In this project, the Antarctic was given a role of the main object of studies. The International Geophysical Year convincingly demonstrated to the international community a positive role of international cooperation in this region.
A special section is devoted to comments on the structure and principally important clauses of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. This document adopted in 1991 in Madrid by all countries-participants to the Antarctic Treaty has become in fact an ecological part of the Treaty. Brief explanations of the Protocol structure, which envisages its possible supplementing with Annexes if necessary adopted in compliance with the procedures established by the Treaty, are given. At present, the Protocol has five Annexes, defined as its integral parts. On many issues the clauses of these Annexes replaced numerous Recommendations adopted earlier by the Consultative Meetings.
The volume includes clauses on the mechanism of functioning of the Antarctic Treaty System. The forms and procedures of activity of the main management body of the Antarctic Treaty System – Consultative Meeting are described. In particular, the volume contains the basic information on the procedure of determining the status of the Consultative Party of the Treaty. Brief evidence on two leading public organizations is also given. These are the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). It is stressed that exactly these two organizations are the diving force in many respects of the entire intricate mechanism of the Antarctic Treaty. Most initiatives constantly coming from them are formed to new documents at the Consultative Meetings providing in the end a multiyear viability of the Treaty itself. The volume contains data on the location and status of five categories of the protected regions of the Antarctic: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Historical Sites and Memorials (HSM), Specially Reserved Areas (SRA) and Multiple-Use Planning Areas (MPA).
The Annexes contain the authentic texts of the: Antarctic Treaty, Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities that has not come into force, Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Rules of procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), Consultative Status of the Party to the Antarctic Treaty, Rules of Procedure for Antarctic Treaty  Consultative Meetings, Consecutive List of Recommendations (Measures) and Resolutions adopted by the Consultative Meetings, List (texts) of Recommendations, Resolutions and Measures of the Consultative Meetings under the Antarctic Treaty 1961-2001, Procedure for consideration and issuance of permits for the activity of Russian physical and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
The book contains 400 pages of the text, 9 color figures and 6 tables.
The volume is intended as a guiding handbook for Russian language natural persons and legal entities that need information on the Antarctic Treaty System from the original sources.   

