XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 044
Agenda Item: 4 g
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Original: English

 





ON THE NEED OF ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING 
OF ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS






Treaty system. Their role significantly increased after the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) has come into force, when this Earth’s region was officially defined as “a natural reserve, devoted to piece and science”. Annex V of the Protocol was specifically dedicated to the issues of the Antarctic Specially Protected and Managed Areas (Annex V Area Protection and Management). This Annex simplified significantly the earlier existing classification of the Antarctic protected areas by subdividing them into the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (АSРA) and the Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA). The Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) are completely included to the ASPA category. The Historic Sites and Monuments of the Antarctic can be referred both to the first and second group of the areas or simply included to the List of such places. 
Significant organization work on the new classification of the Antarctic Protected Areas was carried out by specialists of Great Britain. They have prepared an electronic archive of the protected areas on a compact-disc (CD “Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive. Version 1.0 (2003)”). The new list includes 59 АSPA, 76 Historic Sites and Monuments and 1 ASMA. In recent years, an increasingly greater time and attention is given to discussion of applications for the new ASPA or revision of the earlier prepared management plans at the meetings of SEP.
In compliance with Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol,
	
“Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic
environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: 

(a)	areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
	comparisons may be possible with localities that have been
	affected by human activities; 

(b)	representative examples of major terrestrial, including
	glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;

(c)	areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
	including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;

(d)	the type locality or only known habitat of any species;

(e)	areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
	research; 

(f)	examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
	geomorphological features;

(g)	areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;

(h)	sites or monuments of recognized historic value…” 
	


Thus, structural components of both living and non-living nature are under the special protection conditions. Sections of the ASPA management plans are devoted to the characteristics of their state. It is obvious that different natural complexes can be exposed to changes not only under the impact of man activity but also due to different natural processes and phenomena. The living nature objects respond to a greater extent to these factors. The possible changes of natural complexes even in the ASPA cannot be protected from the influence of natural processes and phenomena of greater or catastrophic scales. Cases are known of a mass death of Antarctic seals and birds, new migration pathways of living organisms unaccountable from the scientific viewpoint, etc. It is possible that changes of the natural conditions in the Antarctic specially protected areas can be influenced by the processes occurring beyond their boundaries. Under the impact of atmospheric or oceanic transports, the natural phenomena occurring in tens or hundreds of kilometers from the ASPA can produce a significant influence on the spatially restricted ASPA sites, etc. Such natural phenomena may include manifestation of volcanism, earthquakes, tsunami and ice storms, genesis and transformation of icebergs and ice shores, different aspects of solar-terrestrial relationships, etc. Thus it is very difficult to determine the true cause of disturbances of a delicate balance of the Antarctic ecosystems, as well as of the non-living nature objects, i.e., not always such changes can be referred to an adverse influence of the anthropogenic factor.
In our opinion, the way out can be in arranging monitoring of the state of those natural values that served as a basis for designating some or other Antarctic area as ASPA. This monitoring should be conducted by sparing methods for the nature compartments the recommendations on which could be prepared by SCAR. The responsibility for conducting such monitoring should rest with the Party that submitted an application for the ASPA. The results of monitoring must serve as a basis for revision of the management plans of the areas. According to the procedure of area designation (Article 6 Annex V of the Protocol), “a review of a management plan shall be initiated at least every five years”. By the present time, only one example is known when the Party to the Antarctic Treaty requested the Consultative Meeting to exclude from the ASPA List the earlier proposed area as this Party could not organize a visit to this area for quite a long time and correspondingly determine the state of the natural objects for which sake the given area has received the corresponding status. In our opinion, this example illustrates well the responsibility of the Treaty Party that submits an application for the ASPA. The real environmental protection of the Antarctic is achieved not only by the number of places with the ASPA status, but also by the responsibility for the given area before the international community, and also by the need of undertaking additional activity for providing monitoring of the environmental state in such areas. 
