XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 040
Agenda Item: CEP
INDIA
Original: English

 







REVIEW OF THE HISTORIC SITE AND MONUMENT
HSM- 44 (A PLAQUE ERECTED AT “DAKSHIN GANGOTRI” STATION)


º
Review of The of Historic Site and Monument

Historic site and monument Number
HSM 44 (a plaque erected at “Dakshin Gangotri” Station)

Reviewed by
Director 
National Center for Antarctic and Ocean Research, Head Land Sada, 
Vasco da Gama, Goa – 403 804
India 

Does the site still exist, either in whole? or in part
Yes, the site still exists, though the original plaque erected has been buried under snow

Does the site continue to meet the guideline for Historic Sites and Monuments set out in Resolution 8 (1995)
Yes, the foundation of Indian Polar Research Programme in Antarctica was laid during the third Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica in 1983-84 by establishing a permanent base “Dakshin Gangotri” on the shelf of the Princes Astrid Coast, Central Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Indian scientists started carrying out polar research round the year after establishment of this permanent station.
Presently the “Dakshin Gangotri” station is buried under 3-4 m of ice cover. Since the establishment of this permanent station marks the advent of Indian foray in Antarctic Research, this site has a special significance and place of honor in Indian History

Does the description of the site require amending or updating? 
Amended description is given in annexure 1. Map (1) and photographs 1,2,3 and 4 enclosed

Are boundaries required to define the site
Yes, area between Latitudes 70o03’30” S to 70o06’00” S and Longitude 11o58’30” E to 12o06’00” E (map-2 enclosed)

Does the site require special protection or management and if so, should it be designate as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area?
No, the site is recommended as Historical Site only.




In light of this review, should the site be delisted?
Not recommended for delisting from HSM 44


Should other parties be included in, or assume responsibility for, the management of this Historic Site or Monuments?
Not required. Members of Indian Expedition to Antarctica visit the adjoining area (supply base) regularly. They look after the site for its upkeep and maintenance.

Annexure 1

Description of the area
Geographic Location 
The first Indian permanent station in Antarctica,  “Dakshin Gangotri” which is totally buried under snow, is located on ice-shelf on Princess Astrid Coast (70O 05’ 37”S Latitude to 12O00’00” Longitude).  This station was commissioned in 1883-84 and provided excellent contemporary state of the art facilities and well-equipped laboratories to carry out scientific research.  The site is located about 10 km from the shelf edge towards the Schirmacher Oasis.
The Dakshin Gangotri Station was decommissioned in 1989-90 due to excessive snow cover. The adjoining area at present is being used as Supply Base.  The permanent base was shifted to “Maitri” in Schirmacher Oasis.  The scientific activities in the adjoining area are still being continued by Indian Scientists. 
Morphological Features
The shelf shows a gently rolling topography with an average elevation of 20 m above msl.  The shelf thickness is least near the sea and increases towards inland.  This portion of the shelf is characterized by numerous melt-water channels usually running in a NE-SW direction and frequently occurring surface ponds and lakes, south of the present site, especially near the Schirmacher Oasis. The shelf shows highs or domes where it rises over basement highs and usually slopes towards the sea-ice interface.  The coastline is characterized by several longitudinal tension cracks, which often extends 1-2 km inside the shelf thus forming several bays with a thin cover (3-5m) of fast ice.  The surface of the shelf region exhibits various glaciological features like sastrugis, grooves, drift deposition etc.  indicating the strong influence of wind erosion.  
Subsurface Features
The information pertaining to subsurface as interpreted from seismic investigations revealed 1 m thick (velocity 1350 m/sec) top porous ice layer followed by 19 m (velocity varying form 3100 to 3600 m/sec) unconsolidated ice layer.  The compact ice layer underneath displaying velocity form 3600 to 4350 m/sec accounted for 395 m depth.  The base is marked by 285 m thick glacial sediment, which overlies the basement.
The average thickness of the ice shelf in the area is around 400 m.  However, the site of the Dakshin Gangotri station is virtually floating over a 1850 m deep submarine valley with depth to top of the basement varying from 700 m to 800m .
Scientific Experiments 
Geological Survey of India
    • Sustained scientific studies on surface morphology of the shelf and ablation intensity and pattern are being carried by the Geological Survey of India near the DG station area.  These studies indicate that this portion of the shelf is comparatively stable (from major calving) and has an annual accumulation rate of about 50 cm.  Due to this deposition of snowdrift and natural sinking, the DG station gradually got submerged below the surface.
India Meteorological Department 
    • Six hourly met data including wind speed,  wind direction, wet and dry temperature used to be collected uninterruptedly  form 1983-84 to 1989-90 by India  Meteorological Department. 
    • Radiosonde data were collected during the year 1884 to 1986.
    • Hourly Global Solar Radiation data collected during the year 1984 to 1986 Indian Institute of Geomagnetism.
Indian Institute of Geomagnetism 
Scientific experiments on geomagnetic field and magnetic pulsation were conducted here for years till the station was lost to ever increasing snow cover.  Indian Institute of Geomagnetism is conducting following experiments at Dakshin Gangotri:
    • A Proton Procession Magnetometer was operated most of the time to record the variation in total magnetic field (F)
    • A  fluxgate Magnetometer was operated to record variations in three orthogonal components X, Y and Z
    • A 30 MHz Riometer was operated for recorded the cosmic radio noise absorption.
    • Dakshin Gangotri was one of the station for triangulation experiment operated by any country in Antarctica.  The experiment was operated with three fluxgate Magnetometers operating at the vertices of a triangular with sides 100-200 km.  The experiments were aimed at calculating the velocity of small scale mobile auroral current systems.  Such chain of experiments are operated regularly in Alaska and northern hemisphere.
    • The Fluxgate Magnetometer at DG has been replaced by Digital Fluxgate Magnetometer in the year 2003-2004.  The new instrument  has  a better sensitivity (0.1 nT) and range.  The experiment is aimed at, studying the storm- substorm relationship.
Snow & Avalanche Study Establishment
Energy budget model is prepared based on albedo and glacio-meteorological parameters of different snow-ice media at Dakshin Gangotri in Antarctica. Snow albedo and energy exchange studies is carried out on Antarctic Ice Shelf of Dakshin Gangotri and following experiments conducted:
    • Variation in different snow-met parameters 
    • Albedo variations with melt water concentration
    • Albedo variation with solar elevation angle
    • Albedo variation with cloud amount
    • Albedo decay wih age of snowpack
    • Energy balance studies over ice shelf 






























