									
XXVII ATCM
Information Paper
IP 031
Agenda Item: 12
FINLAND
Original: English

 





REPORT OF THE 2004 FINNISH ANTARCTIC INSPECTION UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND ARTICLE 14 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY








CEP/ATCM
									Information paper IP-
									Agenda Item  /12
									Finland

									original: English





Report of the 2004 Finnish Antarctic inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

Introduction

The Finnish government undertook an inspection in Queen Maud Land, Antarctica, during the period January 27-February 1, 2004. This was the first such inspection made by the Finnish government. The inspection was conducted in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The inspection team consisted of four Finnish nationals: Ms Satu Mattila, Director, Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Dr Pentti Mälkki, Director General, Finnish Institute of Marine Research, Ms Riitta Mansukoski, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Trade and Industry and Mr Markus Tarasti, Senior Advisor, Ministry of the Environment. The names of the team were communicated to all Consultative Parties to the Treaty by a diplomatic note of December 15, 2003. 

The following stations were inspected: Troll (Norway), SANAE IV (South-Africa), Wasa (Sweden) and Neumayer (Germany). Due to weather conditions the Russian station, Novolazarevskaya, was not inspected as had been originally planned. Also, the plan to visit the South-African e-Base had to be cancelled due to stormy weather. The team also visited the Finnish station, Aboa, which is located close to the Swedish station, Wasa.

The Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol were used as the basis for the inspection, together with the Inspection Checklist A (for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations) adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in 1994 (ATCM XVIII). The Checklist was used selectively. The focus was mainly on environmental issues and scientific research. 

A full report of the inspection is under preparation. A paper copy will be made available to each delegation at the meeting of the ATCM XXVII in Cape Town. The document will be electronically available on the CEP website and the ATCM XXVII website after the meeting. In accordance with Article 14 of the Madrid Protocol the Parties whose stations were inspected have had an opportunity to comment on the report before it is circulated to all Antarctic Treaty Parties and to the Committee for Environmental Protection. The respective parts of the report concerning each station were submitted for comment to the governments of Germany, Norway, South-Africa and Sweden on April 7, 2004.

 




Summary of findings/ Recommendations	


Inspection procedure/Antarctic Treaty provisions
. 
The inspection team was welcomed and treated cordially at each station visited. All areas were open to inspection upon request. The personnel at the stations were helpful and discussed matters openly. 

All the inspected stations were found to be well managed. The station leaders, managers and personnel were fully aware of the obligations of the Antarctic Treaty. Awareness of the need for environmental protection was high and the operations reflected strong commitment to that need. All countries provide training and instruction for staff members prior to departure for the Antarctic. 

Some stations had completed a checklist prior to the inspection team's arrival. Other stations provided the team with substantial information about their ongoing projects, research management, logistics and functioning of the stations. Most of the material was found to be very helpful. However, information regarding environmental protection measures could have been more detailed in the case of some of the stations inspected. It is recommended that the national operations endeavour to provide homogenous sets of station information for inspectors and scientists of other nations. The ATCM checklist provides a good basis for the list of information to be provided. 

Transport and Communication 

Transport and communication facilities in East Antarctica have during the past ten years become increasingly coordinated as a result of several developments. Firstly, heavy transport facilities have been utilized in coordination. Major factors in this activity have been the polar category vessels such as Polarstern, Akademic Fedorov and Agulhas. The situation has been further enhanced by the mapping of safe overland transportation routes from Neumayer to Troll, Aboa, Wasa and recently to Sanae IV. Secondly, the establishment of the DROMLAN air network has added an entirely new dimension to transport operations. 

 Communication facilities in Antarctica have developed dramatically during the past ten years. There is, however, plenty of room for improvement. The Iridium network offers opportunities for more detailed cooperation, in particular in further development of DROMLAN operations. Bearing in mind that these services are becoming cheaper over time, the establishment of improved means of communication by satellite phones might be advisable. Moreover, data transfer through Inmarsat could be developed further, in particular the distribution of operational data such as weather maps and emergency messages, inter alia. It is recommended that the stations together consider the possibilities for improvement in matters such as the need for additional links/lines, transmission protocols and priorities. 

It is recommended that COMNAP considers developing fixed schedules for communication contacts. 





Search and rescue/ Tourism 

Within the framework of DROMLAN, Neumayer station has a key role in providing weather forecasts for the entire East Antarctic. The station has a notably competent meteorology service, with regular reception of all relevant satellite images and numerical weather forecasts from several European sources. In addition, local forecasting is based on the collection of data from all surrounding stations. This combination of competence, good technical facilities and good information flow proved to be crucial in the difficult weather conditions during the inspection.

Search and rescue services for DROMLAN are provided by the staff of Sanae station. The system seems efficient but it is unclear to the inspection team how the services can be properly provided during the period before the South African helicopters have arrived for the summer season. DROMLAN extends the operation time, in particular at the beginning of the austral summer season.

It is important to bear in mind the original purpose of DROMLAN, which is to service scientific operations only and not to be a resource for tourism activities in the Antarctic. The inspection team welcome the advancement of the negotiations on the rules for tourism activities in the Antarctic.

Scientific activities/cooperation

The magnitude of scientific work varied among the stations inspected. Many of the stations, but in particular Sanae, have surplus accommodation capacity. It is not the intention of the inspection team to propose any specific measures to increase the effective use of the facilities. The matter should be discussed in other forums. The inspection team merely notes that there are good opportunities for increasing cooperative research, e.g. according to the needs of bilateral or multilateral programmes, or those expressed by SCAR as priority tasks, or those within the preparations for the forthcoming International Polar Year 2007-2008. Logistical improvements and year-round use of the Norwegian Troll station in the future will provide more facilities for scientific research and will hopefully widen international scientific cooperation. 

Environmental protection 

The Finnish inspection team was left with the impression that in every station inspected the environmental impacts of its activities were well understood. The provisions of the environmental protocol are thoroughly complied with and some of the stations are actively developing and adopting more environmentally sound solutions for the maintenance of their operations. A good example is the utilisation of solar and wind power. However, the inspection team considers that in some cases the scientific research efforts may not necessarily be found to be in due proportion with all the logistic and maintenance operations needed for running the stations. It is the view of the inspection team that the legitimacy of operations in the vulnerable 
natural environment of Antarctica should rest solely on scientific research activities which should be carried out in a manner that causes the fewest possible adverse effects and minimises potential environmental risks. In this respect the inspection team finds the ongoing negotiations on the liability annex for the environmental protocol extremely important, and 
looks forward to it becoming an effective instrument for strengthening the environmental protection of Antarctica.




Station facilities – Water system
The water systems of the stations inspected are based either on melting of snow, or pumping water from aqueous deposits below the ice. Substantial differences in the consumption of water among the stations were observed, with the lowest consumption average per person being 25 litres daily and the highest up to 200 litres. This is at least partly explained by differences in the sanitary and washing facilities among the stations.

Pollution (oil and chemical spills)

All the stations have contingency plans in force for oil and chemical spills, as provided in the environmental protocol. In addition, preventive and precautionary measures are widely applied to avoid any spillages. Some of the stations provide on-site training for their personnel to deal with spills.  All the stations should routinely re-evaluate their storage facilities, because a major leak or spill of oil or fuel represents one of the greatest risks to the environment. 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

According to the information provided for the inspection team, all the stations pay due attention to their respective national legislation as well as to the Protocol on the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty in respect of regulations for assessing the environmental impacts of their activities. 

Conservation of Flora and Fauna

In the vicinity of the stations inspected there are no specially protected areas under the Antarctic Treaty. However, some stations have adopted internal rules and guidelines for expedition members to obey, for example, to protect the nesting sites of bird colonies. Fences are used by some stations to demarcate these areas. The expedition members at the stations are instructed to pay attention in their operations and other activities to the unique flora and fauna of Antarctica. 

Waste management

In respect of waste management, all the stations seem more or less to apply a policy with the focus on minimisation and prevention of the overall generation of waste. All the stations had waste management plans in force, as provided by Article 8 of Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The inspection team did not observe any omissions in compliance with the waste management plans of the stations, or the environmental protocol. 
 
Energy 

A positive development can be noted in the use of alternative energy systems. Solar energy is used or planned to be used at almost all of the stations inspected. Wind generators seem to be very useful in the conditions of Antarctica due to improved technology. These two solutions reduce the need to use oil. Therefore, increasing the use of new energy systems is recommended as an additional energy source. It is also recommended that attention be given to increasing energy efficiency in order to lessen the consumption of oil.

		

