ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                         XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                 
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                         XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                         Bonn
                                         07 - 18 October 1991

                                         XVI ATCM/WP 36
                                         9 October 1991
                                         Original: English

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
Examination of Recommendations
(Item 7 c)

(submitted by Uruguay and China)
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

Examination of Recommendations

(draft submitted by China and Uruguay)

1

The Representatives,

Considering that:

I.       The A.T. recommendations aiming at furtherance of the principles and objectives of 
the Treaty, have played an extremely useful and important role in the overall structure of co-
operation established by the A.T.System and have greatly attributed to its strengthening and 
consolidating.

II.      The successive recommendations adopted on a variety of subjects have, in many 
instances, been complementary to one another, while in others they have been tacitly 
amended without being expressly stated that some of them have been partly or wholly 
superseded.

III.     The above mentioned situation may give rise to difficulties in a clear statement of 
obligation under those recommendations.

IV.      Thus an examination of recommendations with a view to their rationalization might be 
desirable in order to facilitate their unanimous application and confer further transparency on 
the System.

V.      It is incumbent upon the Consultative Meetings to lay down a clear statement of 
obligations under those recommendations.

Recommend to their Governments:

- to reaffirm the importance of examination of recommendations and the need to 
continue the concerted efforts in this regard;
2

- to start the work with examining the overlap among the relevant recommendations 
and between them and the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on the Environmental Protection 
and its Annexes.

- to consider the possibility to have an expert group in assisting the work.
