ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 50
16 October 1991
Original: English

Draft Report of Working Group I

(submitted by the Secretariat)
Draft Report of Working-Group I
to the Plenary
of the XVIth ATCM

The Working Group held 12 meetings and adopted its report on 17 October 1991.

Item 7a
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System
Organisational aspects

The Meeting discussed working paper XVI ATCM/WP 8 submitted by the United
States of America and working paper XVI ATCM/WP 10 submitted by Japan on
organisational aspects of the Antarctic Treaty System. The delegation of Uruguay submitted
an information paper XVI ATCM/INFO 36 on the same subject.

Some delegations, one of them from a Non-Consultative Party, stated that they did not
believe the study and consideration of this subject had proceeded to the point where a
concrete decision could be taken. It was underlined that the Antarctic Treaty is considered
one of the most efficient and farsighted instruments of this century. These delegations
emphasized, as key for its continued effectiveness and credibility, the preservation of its
working structure which includes a network of direct diplomatic contacts that precede and
determine the contents of formal decisions. In this context, one delegation referred to working
paper XVI ATCM/PREP/WP 7.

Another of those delegations supported in principle the possibility of creating an
administrative support unit to assist the Environmental Committee, but agreed that the
discussion at this meeting was as far as the matter could be taken at this time.

All other delegations who spoke supported the establishment of a small, cost-effective
administrative support unit, to assist the preparation of Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings. Most of these delegations felt its creation was urgent. The arguments favouring this
position centred mainly on the increased range and complexity of issues coming before
Consultative Meetings and the move to annual meetings. The delegations referred to in the
proceeding two paragraphs were of the view, however, that more experience should be gained
under the existing situation in the new set of circumstances.

Several delegations spoke in favour of an interim decision, if a final decision on all
aspects cannot be taken at this meeting. Other delegations stated that all aspects were of the
same importance and could not be dealt with separately.
2

Several delegations spoke in favour of an interim decision, if a final decision on all 
aspects cannot be taken at this meeting. Other delegations stated that all aspects were of the 
same importance and could not be dealt with separately.

As to the costs of the administrative support unit, those who spoke in its favour, agreed 
that the costs should be kept to a minimum. Some of these delegations favoured division of 
the costs equally, others favoured a division weighted on some basis. Some delegations argued 
that the costs of holding Consultative Meetings should be included.

All delegations who addressed the matter favourably emphasised limiting the functions 
of the unit to those needed to make Consultative Meetings more efficient. These delegations 
also emphasised that the support unit would be responsible to and under the authority of the 
Consultative Meetings.

The question of location was mentioned by several delegations. Some delegations were 
of the view that this question could remain open for the time being. Others stated that no 
aspect should be isolated.

Item 7 b
Public Availability of Documents

The Australian delegation submitted to the Meeting a list of documents of the Second 
Special Consultative Meeting, which led to the establishment of CCAMLR according to 
paragraph 38 of the Final Report of the XVth ATCM, reissuing an information paper 
submitted to the Preparatory Meeting of the XVI ATCM (XVI ATCM/PREP/INFO 5).

The delegation of New Zealand acted according to the same paragraph of the Final 
Report of the XVth ATCM in submitting to the Meeting the list of documents of the fourth 
Special Consultative Meeting on Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA) in information 
paper XVI ATCM/INFO 27.

The Meeting agreed that the documents listed could be made publicly available.

The Meeting recalled Recommendation XIV - 1 calling for public release of the 
documents of Consultative Meetings, as from the closure of the Meeting at which they are 
submitted, unless indicated otherwise.

Item 7 c
Examination of Recommendations
3

The delegations of China, Uruguay and Belgium submitted working papers to the Meeting concerning the Examination of Recommendations. It was generally felt, that Antarctic Treaty Recommendations forming an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System are playing an extremely important role in the structure of cooperation within the system. In order to provide Contracting Parties and future acceeding states with a better understanding of their obligations, several delegations supported a review of existing Recommendations.

It was decided that two lists should be drawn up, one of Recommendations which are spent and one one of those which may be affected by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Drafts of these list were submitted to the Meeting by China and Uruguay and by Belgium respectively. These drafts are annexed to this report.

The Meeting decided that these documents should be reviewed by the Parties before the next Consultative Meeting, together with the paper submitted by Australia on Exchange and Reporting Requirements (XVI ATCM/INFO 30) with a view to the submission of any proposals considered appropriate and the further consideration of this matter at the next Consultative Meeting.

Item 7 d
Exchange of Information

The Meeting considered whether the information exchange requirements of the Antarctic Treaty, and in Recommendations and measures adopted pursuant to it, continue to meet the Parties' requirements. The Meeting recognised the importance of maintaining information exchanged in accordance with Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty, but noted that a number of measures subsequently adopted pursuant to Article IX of the Treaty had added considerably to the information exchange requirements.

In this regard, the Meeting welcomed an information paper submitted by the delegation of Australia (XVI ATCM/INFO 30) which listed all of the information exchange requirements currently agreed. A specific proposal to modify information exchange requirements was received from the délégation of Germany (XVI ATCM/WP 42) and another proposal, relating to sharing information about domestic legislation relevant to Antarctica, was jointly submitted by the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay, Spain und the United Kingdom (XVI ATCM/WP 43/Rev.4).

It was noted by some Parties that the information exchange provisions have created a substantial burden and that some of the information exchanged may not be reaching those to
whom it is of most use. In addition, it was suggested that some of the information exchanged is 
received too late for it to be useful in planning expeditions. It was further recognised that 
there is potential for duplication of some categories of information exchanged. In this regard 
it was noted that COMNAP/SCALOP members also exchange information on logistics, and 
that scientific information is exchanged through annual national reports to SCAR.

While the Meeting agreed that the German proposal to reduce some information was a 
valuable step the proposal was deferred pending a wider review of the Parties'information 
needs.

The Meeting therefore agreed to consider the issue in detail at the XVIIth 
Consultative Meeting. It was agreed that in doing this the Meeting should examine the Annex 
to recommendation VIII - 6, and all information exchange provisions in other 
Recommendations and measures, and should consider the type of information that should be 
exchanged, the level of detail, to whom it should be sent, and the most appropriate time by 
which information should be circulated.

The Meeting recognised the value of Parties exchanging from time to time information 
on their domestic legislation currently in force and which is relevant to the Antarctic Treaty. It 
was noted that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and 
Conventions adopted under the Antarctic Treaty provide for the exchange of information on 
relevant domestic legislation but that such provisions had not been made with respect to 
domestic legislation enacted to give effect to obligations arising from Recommendations 
adopted at Consultative Meetings. It was therefore agreed that Parties would benefit from the 
exchange of such information and the Working Group agreed to the text of a suitable 
Recommendation.

Item 8 
Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

The Meeting took note of the increasing number of inspections as reported by the 
United Kingdom (XVI ATCM/INFO 5). On the request of Contracting Parties the Secretariat 
prepared a list of inspections undertaken since the XVth ATCM for inclusion in 
the final report (Annex ...) 

Referring to a proposal presented by Sweden (XVI ATCM/WP 3), the Meeting agreed 
that inspections could play a useful role not only as an instrument of compliance but also as a 
means of exchange of experience and knowledge between the Contracting Parties.
5

It was also noted that there is an increasing emphasis given to environmental aspects in 
carrying out inspections. In this regard, it was recognized that more detailed reporting is 
called for, for example by using check-lists such as the one employed by the United States 
(XVI ATCM/INFO 67). This would also facilitate comparison between inspectors' reports.

The Meeting recognized that any such standardized formats for reporting would be 
without prejudice to the inspection-rights provided in Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

In the light of rising costs, the necessity to improve the efficiency of Antarctic 
operations and the value of cooperative efforts in Antarctica, it was agreed that joint 
inspections between two or more Contracting Parties should be encouraged. Moreover, it was 
noted that Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection also envisages joint 
inspections.

Item 12 
Promotion of international scientific cooperation
a) The role of Antarctic Science in understanding the Global environment, including 
depletion of the ozone layer
b) Antarctic Science Conference, Bremen 1991

The Meeting decided to discuss items 12 and 13 together. Papers were presented by 
Italy (XVI ATCM/INFO 62) and Japan (XVI ATCM/WP 9) in relation to item 12 a. A 
report of the SCAR Antarctic Science Conference in Bremen in September 1991 was 
submitted to the Meeting.

Item 13
International Antarctic scientific and logistic cooperation
a) Measures for scientific and logistic cooperation in Antarctica

On the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty and the development 
of the Antarctic Treaty System, Delegations noted that international cooperation in Antarctic 
scientific research, which had so notably marked the International Geophysical Year had 
steadily and progressively increased. In this context it was noted that the the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty had designated the Antarctic as a national 
reserve dedicated to peace and science.

Many delegations noted the increasingly important contribution of large-scale research 
programs to the solution of global scale problems and they demanded increased financial, 
logistic and technological support. As a consequence, efficient planning of scientific and
logistic activity requires that account be taken of the influence of Antarctica on the functioning of global environmental systems; of measures to enhance the quality of scientific research; of the value of strengthening cooperative use of existing facilities to gain optimal results from investment in Antarctic stations; and of the need to respond to accumulating knowledge and to changes in requirements for study of the world environment.

Papers submitted to the meeting noted the benefits to be derived from increased international cooperation in the fields of:

-    mutual exchange of information on long-term scientific programs
-    more efficient use of human scientific capacity
-    cost-effectiveness for laboratories, instruments, stations and logistics
-    reduced environmental impact and improved safety of operations
-    more systematic and coordinated scientific observations
-    a coordinated approach to the siting of stations
-    integration into existing arrangements of the scientific programs of new Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

In this context, the Meeting welcomed with satisfaction SCAR's Conference on Antarctic Science, designed to foster interdisciplinary research, to strengthen the interaction within the international scientific community and to further integrate scientific planning into programs of global significance.

In the long line of Antarctic tradition which stems from the International Geophysical Year, the Meeting felt that the time might have come for consideration of a more systematic approach to international collaboration in research programs and their associated logistic activities in Antarctica.

The Meeting noted that there had been examples of new and interesting forms of international cooperation arising from initiatives and experiences in many countries. A number of more detailed examples and suggestions are included in several documents presented at the XVIth Consultative Treaty Meeting under Items 12 and 13 of the Agenda (XVI ATCM/WP 4 by Sweden, XVI ATCM/INFO 34 by Finland, XVI ATCM/INFO 56 by the USSR, XVI ATCM/INFO 60 by Argentina and Chile). The Meeting considered that this material would provide a valuable input to the work already being done by SCAR and COMNAP, and requested both organizations to continue their endeavours towards rationalizing, systematizing and improving the framework within which the pursuit of high quality scientific programs of global significance and the improvement of scientific productivity could be achieved.
7

b) Comparability and accessability of Antarctic scientific data

The delegation of the United States of America presented a working paper on 
Accessibility of Antarctic Geophysical Data (XVI ATCM/WP 30). The Meeting discussed the 
paper and agreed on Recommendation XVI ....

The Meeting discussed a paper submitted by Italy on an Antarctic International 
Computer Network for Data Exchange (XVI ATCM/WP 26) and the implementation of 
Recommendation XV - 16 calling for the creation of an Antarctic environment and scientific 
data system.

Although such a system is intended to eventually encompass the full range of 
environmental and scientific data, it was agreed that initial consideration of this issue could 
occur in the context of a Group of Experts Meeting called to discuss environmental 
monitoring of the impacts of human activities in Antarctica. Such a Meeting, called pursuant 
to Recommendation XV - 5, would, of necessity, consider data issues.

It was agreed therefore that this matter should be referred to the Meeting discussed in 
the report on item 9.

c) Siting of Antarctic stations

The meeting considered the working paper XVI ATCM/WP 25 submitted by Italy. 
The substance of this matter was covered in the discussion of item 13 a reported above.

Item 14
Tourism and Non-governmental Expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Meeting received working papers by the delegations of France (ATCM/WP 2), 
Chile (ATCM/WP 29), Japan (ATCM/WP 34), Italy (ATCM/WP 37) and Germany jointly 
with Japan (ATCM/WP 41). It decided to establish a sub-working group under the 
chairmanship of Mr António José Guerreiro of Brazil.

The sub-working group initiated a detailed examination of tourism in Antarctica, 
bearing in mind the decision of the XV ATCM that a comprehensive review of the issue of 
tourism and non-governmental expeditions was required and taking into account previous 
Recommendations regarding tourism and its effects, in particular Recommendation VII - 9. It
studied the proposals for a future Annex to the Protocol adopted in Madrid contained in 
working papers 2, 29 and 37, the proposals for future work contained in working papers 34 
and 41, as well as several Information papers on the subject.

The sub-working group submitted to Working Group I a draft Recommendation on 
Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The Meeting 
subsequently adopted Recommendation XVI . . .

Item 19

Frequency of future Consultative Meetings

The working group discussed the future frequency of Consultative Meetings. It was 
agreed that, in view of the increasing range and complexity of the issues coming before 
Consultative Meetings and in view of the need to adopt procedures to give effect to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty it was desirable that 
Consultative Meetings should in future be held annualy. It was also agreed that it would be 
desirable to move as soon as possible to hold Consultative Meetings in the April/May period.
