ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  Bonn
                                07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 1
07 October 1991
Original: English

Area Protection and Managment in the Antarctic

Item 11

(submitted by United Kingdom)
AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT IN THE ANTARCTIC

1. Attached is a further UK attempt to draft an Annex dealing with the protection and management of designated Antarctic areas. It will be recalled that the UK had originally proposed that all types of area should be designated Antarctic Protected Areas and that all necessary differences in management procedures between one area and another could be accomodated within management plans. Taking particular account of the US paper tabled at Madrid I (XI ATSCM/2/WP21) we now agree that this was taking simplification a step too far.

2. The attached draft Annex accordingly provides for the designation of "Antarctic Protected Areas", "Antarctic Managed Areas" and the listing of Historic Sites and Monuments. We expect that all the current Specially Protected Areas and, in all probability, Sites of Special Scientific Interest and Specially Reserved Areas will fall within the category of Antarctic Protected Areas.

3. As regards Antarctic Managed Areas (Article 4), we have followed the line of thinking behind Recommendation XV-11, although we have not kept the term "Multiple-use Planning Area" in the belief that the term is too restrictive and that there could be areas which we might wish to manage for a single purpose, such as, for example, Areas of Special Tourist Interest.

4. The fundamental distinction between Antarctic Protected Areas and Antarctic Managed Areas is that no-one can enter a Protected Area without a permit, but that Managed Areas are managed in accordance with an agreed Code of Conduct with no permit for entry being required.

5. In both US and UK earlier drafts, provision was made for transition of arrangements between the system as it exists now and the system as it would be under an Annex. The reason for this was to maintain existing obligations regarding SPAs

JH1AAN/1                                                     /and
and SSSIs until Management Plans had been adopted and had 
entered into force under the Annex. On reflection, we do 
not believe, subject to one caveat, that such provision is 
necessary. The caveat is that the Annex should not enter 
into force until Management Plans for SPAs have been prepared 
and are themselves about to enter into force. This will 
avoid two separate systems operating simultaneously.

6. It follows from this that preparation of Management Plans 
for SPAs should be put in hand as a matter of some urgency. 
It will help that a great deal of the necessary work has 
already been published in SCAR's 1985 "Conservation Areas in 
the Antarctic" edited by Nigel Bonner and Ron Lewis-Smith. 
A new edition is in preparation but awaits decisions about 
the treatment of protected areas under the Protocol.

7. The following notes on some Articles may be helpful:

Article 1

These definitions are derived from Article I of the 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna 
and Flora.

Article 3

Paragraph 2. This paragraph is not exhaustive and does 
not prevent the accordance of Antarctic Protected Area 
status for the purpose of providing protection to 
interests other than those listed here as long as they 
fall within the scope of paragraph 1 of this Article.

Article 4

Paragraph 2. The same applies to this paragraph as to 
Article 3(2).

JH1AN/2                                         /Article
Article 5

This Article states (paragraph 1) who may propose an 
area for designation by submitting a proposed Management 
Plan to an ATCM. It states (paragraph (2)(i)-(v)) what 
must be included in all Management Plans; in paragraph 
(2)(vi) what must be included in a Management Plan for 
an APA; and in paragraph 2(vii) what must be included in 
a Management Plan for an AMA. It will be seen that 
paragraph (2)(vi)(a) to (h) and (vii)(a) to (h) are 
virtually identical. This arrangement has been adopted 
to allow for possible differences that debate may show 
are necessary with respect to sub-paragraphs (a) to (h) 
in each case.

Article 8

In principle, access to Historic Monuments ought not to 
be restricted. Some Monuments, however, such as the 
heroic age huts on Ross Island, would be candidates for 
either APA or AMA status. For others, such as busts and 
plaques in the middle of Antarctic stations, it would 
not make much sense to provide individual Management 
Plans. For yet others, such as busts or plaques far 
away from any station, visits to them ought not to be 
subject to a permit arrangement. We have therefore 
provided in the Article for a general obligation to 
respect all listed historic monuments and for either APA 
or AMA status to be accorded to particular monuments in 
cases where such status would be appropriate to achieve 
the desired level of protection.

JH1AAN/3
DRAFT

ANNEX V TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 1

DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:

    (a) "appropriate authority" means any person or agency 
        authorised by a Party to issue permits under this 
        Annex;

    (b) "permit" means a formal permission in writing issued 
        by an appropriate authority.

ARTICLE 2

OBJECTIVES

1. For the purposes set out in this Annex, any area may be 
   designated as an Antarctic Protected Area or as an Antarctic 
   Managed Area.  Activities in those Areas shall be prohibited, 
   restricted or managed in accordance with Management Plans adopted 
   under the provisions of this Annex.

ARTICLE 3

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as 
   an Antarctic Protected Area to protect conservation, scientific,

EW2ABY
aesthetic, wilderness, or historic interests, or any combination 
of those interests.

2.    Antarctic Protected Areas may include:

      (a)    areas kept inviolate from human interference so that 
              future comparisons may be possible with localities 
              that have been affected by human activities;

      (b)    areas of important natural ecological systems 
              including:

              (i)     examples of major terrestrial, including 
                      glacial and aquatic, ecosystems or marine 
                      ecosystems;

              (ii)    areas with important or unusual assemblages 
                      of species, including major colonies of 
                      breeding native birds or mammals;

              (iii)   the type locality or only known habitat of 
                      any species;

      (c)    areas of exceptional scientific interest or 
              locations of ongoing or planned scientific research;

      (d)    examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or 
              geomorphological features;

      (e)    areas of exceptional aesthetic and wilderness 
              value;    and

      (f)    sites or monuments of recognised historic value.

3.    Entry into an Antarctic Protected Area shall be prohibited 
except in accordance with a permit issued under Article 7.

EW2ABY
ARTICLE 4

ANTARCTIC MANAGED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Managed Area to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities and to reduce possible conflicting interests, improve co-operation between Parties and minimise environmental impacts.

2. Antarctic Managed Areas may include:

      (a) areas where multiple activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts;

      (b) sites or monuments of recognised historic 
          value.

3. Entry into an Antarctic Managed Area shall not require a permit.

ARTICLE 5

MANAGEMENT PLANS

1. Any Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party, the Committee for Environmental Protection, the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research, or the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources may propose an area for designation as an Antarctic Protected Area or an Antarctic Managed Area by submitting a proposed Management Plan to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

2. Proposed Management Plans shall include:

EW2ABY
(i)     a description of the interest or interests for which 
        additional protection or management is required;

(ii)    a statement of the aims and objectives of the 
        Management Plan for the protection or management of 
        those interests;

(iii)  a physical description of the area, including:

        (a)     the geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers 
                and natural features that delineate the area;

        (b)     access to the area by land, sea or air 
                including marine approaches and anchorages, 
                pedestrian and vehicular routes within the 
                area, and aircraft routes and landing areas;

        (c)     the location of structures, including 
                scientific stations, research or refuge 
                facilities, both within the area and near to 
                it;

        (d)     the location in or near the area of other 
                Antarctic Protected Areas or Antarctic Managed 
                Areas designated under this Annex, or other 
                protected areas designated in accordance with 
                measures adopted under other components of the 
                Antarctic Treaty system;

(iv)    the identification, where appropriate of zones 
        within the area, in which activities are to be 
        prohibited, restricted or managed for the purpose of 
        achieving the aims and objectives referred to in 
        subparagraph (ii) above;

(v)     maps and, as appropriate, photographs that show 
        clearly the boundary of the area in relation to 
        surrounding features and key features within the 
        area;

EW2ABY
(vi)     in respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Protected Area, a clear description of the conditions under which permits may be granted by the appropriate authority regarding:

         (a) access to and movement within or over the area;

         (b) activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and place;

         (c) the installation, modification, or removal of structures;

         (d) the location of field camps;

         (e) the taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna;

         (f) the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit-holder;

         (g) the disposal of waste;

         (h) any requirement for reports to be made to the appropriate authority regarding visits to the area;

(vii)    In respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Managed Area, a code of conduct regarding:

         (a) access to and movement within or over the area;

         (b) activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and place;

EW2ABY
(c) the installation, modification, or removal of 
structures;

(d) the location of field camps;

(e) the taking of or harmful interference with 
native flora and fauna;

(f) the collection or removal of anything not 
brought into the area by the visitor;

(g) the disposal of waste;

(h) any requirements for reports to be made to the 
appropriate authority regarding visits to the 
area;

(viii) the period of time after which the Management Plan 
is to be reviewed.

ARTICLE 6

DESIGNATION PROCEDURES

1. Proposed Management Plans for Antarctic Protected Areas and 
Antarctic Managed Areas shall be forwarded to the Environmental 
Protection Committee, the Scientific Committee for Antarctic 
Research and, with respect to marine areas, to the Commission for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources for advice 
and comment. Thereafter Management Plans may be approved by the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a measure adopted at an 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article 
IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless the measure specifies 
otherwise, the Plan shall be deemed to have been approved 90 days 
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at 
which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative 
Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time period, that it

EW2ABY
wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the
measure.

2.       Management Plans may be amended or revoked in accordance
with paragraph 1 above.

3.       Upon approval Management Plans shall be circulated promptly
by the Depositary to all Parties.  The Depositary shall maintain
a record of all currently approved Management Plans.

                                  ARTICLE 7

                                PERMITS

A Party may appoint an appropriate authority to issue
permits to enter and engage in activities within an Antarctic
Protected Area in accordance with the requirements of the
Management Plan relating to that Area.  The permit shall be
accompanied by the relevant sections of the Management Plan and
shall specify the extent and location of the Area, the conditions
on which any activities are authorised and any other conditions
imposed by the Management Plan, including reporting requirements.

                                  ARTICLE 8

                  HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

1.       Sites or monuments of recognised historic value which have
been designated as Antarctic Protected Areas or Antarctic Managed
Areas, or which are located within such Areas, shall be listed as
Historic Sites and Monuments.

2.       Any Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party may propose a site
or monument of recognised historic value which has not been
designated as an Antarctic Protected Area or an Antarctic Managed
Area, or which is not located within such an Area, for listing as
a Historic Site and Monument.  The proposal for listing may be
EW2ABY
approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a
measure adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in
accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless
the measure specifies otherwise, the proposal shall be deemed to
have been approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one
or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary,
within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that
period or is unable to approve the measure.

3.      Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed
or destroyed.

4.      The list of Historic Sites and Monuments may be amended in
accordance with paragraph 2 above.  The Depositary shall maintain
a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments.

ARTICLE 9

INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY

1.      With a view to ensuring that all persons visiting or
proposing to visit Antarctica understand and observe the
provisions of this Annex, each Party shall prepare and make
available information setting forth, in particular:

        (a)     the location of Antarctic Protected Areas and
Antarctic Managed Areas;

        (b)     listings and maps of those Areas;

        (c)     the Management Plans including listings of
prohibitions relevant to each Area.

        (d)     the location of Historic Sites and Monuments.

2.      Each Party shall ensure that the location and, if possible,
the limits, of Antarctic Protected Areas, Antarctic Managed Areas

EW2ABY
and Historic Sites and Monuments are shown on its topographic
maps, hydrographic charts and in other relevant publications.

3.      Parties shall co-operate to ensure that, where appropriate,
the boundaries of Antarctic Protected Areas, Antarctic Managed
Areas and Historic Sites and Monuments are suitably marked on the
site.

                                  ARTICLE 10

                        EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.      The Parties shall make arrangements for:

        (a)     collecting and exchanging records (including records
of permits for and reports of visits to Antarctic Managed Areas 
and Antarctic Protected Areas);

        (b)     obtaining and exchanging information on any 
significant change or damage to any Antarctic Managed Area, 
Antarctic Protected Area or Historic Site or Monument;

        (c)     establishing common forms in which records and 
information shall be submitted by Parties in accordance with 
paragraph 2 below.

2.      Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the 
Environmental Protection Committee before the end of November of 
each year of the number and nature of permits issued under this 
Annex in the preceding period of 1st July to 30th June.

                                  ARTICLE 11

                        CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.      The restrictions laid down and authorised by this Annex

EW2ABY
shall not apply in cases of emergency involving safety of human
life or of ships, aircraft, or environmental protection.

2.    Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall
be circulated promptly to all Parties.

                                  ARTICLE 12

                AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1.    This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted
in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Unless
the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification
shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become
effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the
Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension
of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2.    Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter
become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by
it has been received by the Depositary.

                                  ARTICLE 13

This Annex is an integral part of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Revised 22 August 1991
EW2ABY
