ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                  XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 11
07 October 1991
Original: English

Agenda of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Bonn, 07 to 18 October 1991

(submitted by the Secretariat)
Agenda

of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(Bonn/ 7-18 October 1991)

1.  Opening of the Meeting

2.  Election of Officers

3.  Opening Addresses

4.  Adoption of the agenda

5.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a)  under Recommendation XIII - 2:

    i)   the Chairman of the Commission for the
         Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
         Ressources (CCAMLR)

    ii)  the Head of the Delegation of the United
         Kingdom in his capacity as representative
         of the Depositary Government of the Convention
         for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

    iii) the President of the Scientific Committee on
         Antarctic Research (SCAR)

    iv)  the Head of the Delegation of the United States
         of America in his capacity as representative of the
         Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty

    v)   the Chairman of the Xth Antarctic Treaty Special
         Consultative Meeting

    vi)  the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special
         Consultative Meeting

    vii) the Chairman of the Meeting relating to Article
         8 (7) of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic
         Mineral Resource Activities

    viii) the Convenor of the informal group of Treaty Parties
         in the United Nations

    ix)  the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
         Programs (COMNAP)

b)  in relation to Article 3 (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
- 2 -

6. Report of the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting

7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
      a) Organisational aspects
      b) Public Availability of Documents
      c) Examination of recommendations
      d) Exchange of information

8. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

9. Environmental monitoring

10. Human impact on the Antarctic environment
      a) Waste disposal
      b) Marine pollution
      c) Implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures

11. The Antarctic Protected Area System
      a) Proposals for new Sites of Special Scientific Inter-
         est (SSSI)
      b) Proposals for new Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest
      c) Changes to existing SSSI's and SPA's
      d) Proposals for new Specially Protected Areas (SPA)
      e) Proposals for Specially Reserved Areas (SRA)
      f) Proposals for Multiple Use Planning Areas (MPA)
      g) Review of the System
      h) Historic sites and monuments

12. Promotion of international scientific cooperation
      a) The role of Antarctic science in
         understanding the global environment,
         including depletion of the ozone layer
      b) Antarctic science conference, Bremen 1991
- 3 -

13. International Antarctic scientific and logistic cooperation
    a) Measures for scientific and logistic cooperation in Antarctica
    b) Comparability and accessibility of Antarctic scientific data
    c) Siting of Antarctic stations

14. Tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area

15. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

16. Marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in the Southern Ocean

17. Cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of antarctic waters

18. Air safety in Antarctica

19. Frequency of future Consultative Meetings and date and place of the XVIIth Consultative Meeting

20. Commemoration of the 30th anniversary of the entering into force of the Antarctic Treaty

21. Any other business

22. Adoption of the Report

23. Closing of the Meeting
