ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                        XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP29
8 October 1991
Original: Spanish

TOURISM AND OTHER ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

(Item 14)

(submitted by Chile)
1

TOURISM AND OTHER ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

Pursuant to the provisions of the Final Report on the 2nd session of the XIth Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Madrid in April 1991, the Delegation of Chile hereby submits a new working paper which is intended to serve as a basis for analysing, discussing and approving a first draft of Annex V to the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, on "Tourism and other activities in Antarctica".

This paper puts forward a tentative outline for the possible initial contents of a draft Annex to the Protocol, some of the points of which represent the proposals made by our country.

It has been deemed advisable to address the study of this question in the form of a draft Annex to the Protocol, having regard to the subject areas it would be expected to cover and to the majority view of the Consultative Parties on the need to regulate tourism in a manner that would be more efficient and appropriate and, at the same time, more closely linked to the Protocol.

The Annex to this paper engages in a brief historical review of tourism in Antarctica from the standpoint of the different forms it has taken and of the Antarctic Treaty System provisions currently regulating it, with the aim of assessing which of those forms or provisions warrant being waived or updated.

We feel that it is necessary to propose that tourism and the other activities being conducted in Antarctica should comply with five basic requirements as these pertain to considerations of ecology, liability, control, limitation of numbers and self-reliance.

PROSPECTIVE SUBJECT AREAS FOR INCLUSION IN AN ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL AND RELEVANT PROPOSALS PUT FORWARD BY THE DELEGATION OF CHILE

a) Definition of tourism

It is considered important to define the scope of the term "tourism and non-governmental activities", which has been regularly used in the Treaty System, for the purpose
of its practical application in the continent of Antarctica and, in that connection, of specifying 
or making it clear whether the Annex should be applicable to all human activities in 
Antarctica or whether scientific and logistical activities should be excluded.

It is considered that the Annex should be wide-ranging in scope, so that it will cover all 
recreational and adventure-type activities in which people engage, including visits by 
authorities and the media, sporting events, expeditions and other forms of activity, without it 
being necessary to draw a distinction between those that are of governmental origin and those 
that are not. A more far-reaching study, for the purpose of determining whether the Annex 
should be even broader in scope and also apply to scientific and logistical activities, would be 
left pending. This is the position taken by the Delegation of Chile in document 
ATSCM/2/WP.20, which it submitted in Madrid in April last.

b) Pre- and post-notification of tourist and other activities

This is a subject area which has to be examined in the light of the existing 
Recommendations by ascertaining how it is currently being implemented and, depending on 
the findings, deciding whether or not to amend the existing provisions contained 
in Recommendations IV-27, VI-7 and VIII-9.

Chile has noted that the provision whereby applications have to be submitted to 
Ministries of Foreign Affairs for permission to visit individual-country bases is not respected, 
and that it has been the practice for operators and other people involved to seek such 
permission only hours or at even shorter notice prior to visiting bases, thereby leaving it to the 
discretion of base directors to decide whether or not to grant permission or to stipulate the 
conditions on which visits can be made.

With regard to the post-notification or information which tour operators are required 
to provide by completing the form referred to in Annex C to Recommendation VIII-9, the 
following relevant aspects should be taken into consideration: a) the form should be updated 
with respect to the information it is required to contain; and b) the same information should 
be provided for pre-notification purposes: it should then be updated to reflect what actually 
transpired and should be sent only to the country to which the prior notification was given. 
There is no justification for sending the form to the Consultative Parties whose stations have 
been visited, as stipulated in the above-mentioned Recommendation.

The notification procedure should be dictated by the individual countries' domestic 
legislation, while the Annex should only deal with those aspects that are considered as being
most relevant to the proper supervision of the activity in question by the Consultative or 
Contracting Party.

c) Information to be provided for all people visiting Antarctica

It is noted that the "Declaration of Accepted Practices and Relevant Provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty" forming Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9 has, to some degree, become 
obsolete as a result of the new provisions contained in the Protocol. Similarly, the guides 
which were prepared by SCAR in 1980 and were subsequently published are now being 
revised, while COMNAP has made a compilation of the provisions contained in various 
Recommendations to produce a more practical and educational booklet setting out the rules 
of conduct which all people visiting the continent are expected to observe, without any 
distinction as to the reasons for their visit.

These guides should be revised by the Consultative Meeting, so that they can, if 
necessary, be supplemented and their contents incorporated in the Annex and be accorded 
official approval.

The Antarctic Treaty Parties should make every effort to ensure that all people visiting 
Antarctica from their national territory have at least access to this information. Such people 
should be considered as including authorities, researchers, logistic personnel, ships' companies 
and aircrews, tourists, journalists, and all other categories.

d) Requirements to be fulfilled by tour operators and other members of expeditions or 
visitors

Under this heading, it would be important to make a distinction between the different 
kinds of tourism or other forms of activity which may take place and, depending on their 
specific features, to examine whether it is necessary to lay down differing requirements or 
conditions.

For example, tourism involving overflights does not call for the same degree of 
specialization in the tourist guides as that which has to be provided for tourists on ocean 
cruises.
A cruise liner with 800 passengers is different from one with only 120 passengers or 
from tourist trips by air, with 40 tourists or fewer travelling to a single location, in terms of 
their impact or disruptive effect on the scientific activities conducted on the bases. This is a 
factor which base directors will have to bear in mind when authorizing visits to their stations.

Similarly, groups of authorities paying official visits to one or more bases or groups of 
people from the media are different from expeditions to the Ellsworth Mountains or on skis 
to the South Pole. Consideration will have to be given to deciding whether or not all these 
activities should be accorded the same treatment, without prejudice to the fact that they all 
have to be regulated with a view to protecting the environment and to abiding by the 
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty System.

In this connection, it is suggested that a study be made of the machinery for regulating 
the passenger quotas of cruises which may visit Antarctica and deciding whether or not it 
would be advisable to fix or recommend a maximum number per vessel, with a view to 
preventing visits by large Transatlantic-type liners whose size and passenger capacity could 
cause greater damage to the environment and entail greater risks. For example, if a tourist 
vessel with 800 passengers on board were to be shipwrecked, serious problems would be 
involved in providing temporary accommodation for so many people, who are usually elderly, 
and would likewise create a serious problem for rescue and salvage teams.

It is considered necessary to seek practical ways and means of preventing tourism and 
other similar activities from increasing to a significant degree in years to come.

One way of restricting the above-mentioned activities would be to engage in prior 
environmental impact assessments, which would have to be carried out by the people 
interested in developing activities on the continent. Even then, it is suggested that an analysis 
be made of other ways and means of achieving that aim, without losing sight of the freedom of 
action needed to engage in peaceful activities in the area.

e) Insurance

This issue calls for much more far-reaching decisions that those provided for in 
Recommendation X-8.

In this connection, it is suggested that consideration be given to the advisability of the 
Antarctic Treaty Parties examining the possibility of requiring all vessels sailing to the 
continent to take out Protection and Indemnities insurance (P&I) covering damage caused by 
environmental pollution.
5

It would be important to take further steps along these lines by seeking various 
alternative approaches in conjunction with companies or mutual benefit societies specializing 
in such P&I insurance, in order to examine the possibility of introducing some kind of direct 
provision that would enable the country or countries having to participate in providing 
assistance for the victims of shipwrecks and clearing up the damage caused by, say, spillages of 
oil or other substances, to institute direct proceedings against the insurance companies or 
mutual benefit societies with a view to being paid appropriate compensation.

In connection with environmental protection, one issue that is becoming increasingly 
important is that of the insurance taken out to cover the compensation payable in respect of 
any kind of accident occurring in the Antarctic latitudes and of its practical and effective 
application, so that, in future, countries situated close to the Antarctic or other countries 
having participated in rescue or cleaning-up operations in sectors affected by oil spillages can 
recover the large sums invested in such activities, without the problem of territorial claims 
proving an impediment.

On account of its preventive nature, insurance can and should be provided 
independently of the existence of an Annex dealing with liability for environmental damage 
which the Parties have given a pledge to negotiate.

f) Application of the Protocol and its Annexes to these activities

Specific reference could be made to those provisions of the Protocol and its different 
Annexes that apply to tourism and other activities, so as not to repeat the same provisions on 
marine marine pollution, disposal of waste, protection of flora and fauna, and especially 
environmental impact assessment. In the last-mentioned connection, it is considered advisable 
to examine how and when Annex I should be implemented and what the requirements are for 
that purpose, and whether such assessments should be made for all types of tourist and other 
activities. It is important to spell out the scope of the Annex in respect of these matters.

It is also important to bear in mind that the Antarctic has been declared a "special 
area" for the application of MARPOL 73/78, and this will place greater demands on tourist 
ships, as well as on vessels used for other purposes.
6

It is likewise considered necessary to examine the most expeditious way of applying the 
system for the settlement of disputes set out in the Schedule to the Protocol, which could give 
rise to the application of this draft Annex on tourism and other activities.

g) Promulgation of domestic laws in countries applying strict measures to ensure the 
fulfilment of these provisions

Steps should be taken to ensure that countries institute their own laws or relevant legal 
instruments for taking proceedings or imposing sanctions for failure to abide by the provisions 
approved in the "future" Annex.

A system for exchanging information would be most useful. In any event, it would be 
essential to be familiar with all those legal systems adopting measures or standards that are 
stricter than those set out in the Protocol.

This practice should also be incorporated in the form used for annual exchanges of 
information.

h) Observers     

It has also been considered advisable to give consideration in this draft Annex to the 
possible conditions or requirements which observers would be expected to 
fulfil when they inspect this special type of activity.

This work would be most valuable for examining the follow-up to inspections (item 8 of 
the agenda).

i) Sites of special touristic interest

It is considered that this subject should be looked at again, by laying down guidelines 
for designating special sites for the disembarkation of tourists, so that greater long-term 
environmental impacts will be avoided.. The Treaty Parties could consider designating or 
setting aside areas adjoining their bases in which tourists would be allowed to move about.
7

As the Netherlands once pointed out, the setting-up of such sites or areas of tourist 
interest should be correlated with a periodic system for environmental impact assessment. 
Obviously, any territorial approach to tourism has to be integrated into the analysis of the 
Antarctic Protected Area System.

In conclusion, the Delegation of Chile again voices its concern and its wish to see 
progress made in connection with the tourism issue at the current Consultative Meeting, with 
the preparation of at least the first draft of Annex V, which would form the basis for further 
studies prior to its possible approval at the next Meeting. Moreover, it considers that there is 
sufficient information among Treaty Parties with interests in, and experience of, tourism to 
enable significant progress to be made in connection with this issue.

 
   
 
· 
  



 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 

8


ANNEX

Antarctic Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

I. Historical summary of tourism in the Antarctic.

Tourism commenced in the Antarctic with the first tourist overflight of the Antarctic 
peninsula by the Chilean national airline, LAN CHILE, in 1956.

In 1958 Argentina carried out the first sea cruise, followed in 1959 by Chile with a 
similar trip, both of them to the Antarctic peninsula.

Those were the first ventures in tourist travel by the two countries closest to the 
continent, before the signature of the Antarctic Treaty.

Later, in 1966, sea cruises for tourists were started by a North American operator and 
shortly thereafter by other nationalities, on a yearly basis which is still continuing. This 
represents the most significant means of transport carrying the largest number of passengers 
to the most frequently visited parts of the continent.

Overflight tourism has developed along less regular lines, with flights over the 
peninsula and the Mac Murdo area. At the latter location, flights were suspended for several 
years following the Mount Erebus accident in 1979, and resumed only a few years ago. 
Chilean air carriers engaged in a number of such operations during the 1980s.

Aerial tourism has also been developed by Chile in the form of trips to Marsh Base, 
King George Island, with groups of no more than 40 tourists, who spend 3 days at the Chilean 
air force "Estrella Polar" guest quarters. This form of tourism has been carried on in October 
or November and in March each year since 1984.

In recent years, another type of adventure tourism or expedition has emerged, in which 
climbers or ramblers are taken to the Ellsworth Mountains, while others continue their trip on 
skis to the South Pole.
Mention must lastly be made of private expeditions which arrive on the continent in 
leisure marine craft or small aircraft. These generally do not comply with the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty System and are more difficult to control or regulate.

II. Regulations of the Antarctic Treaty System in respect of tourism and non-governmental 
activities

The Treaty Parties started to lay down rules and regulations in respect of tourism and 
non-governmental activities in 1966, with Recommendation IV-27. This was instrumental in 
giving rise to a number of Recommendations up to and including Recommendation X-8 and 
thereafter to extracts from the Final Reports of the last five Consultative Meetings and an 
extract from the 2nd session of the XIth Special Consultative Meeting held in Madrid in April 
1991.

The most significant aspects of these provisions and past developments can be 
summarized as follows:

1.    The Consultative Parties have endeavoured to ensure at least a minimum degree of 
organization and to assume responsibility for tour operators and for all non-governmental 
activities. This has taken the following forms:

      a) Providing governments with advance information on tourist and non-governmental 
expeditions and applying for the relevant permission through the Ministries of Foreign Affairs 
of the countries to which the tour operators or private individuals belong, in the event of their 
wishing to visit the bases or stations of other Antarctic Treaty Parties (Recommendations IV-
27, VI-7 (2) and VIII-9).

      b) Tour operators or private individuals may visit bases in respect of which they have 
been given prior authorization, provided that the final arrangements are made with the base 
director by giving notice of between 24 and 72 hours prior to the estimated time of arrival 
(Recommendations IV-27 (2 and 3), VI-7 2(a) and VIII-9 2 (a).

      c) Following visits, the organizers of such tourist and non-governmental activities are 
required to provide the Consultative Parties whose stations they have visited with all the 
information requested in Annex C to Recommendation VIII-9.
10

d) All tourists visiting Antarctica are required to be familiar with the minimum 
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. It was for this purpose that the "Statement of Accepted 
Practices and Relevant Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty" was prepared and appended as 
Annex A to Recommendation VIII-9, along with the guide entitled "Guidance Material for 
Tourists visiting Antarctica", which is likewise appended to that Recommendation, but both of 
which were actually approved under Recommendation X-8.

e) Although activities of this type are not spelt out in any of the Recommendations 
under the specific heading of tourism and non-governmental expeditions, they are likewise 
required to comply with all the provisions relating to environmental protection, such as the 
rules of conduct for bases, together with those in respect of the disposal of waste, marine 
pollution, conservation of flora and fauna, and so on, as set out in Schedule II of Annex A to 
Recommendations VIII-9 and VII-4 (4).

f) Operators are encouraged to bring tourist guides with them, to be self-reliant and to 
take out appropriate insurance (Recommendations X-8 II and III and the extract from the 
Final Report of the XIIth ACTM).

g) It was requested that a study be made of the designation of sites of special tourist 
interest for inclusion in Annex B to Recommendation VIII-9 (these sites have still not been 
designated) and that steps be taken to ensure that visitors do not enter protected areas of the 
Antarctic System.

2. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its four Annexes lay 
down a whole new system of more stringent provisions for the comprehensive environmental 
protection of the continent, and these are equally applicable to tourist activities.

Article 3.4 of the Protocol provides that: "Activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty 
area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-
governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required in 
accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctica Treaty, including associated logistic support 
activities, shall:
11

(a) take place in a manner consistent with the principles in this Article; and

(b) be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts 
upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems inconsistent with 
those principles".
