ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE





Bonn

07 - 18 October 1991

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVI ATCM/WP 4
07 October 1991
Original: English

International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

Item 13 a

(submitted by Sweden)
Sweden                                                         Working Paper

September 23, 1991


ATCM XVI, Bonn: Item 13 a) International Antarctic scientific and logistic
cooperation

The Antarctic Treaty is an important instrument for securing peaceful international
relations and promoting international science in Antarctica. The Treaty has proved its
strength during 30 years of existence, and it has a great potential to achieve more.
The dynamics of the Treaty system itself have proved to be a vital element in its
development.

International cooperation will be crucial for the cost-effectiveness of research in
Antarctica in the coming years. The conditions of science generally have changed
dramatically over the last decades. More systematic and coordinated observations are
called for, often over large areas and for long time-periods. Modern Antarctic science
relies on high technology both in the field, through satellites in space and in the
laboratories back home. It becomes increasingly difficult for any single country, and
even more so for small and less technologically advanced nations, to meet these
demands without cooperation.

A prerequisite for improving cooperation within the Antarctic Treaty Area is the
availability of advance information on activities. Such information will enable the
Treaty Parties to improve their scientific research through more efficient use of
resources and to minimize the environmental impact of human activities in the area.
This is important not least in the light of the recently adopted Protocol on
environmental protection.

As a basic requirement, information on national research programmes should be
circulated well in advance. Further on, data networks could be established, exchanges
of researchers could develop further, and there could be a twinning of laboratories.
2

The present form of annual exchange of information according to article VII:5 in the
Treaty is no longer sufficient. Moreover, similar information is being circulated in the
SCAR system and, most importantly, among the operators in COMNAP. It would be
highly desirable to look into these parallel systems of information exchange and to
test their relevance in relation to political, operational and scientific needs.

A working group should be appointed with representation from COMNAP and
SCAR to develop a unified system of information exchange, considering requirements
of contents and timing as well as the possibilities offered by modern communication
technology (in terms of data communication, storage etc.)

On the logistic side it is evident that the opportunities for combining resources and
finding new creative solutions to transportation problems to and from Antarctica and
in Antarctica itself have never been greater. The new model of co-operation that is
developing between the Nordic countries could be quoted as an example. Closer
contacts not only between national operators but also with non-governmental agents
could be envisaged.

Recognising scientific and technical demands as well as financial restrictions, and
recalling the opportunities emanating from the increasing number of nations and
operators in Antarctica, further practical steps should now be taken to ensure an
efficient use of logistic and scientific resources through international cooperation.

Also this issue would best be addressed by COMNAP and SCAR, who against the
background of their broad experience, and considering both difficulties and
opportunities, should be asked to give the Parties advice on concrete measures to
develop international scientific and logistic co-operation in Antarctica.
