ANTARCTIC TREATY           
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           


                                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO           
                                                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA           


                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
                                                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

Bonn           
07 - 18 October 1991           

XVI ATCM/WP 15           
07 October 1991           
Original: English           

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION           

on the Re-Designation of SSSI No 30, Avian Island, as a Specially Protected Area, Including           
a Proposed Management Plan           
(Item 11)           

(submitted by the United Kingdom)           



                                                    
Explanatory Note

Avian Island, North-West Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula 
was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No 30, by 
Recommendation XV-6, on the grounds that 'the site is exceptional 
for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds'.  It 
includes Adélie Penguins, Blue-eyed Shags, Giant Petrels, 
Dominican Gulls, South Polar Skuas and Wilson's Storm Petrels.

Information recently received has shown this island to be of 
exceptional ornithological importance. Avian Island possesses 
the greatest diversity and concentration of breeding birds in the 
Antarctic Peninsula region, including the farthest south breeding 
colony of Southern Giant Petrels and one of the largest Blue-eyed 
Shag colonies in the Antarctic.  The Adélie Penguin colony is the 
largest on the Antarctic Peninsula.  The Area is vulnerable to 
visits by tourists, private yachts and uncontrolled personnel 
from neighbouring research stations in Marguerite Bay, and it 
is considered desirable to afford the site maximum protection. 
Hence the proposal to re-designate the island as a Specially 
Protected Area.  A description of the site and a proposed 
Management Plan are attached.

MR2ABA/18
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA:

RE-DESIGNATION OF SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 30,
AVIAN ISLAND, MARGUERITE BAY, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA AS A
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting  that a Management Plan has been approved by the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering  that Avian Island, together with its littoral
zone is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its
abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds, including
Adélie Penguins, Blue-eyed Shags, Giant Petrels,
Dominican Gulls, South Polar Skuas and Wilson's Petrels,
and that the colony of Adélie Penguins is the largest on
the Antarctic Peninsula, and that other species are at or
near the southern limits of their breeding range, and that the
island is vulnerable to visits by tourists, and uncontrolled
personnel.

Recommend  to their Governments that:

(i)      the designation of Avian Island as Site
         of Special Scientific Interest No 30 under
         Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4 be
         terminated;

(ii)     the number 30 should not be used for another
         Site of Special Scientific Interest;

(iii)    The following area of outstanding ornithological

MR2ABA/19
interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially 
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 
(1964), along with the Management Plan 
accompanying the description of  the said 
Specially Protected Area;

Specially Protected Area No 24

Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula (67°46'S, 
68°54'W).

MR2ABA/20
Annex

Proposed Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan

Avian Island, North West Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Avian Island (67°46'S, 68°54'W) lies 0.25 km south of the south-west tip of Adelaide 
Island in north-west Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area consists of Avian Island together with its littoral zone. It is 1.45 km long by 0.8 
km at its widest (total area about 49 ha), and rises to just over 40 m altitude in the south. It 
is almost entirely ice-free in summer. There are several shallow melt pools, the largest 
being on the eastern raised beach terrace. There are two small dilapidated refuge huts, one 
near the north-west and the other near the mid-east shores of the island.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of 
breeding seabirds, the most important of which are: Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) 
about 36,000 pairs; blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) about 670 pairs; southern 
giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) about 250 pairs; Dominican gulls (Larus 
dominicanus) about 60 pairs (total adult birds about 200); skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) 
30 pairs (total adult birds about 200); Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) several 
hundred pairs. Several other birds are frequent visitors, breeding elsewhere in Marguerite 
Bay. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed in small numbers around the shores 
of the island, and other species of seals occasionally come ashore, particularly fur seals 
(Arctocephalus gazella) in increasing numbers during summer. Bryophyte vegetation is 
sparse but nitrophilous lichen communities are well-developed; vascular plants are absent. 
The giant petrel colony is the farthest south known breeding population and represents 
about a quarter of the population breeding on the entire Antarctic Peninsula. The blue-eyed 
shag colony is one of the largest known in the Antarctic and is very close to the southern 
limit of the species breeding range; it represents about 85% of the total population breeding 
south of the Antarctic Circle. The Adélie penguin colony is the largest on the Antarctic 
Peninsula and contains a third of the total population breeding in the region.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
Originally designated as SSSI No.30, November 1989, Recommendation XV-6, by UK; 
July 1990; UK.

(iv) Access points
Access should be from the sea as close as possible to either of the refuges.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.
vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area (over-snow vehicles used to visit the island
    must be left at the shoreline);

(b) bring any dog into the Area;

(c) land a helicopter within the Area;

(d) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(e) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in
    accordance with the permit;

(f) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
    all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(g) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, except at the
    refuges, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of
    which they must be removed.

(h) erect any form of building within the Area, besides the restoration and
    maintenance of the two existing refuges.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding
bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or
seal, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits should be made to the Area at least once every five years to assess the state
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

 
                         AVIAN ISLAND

          68°54'          68°53'W
-67°46'15"S

 
                         WOODFIELD CHANNEL

-67°46'45"

 
Contours at 10 m
interval

  0        500
   m
