ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

             

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP35
9 October 1991
Original: English

THE PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM IN ANTARCTICA

(item 11)

(submitted by Italy)
1.     ; in the view of the Italian delegation the regulation of the protected areas system 
should be an annex to the Madrid Protocol.

2.     and Historical Sites and Monuments (Rec. I-9, V-4, and VII-9)

3.     and of human history in the region

4.     The present procedures for proposal and review of protected areas, i.e. proposal by 
Parties, review by SCAR, and final presentation to ATCM by a Party, have proven 
reasonably adequate. However, when the Committee for Protection of the 
Environment established by the Madrid Protocol will become operative, such 
Committee should undertake the functions of review of the proposals for new 
protected areas and of drafting the final proposals to be submitted to ATCM. The 
Committee will review the management plans, including the provisions for inspections 
and other measures of control.
2

Item 11 -- Italy working paper on the protected areas system

ATCM XVI, Bonn 7-18 Oct. 1991

Item 11 - The protected areas system in Antarctica

Working document presented by the delegation of Italy

This document aims to rationalize the system of protected areas in the Antarctic. The 
proposals put forward by several delegations at the 1st Session of ATSCM XI as well as the 
1987 SCAR proposal provide a useful basis for discussion.

The Madrid Protocol affords comprehensive protection and conservation of the 
Antarctic environment; in the light of this protocol and in order to fullfil its general purpose, 
the whole Antarctic area should be regionalized into several major geographical-
environmental units, each characterized by an established degree of internal environmental 
consistency, to which differentiated basic levels of protection should apply. Within this frame 
the protected areas designated under the Antarctic Treaty System should represent the most 
specific single territorial units to which special and more stringent protective provisions would 
apply.

The Italian delegation considers it useful to reduce the number of cathegories of 
protected areas and to reach a formally simpler and more straighforward system. A single 
cathegory of protected areas should be established in place of the former SPA (ART.VIII of 
the 1964 Agreed Measures, Rec. VII-2 and XV-9), SSSI (Rec.VIII-3), SRA (REC XV-10) 
bearing in mind that the aim of these cathegories is the protection and the conservation of 
some or all the components of the natural environment from the interference of human 
activities and to preserve the conditions for carrying out scientific activities. However, in such 
areas the scientific activities themselves are also subject to some form of specific regulation in 
order to preserve the long-term scientific value of the areas, and the possibility for future 
research on the pristine and natural components of the Antarctic environment.

    the existing protected areas should be kept according to the adopted disignations and 
management plans, although renamed and renumbered under the new cathegory of Antarctic 
Protected Areas, APA, following the 1987 SCAR proposal.
Item 11 Italy working paper on the protected areas system

The environmental values to be protected have been established in a number of
provisions (inter alia the 1964 Agreed Measures, Rec.VIII-3, Rec.XV-10, and systematically
described in the Madrid Protocol). Such values now include: the scientific interest and
ongoing or planned scientific research, aesthetic and wilderness values, examples of major
ecosystems, unusual assemblages of species, type localities and only known-habitats of species,
examples of major geological, geomorphological or glaciological features, monuments and
sites of historical value. The advice of SCAR should be sought for any future review and
extension of the protected values.

The purpose and the scope for designation of a protected area will be fundamental
elements to be defined in its proposal. The reasons for designations should be stated as
clearly as possible, not only in terms of description of the values to be protected, but also in
terms of need of protection from interference and from the effects of activities in and near the
area. The necessary between-areas distinctions will result from the purposes and scopes stated
in their designations, whether providing for full and comprehensive environmental
conservation (granted by such measures as prohibition of access, e.g. in areas to be kept free
of interference for providing scientific baseline data and comparability of effects), or
providing for partial protection of specific and cultural environmental elements, or providing
for protection of scientific interests and activities. The expiration of the status of protected
areas may also be established.

The management plans will designate the specific requisites, provisions, restrictions, and all
the conditions which will be deemed necessary to attain the required level of protection and
to fullfil the purpose of designation. The management plans will specify if, and under which
conditions, permits will be required for access and for conducting activities in the area. It will
be also stated, if inspections should be required, as well as reports of such inspections. The
handbook on management plans prepared by SCAR should be considered as a useful
practical basis.

The status of protected areas should also be granted to protect environmental and
scientific values of areas of the marine environments (marine areas), building on Rec.XIV-6.
Item 11 --Italy working paper on the protected areas system

The disignations of historic sites and monuments should also include reviewed management plans, since in some cases in the past the historical, cultural, and aesthetical value of the monuments has been belittled by the lack of adqate buffer zones or by lack of adequate management.

Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPA, Rec. XV-11), should be maintained under a separate cathegory, inasmuch the designation of those areas is not strictly one of preventive and general protection of some or all the natural environmental components within the area, which is the general purpose of the natural reserves. MPAs are in fact areas of development of human activities, including but not exclusive of scientific activities. Within MPA the best suitable and compatible environmental protection is sought in order to avoid unneccessary environmental costs by cumulative effects, and in order to minimize interference between activities in the light of the relevant existing principles of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Madrid Protocol. Permits of access to MPAs should not be required, unless otherwise specified in their management plans.

In the drafting of the provisions on protected areas the following specific items should also be considered:

a) spatial and environmental requirements:
-   the spatial criterion adopted in the past has been of designated areas of minimum territorial size compatible with the protection afforded. In some cases such condition has not been sufficient to grant the level of protection expected, and extention of the areas have been included in management plans as buffer zones. In fact, the interdependence between the various environmental components may introduce into the protected area significant second-order effects from activities carried out outside the area. Therefore the criterion of optimal areal extent should be adopted in place of the former criterion of minimum spatial extent which would supposedly fullfil the purpose for designation of each area.
-   the improved, exact and recognizable boundary definition of the area; the use of natural features as boundaries.
-   the concept of territorial zoning should apply whenever possible by defining the areas of permitted activities within the protected area, by defining the buffering zones from external disturbances, and by describing size and extent of areas of expected impacts from activities carried out within and near the area
Item 11 Italy working paper on the protected areas system

-   an overall geographical-environmental zoning of the Antarctic region should be 
    established as a scientific framework introducing the basic knowledge requirements for 
    designations. Such zoning would also provide the geographic basis for selecting new protected 
    areas according to a criterion of geographically balanced representativeness.

b) management requirements:
-   requirements and conditions of the permits issued by the appropriate authorities of the 
    Parties; format of permits
-   advance information about planned activities in the areas should be exchanged on a 
    regular basis
-   records of activities and of permits issued should be maintained by the Parties and 
    exchanged on a regular basis
-   inspection reports should be circulated on a regular basis
-   access routes and landing sites should be defined, as well as any restriction on access 
    from other routes when adverse effects might occur; in some management plans access could 
    be prohibited (e.g. for areas to be kept inviolate for future comparison)
-   restriction on activities in any protected area should be formulated in terms of 
    prohibiting all activities except those permitted by its management plan; a statement of such 
    permitted activities and conditions should be established in the management plan
-   monitoring, when deemed appropriate, should be carried out in furtherance of the 
    principles established by the Madrid Protocol as well as by previous recommendations; some 
    adopted management plans should be reviewed to that aim. Periodic visits should be provided 
    for in order to monitor: the continuing conditions for designations, the efficiency of the 
    protection afforded, adverse impacts, should they arise. Reports of visits provided for in the 
    mangement plans should be made in accordance with the established practice for SPA, SSSI, 
    SRA and for MPA.
