ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 10
07 October 1991
Original: English

Non-Paper

(submitted by Japan)
Non-paper

In view of the fact that the Antarctic Treaty sytem is becoming increasingly complicated and in order to maintain the momentum and the continuity of the discussion engaged in this meeting, it may seem advisable to have a secretariat of a small size which can continuously follow the events related to Antarctica and accumu-late know-how with regard to logistic and other matters related to the Antarctic Treaty and its Consultative Meetings.

In the view of the Japanese delegation, if a secretariat is to be established, its size and duties should be minimal at least for the next few years. It should be noted that the secretariat will not expand to an unnecessary degree as is often the case in other international organizations. Accordingly, at the time of start-up, the size and the duties of the secretariat should be as follows:

the staff;
    three professional staff and local staff
(including two or three secretaries)

duty;
(1) Logistical and other support to the host country in preparing for the Consultative Meeting,

(2) Preservation of the documents produced in the Consultative Meetings, and to provide them if requested by the Contracting Parties,

(3) Other duties assigned by the Contracting Parties as far as practicable.

privileges and immunities;
    depend on the offer of the host country but need not be ex-tensive. These will be regulated by the agreement between the secretariat and the host Government.

cost sharing;
    the running cost (salary, maintenance, etc.)
shall be equally shared by the Contracting Parties. The start-up cost (land and building) will also have to be shared but the burden will to a large extent depend on the offers of the host government.
The actual amount of the cost of the secretariat will become available after we receive 
offers from any Contracting Party who wishes to host the secretariat. We should receive these 
offers before the next consultative meeting and decide on the necessity of the secretariat at 
that meeting.
