ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                        
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 13
7 October 1991
Original: English

Draft Recommendation
(Item 11)

Specially Protected Areas
Cryptogram Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS :
        CRYPTOGRAM RIDGE, MOUNT MELBOURNE, VICTORIA LAND

(Working Paper Submitted by the UK Delegation)

MR2ABA/15
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, CRYPTOGRAM RIDGE,
MOUNT MELBOURNE, VICTORIA LAND

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting  that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering  that Cryptogram Ridge on the southern rim of
the main summit crater of Mount Melbourne includes areas of
geothermal activity which are ice-free and surrounded by
numerous ice hummocks and scattered ice towers, and that the
geothermal ground supports a unique community of bryophytes,
algae and microbiota including very rare species, and that
this fragile and sterile habitat is of exceptional biological
interest and, to maintain its unique pristine state, should be
afforded maximum protection from human influence;

Recommend  to their Governments that the following area of
outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B,
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the
annexed Management Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 22

Cryptogram Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land.
Mount Melbourne (74° 21'S, 164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay
and Campbell Glacier, northern Victoria Land, on the western
side of the Ross Sea.

MR2ABA/16
Annex

Proposed Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan
Cryptogam Ri[?]ge, Mount Me[?]urne, Victoria Land

1. Geographical location

Mount Melbourne (74°21'S, 164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell Glacier,
northern Victoria Land, on the western side of the Ross Sea.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area includes most of Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater
(2,733 m altitude), and extends about 1,200 m by 500 m. Geothermal activity occurs
along about 300-400 m of the ridge and is marked by discontinuous areas of ice-free
ground, surrounded by numerous ice hummocks up to 1 m high and scattered hollow ice
towers up to several metres in diameter and 4 m high. The warm ice-free areas are mostly
gently sloping with narrow terraces up to 1.5 m wide. More general details for the adjacent
areas are given for the surrounding SSSI No. 24.

(ii) Reason for designation
The geothermal ground within the Area supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae
and microbiota, including the only known occurrence in the Antarctic of the moss
Campylopus pyriformis and the very rare continental occurrence of the liverwort
Cephaloziella exiliflora, otherwise unknown above about 500 m elsewhere in the Antarctic.
This site is comparable with the only other known high altitude geothermally influenced
ice-free area near the summit of Mount Erebus. This fragile and sterile habitat is of
exceptional biological interest and should be afforded maximum protection from human
influence to maintain its unique pristine state.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
June 1990; New Zealand and Italy.

(iv) Access points
Access should be only from either end of Cryptogam Ridge and not from the ridge slopes.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry to the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose with cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) enter the Area without wearing sterile protective overclothing and footwear, to
    be provided by the supporting national operator;

    (b) Use any sampling or other equipment within the Area which has not been first
    sterilized using an acceptable method;

    (c) land a helicopter within the Area; helicopters should land near the summit of
    Mount Melbourne only at a specified point in or adjacent to the main crater, no
    closer than 200 m from the boundary of the Area;

    (d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any waste, including all human waste,
    within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(e) bring into the Area any fuel or food, or leave any form of other supplies within 
the Area, other than markers required for monitoring studies;

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but pedestrians must not use the ridge crest as a way of access to parts of 
the surrounding SSSI. Extreme precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of all ice-free 
ground or interference with ice structures within the Area, unless required as specified in 
the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling 
Where at all possible collections and general observations of geothermal soils and 
organisms should be made from positions outside the Area, unless directly related to the 
monitoring of Cryptogam Ridge; all activities within the Area must conform strictly with 
those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance 
Inspection visits should be made to the Area no more than once every five years to assess 
the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. 
Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.


                                                                               75°15'
                                 Campbell                                  Wood
                                 Glacier                                  Bay
                                 Mt.Melbourne                                 
                                 2000       1000                              
                                 400                                  
                                 
                        Ice fall                                          
                                 
                                 
                        Caldera              Proposed
                                             S.P.A.
                                             Cryptogam
                                             Ridge
                                 
                                 2733m
                                  ∆      Summit
                                 
                                 
                                 1 km
                                 :: Geothermal area
                                 o Ice tower
