ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                      
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                      
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                      
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                      

Bonn                      
07 - 18 October 1991                      

XVI ATCM/WP 54/Rev. 1                      
17 October 1991                      
Original: English                      

Recommendations and Annexes of Working Group II                      

(Recs. XVI - 1 to XVI - 10 and Annexes to Item 11 e) & f) of the Agenda)                      

(submitted by Working Group II)                      



　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　
ANNEX

MULTIPLE-USE PLANNING AREA,
SOUTHWEST ANVERS ISLAND AND VICINITY

MANAGEMENT PLAN

1. Site Description

The Southwest Anvers Island Multiple-Use Planning Area 
encompasses approximately 1,535 square kilometers (Figure 1).
This rectangular area lies between latitudes 64°41'30"S and 65°S 
and longitudes 63°40'W and 64°35'W.  Palmer Station (64°46'S,
64°03'W) is located on Gamage Point on the southwest side of 
Anvers Island.  Immediately adjacent to the station is Arthur 
Harbor and Biscoe Bay to the southeast, Hero Inlet and Bonaparte 
Point to the south, and the Marr Ice Piedmont sloping upward 
north and east from Gamage Point and covering Anvers Island. 
Torgersen Island, at the mouth of Arthur Harbor and about one 
kilometer from Gamage Point, is the closest island to the 
station.  Within a 5.5 kilometer radius of Palmer Station are two 
exposed, prominent points on Anvers Island (Norsel Point and 
Bonaparte Point) and groups of islands that extend to the edge of 
the Bismarck Strait to the southeast (Figure 2).  These islands 
have a diverse topography which extends into the intertidal and 
subtidal zones surrounding and linking the islands.  Other island 
groups in the area are Dream Island (9 kilometers northwest), the 
Joubin Islands (17 kilometers west), and the Wauwermans Islands 
(15 kilometers southeast) near the southern end of Gerlache 
Strait and Neumayer Channel (Figures 1 and 2).  The area includes 
Specially Protected Area No. 17 (Litchfield Island) and Site of 
Special Scientific Interest No. 20 (Biscoe Point).

Palmer Station serves as the base for scientific research 
and associated logistic operations conducted in the western 
Antarctic Peninsula and Palmer Archipelago by the United States 
Antarctic Program (USAP) and collaborators from a number of other 
Antarctic Treaty Parties.  The present station was established in 
1968 and consists of two main buildings and several ancillary 
structures, including an aquarium, small boat house, workshops, 
and storage facilities.  A modern laboratory facility is located 
in the station.  Two large fuel tanks store the station's fuel 
supply.  The station has approximately 44 berthing spaces and is 
operated year-round.  It receives scientific and logistic support 
from ships operated or chartered by the USAP.  Such ships, which 
visit the station approximately 15 times per year, can be 
accommodated at the dock located at the station.  Travel within 
three kilometers of the station is accomplished using inflatable, 
small boats.  Survival caches are maintained on a number of the 
small islands in the area.
2

There are three particularly important marine features in 
the Palmer Station Area:

1)  Shallow shelves.  These extend from Anvers Island and 
the adjacent island groups to depths of 90 to 140 meters.

2)  Bismarck Strait.  Located south of Palmer Station and 
north of the Wauwermans Islands, this strait is 360 to 550 meters 
deep.  It is on a generally east-west axis and connects the 
southern end of Gerlache Strait and Neumayer Channel to a deep 
basin south of Palmer Station (Figure 1).

3)  "Palmer Basin" (unofficial but common nomenclature).  
Palmer Basin is the only deep basin in the area and is located 
22 kilometers southwest of Palmer Station.  It is bordered by the 
Joubin Islands to the north, the Wauwermans Islands to the east, 
and is surrounded by shelves shallower than 165 meters.  It has a 
maximum depth of 1280 meters.  There is a 460 meter deep channel 
connecting the west side of Palmer Basin to the open ocean.  The 
Bismarck Strait enters the basin from the north and connects it 
to Gerlache Strait.

2.  Rationale for Area Designation

The SW Anvers Island Area, because of its diverse 
environmental features and scientific history, is and will become 
increasingly important in terms of long-term studies of the 
natural variability in antarctic ecosystems, the impact of humans 
on antarctic communities, and the possible effect of global 
change on the antarctic environment and on the physiology and 
behavior of its plants and animals.  A review of scientific 
research in the Area is presented in the background paper, 
"The Ecological and Scientific Basis for Multiple-Use Management 
of Human Activities in the Palmer Station Area."

The diverse and easily accessible assemblages of marine and 
terrestrial flora and fauna in the SW Anvers Island Area make the 
area particularly valuable for science.  Since the early 1960s, 
ecological features of this area and its accessibility have 
attracted scientists studying a variety of topics, including 
long-term monitoring of seal and bird populations, surveys of 
plants and animals in both the terrestrial and sub-tidal marine 
environments, investigations of the physiology and biochemistry 
of birds, seals, terrestrial invertebrates, and zooplankton, and 
the behavior and ecology of planktonic marine species.  These 
investigator-initiated studies will continue in the future.  
The United States Antarctic Program's commitment to continued 
ecosystem research in the Antarctic Peninsula has been formalized 
through the designation in 1990 of the area around Palmer Station 
as a Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site.
3

Because of its accessibility and biological diversity and 
the presence of Palmer Station, the SW Anvers Island Area also 
holds a special attraction to tourists. Between 1984-85 and 
1990-91, the number of tour ship visits each season at Palmer 
Station increased from 4 visits (340 visitors) to 12 visits 
(1300 visitors). This has interfered with station operations, 
and while recognizing the commerical and educational value of 
tourism, the United States has had to limit the number of 
tourists visiting Palmer Station.

The purposes of this management plan are to minimize mutual 
interference of ongoing and future scientific, logistic, tourist, 
and other activitites in the Area, to avoid adverse cumulative, 
environmental impacts, and to safeguard the ecological, 
scientiflc, and other values of the Area. The Plan takes into 
account the life histories and ecological and geographic 
relationships among the various species and communities in the 
Area.

3. Possible Impacts of Planned Human Activities

The important ecological features and/or research and other 
activities being carried out in the Area could be affected 
adversely by:

1. Ongoing and Future Research
    a. collection or disturbance of soil, rocks, flora 
       and fauna in or near established study areas;
    b. over sampling and/or collection of tagged animals 
       of known history; and
    c. interference with breeding or other vital 
       processes.

2. Ship Operations
    a. destruction/disturbance of benthic communities 
       from anchoring;
    b. pollution of marine areas by pumping of bilges and 
       dumping of waste;
    c. disturbance of feeding/breeding whales, seals, 
       and birds by ship-generated noise;
    d. accidents such as oil spills;
    e. pollution from stacks, volatile chemicals; and
    f. commercial fishing.
4

3. Aircraft (Helicopter) Operations

a. disturbance of wildlife and interference with
vital processes (e.g., incubation of eggs) caused
by noise from overflights and landings; and

b. destruction of vegetation and/or wildlife habitat
caused by landings.

4. Small Boat Operations

a. disturbance of nesting/breeding/feeding/resting
birds and seals;

b. marine pollution from fuel/lubricant leaks; and

c. air pollution.

5. Station and Field Camp Operations

a. marine and soil pollution from sewage disposal,
dumping of wastes, fuel leaks, warm water
effluents;

b. air pollution from burning of fuels and combustible
waste, and from evaporation of volatile liquids;

c. disturbance of vegetation and wildlife and inter-
ference with vital processes.during resupply,
recreation, and normal station and field camp
operations; and

d. destruction or disturbance of vegetation and
wildlife habitat by construction of additional
stations and field camps.

6. Tourists and Other Visitors

a. interference with laboratory and field studies;

b. collection of souvenirs or disturbance of soil,
rocks, eggs, flora and fauna, particularly in and
near established study areas;

c. interference with vital processes such as
reproduction and feeding; and

d. discard of personal trash (littering marine
and terrestrial areas) while visiting.
5

The Background Paper, "The Ecological and Scientific Basis 
for Multiple-Use Management of Human Activities in the Palmer 
Station Area," lists and indicates the special features of, the 
research that has been conducted in, and the threats to areas and 
sites of particular ecological or scientific value in, the SW 
Anvers Island MPA. To minimize the potential for cumulative 
environmental impact and mutual interference, the United States 
plans to regulate the activities of its nationals, and requests 
that other Antarctic Treaty Parties regulate activities of their 
nationals in the identified areas according to the general and 
site-specific provisions noted below.

4. Measures to Avoid or Minimize Interference and Cumulative 
Impact

4.1 Ongoing and Future Research

Research conducted within the SW Anvers Island MPA should be 
designed and carried out to minimize environmental impacts and 
impacts on ongoing and possible future research. Research in 
Specially Protected Areas (SPA), Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI), and other sites herein described (see below) 
within the area must be authorized by a written permit issued by 
the appropriate national authority in accordance with Articles II 
and VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Flora and Fauna and any measures adopted by Antarctic Treaty 
Parties.

Research on Litchfield Island (SPA Number 17) is prohibited 
except for compelling scientific purposes which cannot be met 
elsewhere, and which will not jeopardize the natural ecology of 
the Island. Research on Biscoe Point (SSSI Number 20) shall be 
limited to that specified in, and shall be carried out in 
accordance with, the approved management plan for the site.

Although they have not been designated as SPAs or SSSIs, the 
following areas and sites within the SW Anvers Island MPA have 
special ecological and/or scientific values--

Breaker Island              Laggard Island
Cape Monaco                 Limitrophe Island
Christine Island            Norsel Point
Cormorant Island            Palmer Basin
Dream Island                Short Cut Island
Elephant Rocks              Short Cut Point
Hermit Island               Stepping Stones Island
Humble Island               Torgersen Island
Joubin Islands

Research in these areas shall be carried out with particular 
care to avoid or minimize trampling of vegetation and disturbance 
of wildlife. The appropriate national authority shall maintain a.
6

record of research carried out at these sites, as well as at the 
aforementioned SPAs and SSSIs, and shall provide reports of these 
activities as described below.

        Persons entering the SW Anvers Island MPA to conduct 
research (or other activities) are requested to contact the 
National Science Foundation Representative or designee on site at 
Palmer Station before beginning the research to notify him/her as 
to what, where, and when research will be done; and learn whether 
there is other research being conducted in the Area which may 
affect or be affected by the planned research (or other 
activities).  The National Science Foundation Representative or 
designee shall maintain a record of such notifications and, when 
contacted, shall advise researchers of others working in the 
Area.

4.2 Disturbance and Taking of Wildlife

        Contracting Parties shall do everything necessary to insure 
that their nationals conducting or supporting research in, or 
visiting, the SW Anvers Island MPA comply with the provisions of 
the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora and such other measures as may be adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties for the conservation of antarctic flora and fauna.  
Except for compelling scientific reasons, taking of birds is 
prohibited in the following sites within the Area:

        Bonaparte Point             Joubin Islands
        Christine Island            Kristie Cove
        Cormorant Island            Laggard Island
        Diana's Island              Limitrophe Island
        Dream Island                Norsel Point
        Elephant Rocks              Shortcut Island
        Hermit Island               Shortcut Point
        Humble Island               Stepping Stones Island

        In addition, the aforementioned islands shall not be visited 
during the critical seabird breeding season from October 1 to 
March 1, except in connection with scientific activities, 
survival cache replacement, or emergencies.

        Researchers shall not take (e.g., disturb or collect) birds 
or mammals that have been marked and/or that are being studied by 
other investigators.  Persons authorized to take birds and 
mammals shall be required to carry a copy of the permit 
authorizing the collections and shall present the permit, upon 
request, to any representative of a Contracting Party seeking to 
insure that collections are being conducted in accordance with 
relevant measures adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  Any 
possible violations of this provision shall be reported to the 
appropriate national contact point, who in turn should report to 
the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
7

4.3 Ship Operations (General)

Ship operations in the vicinity of Palmer Station can be
hazardous and lead to accidents which can result in substantial
environmental damage, and possibly to the loss of human life.
Also, routine operations may disturb birds and mammals feeding or
breeding in and migrating through the area, and introduce
contaminants (e.g., fuel and lubricating fluids) which may affect
phytoplankton, zooplankton, fish, birds, and mammals, and
compromise the scientific value of the area. In addition,
anchoring of vessels may damage or destroy benthic communities,
including sites which have been established to study and monitor
such communities.

To minimize the risk of accidents and environmental damage
from routine operations, ships operating in or transiting through
the SW Anvers Island MPA shall:

a.  exercise maximum caution in light of incomplete
    charting and incomplete knowledge of hazards to
    navigation;

b.  avoid transiting or anchoring in areas where hazards
    to navigation are known or thought to be present; and

c.  refrain from pumping of bilges, discharging of sewage,
    and dumping of waste within the MPA.

4.4 Aircraft (Helicopter) Operations

Helicopter and other aircraft shall be operated to avoid or
minimize, to the maximum extent practicable consistent with
safety considerations, impacts on flora, fauna, and research and
related support activities in the SW Anvers Island MPA.  In
particular:

a.  except in emergencies, aircraft transporting scientists
    and visitors to Palmer Station shall notify the National
    Science Foundation Representative or designee as far in
    advance as possible of expected arrival time, and shall
    land at preferred landing sites; and

b.  except in emergencies or in connection with authorized
    research, no aircraft shall land in or fly at altitudes
    of less than 600 meters over or around land areas when
    and where birds or seals are or may be present.

There are no maintained landing sites for fixed wing
aircraft.
4.5 Small Boat Operations

Small boat operations shall be carried out so as to avoid or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable consistent with safety considerations, pollution of the marine environment and disturbance of birds and mammals. In particular--

a.    fuel tanks and motors shall be maintained and operated to minimize fuel and lubricant leaks;

b.    all waste products (trash) shall be returned to the parent ship or station for appropriate disposal; and

c.    except for emergencies, or in connection with research, monitoring or survival cache replacement consistent with this management plan, small boats shall avoid and not be operated from October 1 to March 1 within 100 meters of

          Christine Island                     Kristie Cove
          Cormorant Island                     Laggard Island
          Diana's Island                       Limitrophe Island
          Dream Island                         Litchfield Island
          Elephant Rocks                       Short Cut Island
          Hermit Island                        Short Cut Point
          Humble Island                        Stepping Stones Island

4.6 Station and Field Camp Operations

Station and field camp operations shall be planned and carried out so as to avoid or minimize impact to the environment, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct and such other waste disposal, marine pollution, and other environmental impact abatement measures as may be adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.

4.7 Tourists and Other Visitors

Persons or tour companies wishing to make arrangements to visit Palmer Station shall contact the U.S. National Science Foundation's Division of Polar Programs at least six months in advance of the planned visit to determine whether, when, and under what circumstances the Station may be able to accommodate the requested visit.

In addition, the national authority in the country of origin shall insure that tourists and other visitors are fully aware of, and comply with, the relevant provisions of this Management Plan and other relevant measures that have been adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties. In particular, private expeditions and tour operators, their staff, and tourists shall be informed of and, except in emergencies, shall be required to comply with provisions of the Antarctic Treaty prohibiting:
9

a. the killing, wounding, capturing, or molesting of any 
      native mammal or bird;

b. introduction of non-indigenous species;

c. dumping of waste; and

d. entry into designated protected areas.

To avoid impacting sensitive environments and ongoing 
research, members of private and tourist expeditions shall not be 
permitted to go ashore at the following sites--

    Cape Monaco                        Joubin Islands
    Christine Island                   Laggard Island
    Cormorant Island                   Limitrophe Island
    Dream Island                       Norsel Point
    Elephant Rocks                     Short cut Island
    Hermit Island                      Short cut Point
    Humble Island                      Stepping Stones Island

Members of private and tourist expeditions shall be directed 
to Torgersen Island. This Island, with an Adelie penguin rookery 
of approximately 7,500 pairs, has been the site of both 
scientific research and tourist visits during the past decade. 
The size and topography of the island allow the opportunity to 
observe wildlife, while minimizing disturbance and habitat 
degradation/destruction. Prior to visiting the island, the 
expedition leader shall contact the National Science Foundation 
Representative or designee at Palmer Station to ensure that 
interference with ongoing scientific activities is avoided.

Tourists and other visitors also shall be made aware that 
walking on vegetation can cause irreparable damage and that 
discarded litter (e.g., polystyrene cups and cigarettes) may be 
eaten by and harm wildlife. Walking on vegetation shall be 
avoided to the maximum extent possible, and the discarding of 
trash (littering) shall be prohibited.
10

5. Reporting

Parties planning to conduct, support, or authorize research or 
other activities in the SW Anvers Island MPA shall advise other 
interested Contracting Parties as far in advance as possible of 
activities it plans to conduct, support, or authorize in the Area 
in the Area during the forthcoming austral field season, and shall 
provide to the Parties copies of all permits issued to authorize: 
(i) the taking of native mammals or birds; and/or (ii) the conduct 
of research in designated protected areas.

Parties conducting, supporting, or issuing permits to 
authorize research or other activities in the SW Anvers Island 
MPA shall maintain a record of such activities, and in the annual 
exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty shall provide 
summary descriptions of the activities conducted in the MPA in 
the preceding year. In addition, at the conclusion of each 
summer field season, Parties shall notify other Parties of (a) 
any activities carried out by its nationals or those of another 
Contracting Party in contravention of the provisions of this 
management plan or other relevant authorities; and (b) steps 
taken to enforce the provisions of this Management Plan.

6. Review

The Management Plan for the SW Anvers Island MPA will be 
reviewed periodically and updated as required. Proposed 
revisions will be provided to the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR) and other relevant components of the 
Antarctic Treaty system for comment, and shall be submitted to 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for adoption in 
accordance with established practice.
64°41'30"      45'      50'       55'       65'      64°41'30"
                                                      
                                                      SCALE 1 : 217,400
                                                            10
                                                       MILES     KILOMETERS
                                                            0        5      10
                                                                         
                                                       Adapted from Approaches
                                                       to Arthur Harbor, Chart 23122,
                                                       Defense Mapping Agency of the United States.
                                                                         
                                                       Figure 1.  This SW Anvers Island Multiple-Use Planning Area.








64°35'      45'      50'       55'       65'      64°35'
ANVERS 
ISLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Proposed Specially Reserved Area

NORTH SIDE OF DUFEK MASSIF

1. Geographical Location
The Dufek Massif is situated at the north end of the Pensacola Mountains near the 
southern boundary of the Filchner Ice Shelf, centered about 82°30'S, 52°W.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of site
All that area north of the mountain crest from 82°36'S, 53°33'W (Brown Nunataks) 
on the west to 82°26'S, 50°36'W (Cox Nunatak) on the east, to a line from Cox 
Nunatak, to a point on the snow surface 1 km north of the north edge of Forlidas 
Ridge to Brown Nunataks. The length is 48 km and the width is about 10 km. The 
boundaries are demarcated as shown on the attached map. SPA No. _, Forlidas Pond 
and Davis Valley Ponds, is located within the site.

Topography: Elevations range from about 500 meters in the Davis Valley to 
about 2,000 meters in the highest peaks. The northern part of the proposed Area 
consists of ice, the southern part of rock, ice, and soil.

Geology and Soils: The rock outcrops in the Area consist of the lowest exposed 
part of the layered mafic Dufek intrusion, which is of Jurassic age. The dry valleys 
contain rock outcrops, small alpine glaciers, moraines, and strongly developed patterned 
ground. Weathering of rock debris in the dry valleys has locally caused minor 
development of soil.

Meteorology: The Area is protected from the strong south winds flowing off the 
inland Antarctic ice sheet. The mean annual temperature is -30°C as measured on the 
ice sheet at the northern edge of the Area.

Biological Features: The only known biological features are the sparse lichens 
on rocks and the algae in ponds. Snow petrels were sighted over Davis Valley, and 
tracks of larger birds have been reported.

(ii) Rationale for designation
The Area contains outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, 
scenic, and wilderness values. It is presently in a pristine condition, and it is important 
to preserve it in this condition while allowing multiple uses so as to permit access to 
scientists and others, while protecting these values. The Area is of significant geological 
interest, being the lowest section of the second largest layered mafic intrusion (the 
Dufek intrusion) in the world. This intrusion is also exposed in 
the Forrestal Range and south of the SRA. The Area has a very 
benign climate for such a southerly location.
The dry valleys preserve an unusual glacial and glacio fluvial record from Miocene to 
present time.

(iii) Permitted activities that would not jeopardize the values to be protected
The Dufek Massif dams the interior ice sheet allowing the existence of several 
spectacular dry valleys such as Davis Valley and blue ice areas in the north. Access is 
permitted freely to ice-covered areas by tracked or wheeled vehicles, by fixed wing 
aircraft and helicopters, and by pedestrians or skiers. Access to ice free valleys, 
including the dry valleys, is permitted by helicopters and by pedestrians. Erection and 
use of tents and temporary shelters is permitted provided that they are removed after 
their intended use.

(iv) Prohibited activities that could adversely affect the values to be protected
Permanent structures such as buildings and permanent stations are not to be established 
within the boundaries of the Area. Large shelters that may in effect become 
permanent fixtures when partly buried are also prohibited. (There are locations outside 
but adjacent to the boundaries where permanent structures could be erected without 
jeopardizing the values being protected.) Aircraft and vehicle fuel storage facilities 
within the Area are prohibited. Operation of tracked vehicles or wheeled vehicles is 
prohibited in the dry valley areas. Formed aircraft landing facilities (including formed 
helicopter pads) are prohibited in the dry valley areas. Marking of natural features is 
prohibited. Use of smoke canisters should be avoided whenever possible. All wastes, 
including human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Entry into SPA No. __, 
within the Area, is by permit only.

(v) Steps to minimize impacts of authorized access
Equipment used for scientific research or other activities should be removed when the 
activity is completed. Major modifications to soil and rock should be avoided within the 
Area. Minor modifications made during the course of scientific research or other 
activities should be restored to the original condition as near as possible after the 
activity is completed.

2
53*                  52*                 51*
                                                
82*30'                                          
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
            SRA                                          SPA
            Boundary                                      Boundary
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
82*45'          10 km               MAP SOURCE: U.S. Geological Survey
                o Elevations in meters       1:250,000 scale
                                                Davis Valley and Cordiner Peaks maps
Davis 
M[?]ller
(Glacier front in Davis Valley
Davis Valley
"lose up west end of In?ek Massif
Davis Valley
...lose up west end of Intek Massif
last end of bek bassll from north
It traverse party, and west end bufek ssll
XVI - 1

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

NEW SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;

Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest addi-
tional to those already designated;

Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the
Management Plans prepared for these sites;

Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the Management
Plans, annexed to this Recommendation, for the following sites:

Site No 32:     Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
(Location: 62°13'S, 58°56'W).

Site No 33:     Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
(Location: 62°08'S, 58°08'W).
ANNEX 1 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-1

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 32
ARDLEY ISLAND, MAXWELL BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND

1.    GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Ardley Island (62°13'S, 58°54'W) is situated c. 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Penin-
sula, Maxwell Bay, King George Island. It is 1 km south-east of the Soviet station Bellingshau-
sen and the Chilean station Teniente Marsh, and c. 0.5 km east of the Chinese station Great
Wall.

2.    MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i)    Description of Site

The Site comprises the entire island and its associated littoral zone, including
the isthmus between the island and Fildes Peninsula to the west. The island
is c. 2.0 km long and 1.5 km at its widest, and rises about 50 m altitude. It
comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are
some raised beach terraces. It is snow- and ice-free in summer. There is a
small (c. 100 m long) freshwater pond ont the south-west of the island. There
is a refuge hut (FRG) near Braillard Point, and two more refuge huts
(Argentina, Chile) are situated near the middle of the northern coast of the
island, the latter comprising several huts.

(ii)    Reason for Designation

The Site is of exceptional biological interest. It has a divers avifauna with 12
breeding species, and is of particular importance for its breeding colonies of
gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua); the average number of breeding pairs is
about 4,000, which is the largest concentration of Gentoos within the South
Shetland Islands and probably in the Antarctic. there are also about 1,200
pairs of breeding Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and a small number of
chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica). Other breeding species of particular im-
portance are southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). Wilson's strom
petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and black-bellied storm petrels (Fregatta tro-
pica). The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive
plant communities in the South Shetland Island, notably the climax fellfield
ecosystem dominated by macrolichens (Himantormia lugubris, Usnea spp.).
such vegetation is extremely sensitive to human intervention and is very
easily damaged.

(iii)    Outline of Research

Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on
Ardley Island for many years by Chilean, FRG and GDR scientists, with
brief studies made also by scientists from other national stations in the area.
Results of a 10-year census and breeding study, commencing in 1979, of py-
goscelid penguins have revealed large between-season fluctuations in num-
bers and the breeding success of each species. Also, the giant petrel breeding
population has declined by about 80 % in recent years. There is strong evi-
dence that these population fluctuations are a direct response to disturbance
by large numbers of visitors and to vehicles and low-flying aircraft. The ef-
fects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the
long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site. Detailed in-
vestigations of the phytosociology of the island's vegetation and of the phy-
siology of selected lichen species have been undertaken. further terrestrial
botanical, zoological and littoral research is planned. Because of the extreme
importance of this area to biological research it is imperative that it is
protected from the severe threat of human intervention to minimize its
impact on this exceptional ecosystem.

(iv)   Date of expiry of designation

       31 December 2001.

(v)    Access points

       None specified, although not more than five persons should enter the site
       from the sea anywhere east of a north-south line running through the beacon
       on the mid-north coast of the island.

(vi)   Pedestrian and vehicular routes

       Pedestrian activity should be restricted whenever possible to areas with mi-
       nimal vegetation, and should avoid any bird breeding sites, except as re-
       quired for approved research studies. Tourists and non-scientific station and
       ship personnel should visit only the area designated for this purpose (see ix)
       in order to minimize disturbance of biota. The use of any type of vehicle,
       including amphibious craft on land, is not permitted. Helicopters should not
       land on or overfly the island below 300 m altitude. Aircraft landing at and ta-
       king off from Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island.

(vii)  Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful inter-
       ference

       Other kinds of scientific investigations may be permitted as long as they
       cause minimum impact on the biota and ecosystems. All markers and struc-
       tures associated with field experiments must be removed as soon as the re-
       search is completed.

(viii) Scientific sampling

       All activities involving banding, capture, killing, etc. of any bird must con-
       form with Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
       Flora. Any other sampling should be restricted to the minimum required for
       the purpose of the respective studies.

(ix)   Other restraints

       Large groups of visitors to the site should be limited to a maximum of 20 per-
       sons at any time. Such groups of persons should have access only to the
       "tourist area" marked on the map, i.e. the north coast of the island as far as
       300 m west of Braillard Point and 300 m west of the Chilean refuege, up to
       an altitude of 20 m above sea level. Groups should be accompanied by a
guide, provided from the national station approving the visit, who will be re-
sponsible for their conduct and who is fully conversant with the Site Ma-
nagement Plan, the Agreed Measures for the Conversation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora, and the current research programmes. There should be no 
access to dogs whether or not they are required for sledging purposes. All 
human waste materials should be removed from the Site and returned to the 
Station of origin; no comeustible materials should be incinerated within the 
Site.
large numbers of elephant seals and fur seals on the beaches. It is a rich part of the coastal 
ecosystem which has not been disturbed by human activity, other than various biological, 
geological and geomorphological studies which have been undertaken within the Area.

(iii) Date of designation and originator 
July 1990: Poland

(IV) Date of expiry of designation 
31 December 2001.

(V) Access Points 
Access from the sea should be close to the outflow of the main stream within the Area about 
300 m west of lions Rump. Helicopter landings should be restricted to the area south of the 
southern boundary of the Area, so as not to disturb the fauna.

(VI) Entry permit requirement 
Entry into the Area should be in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorised representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not 
jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).

However, access to the Area shall be unlimited to parties wishing only to traverse or pass 
through the site to carry out bona fide scientific research inland of the Area. Such parties shall 
pass through the site as speedily as is reasonable and shall not disturb any part of the site. 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of exchange of 
information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out. Research 
parties passing through the site as permitted above should also report their visits in the same 
way.

(VII) Prohibitions 
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) drive any vehicle within the Area;
    (b) land a helicopter within the Area;
    (c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
    (d) anchor or moor any seacraft within the Area, except in accordance with the 
        permit;
    (e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any human waste within the Area; all 
        such waste must be removed from the Area;
ANNEX 2 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-1
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No.33
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

1. Geographical location

The Area is situated on the south coast of King George Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, and is bounded by the following coordinates:

        62°07'48"S, 58°09'17"W
        62°07'49"S, 58°07'14"W
        62°08'19"S, 58°07'19"W
        62°08'16"S, 58°09'15"W

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The area is named after Lions Rump, a prominent rocky hill between the southern extremity of King George Bay and Lion Cove. It includes the littoral and sublittoral extending from the eastern end of "Lajkonik Rock" to the northernmost end of Twin Pinnacles Island, and from that point to the easternmost end of the columnar plug "Lions Head" to the east of White Eagle Glacier. On land the Area includes the coastline of raised beaches, freshwater pools and the streams on the south side of King George Bay and around Lion Cove, moraines and slopes leading up to the lower ice tongue of White Eagle Glacier and westward to a small moraine protruding through the ice cap south-east of Sukiennice Hills. Lions Rump comprises Tertiary lavas and tuffs with thin brown coal intercalations and silicified wood fragments. The moraine west of Lion Cove consists of several Holocene stages of glacier advance and retreat. A small refuge is situated near the shore close to the main stream within the Area, about 300 m west of Lions Rump.

(ii) Reason for Designation
The Area is representative of the terrestrial, limnological and littoral ecosystems of King George Island, possessing diverse biota and rock formations. There is a rich flora, especially of lichens, and the two native vascular plants, Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica, are frequent. Twelve species of birds breed within the Area, including many colonies of three species of pygoscelid penguins, Adélie, chinstrap and gentoo. There are
(f) leave depots of fuel, food or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building additional to the existing refuge within the Area.

(VIII) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but precautions must be taken to avoid disturbance to any breeding bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(IX) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(X) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess its state and to monitor significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
XVI - 2

Antarctic Protected Area System

New Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendations
VII-3, VIII-3 and XIV-6;

Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for
two Marine Sites of Special Scientifc Interest;

Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience
of the practical effect of the Management Plans prepared for
these sites;

Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take
account of the Management Plans, annexed to this
Recommendation, for the following sites:

No.34 Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands;

No.35 East Dallmann Bay, off Brabant Island.
ANNEX 1 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI -

Marine Site of Special Scientiflc Interest No.34

WESTERN BRANSFIELD STRAIT

1. Geographical Location

The Site is locates off the southern shore of Low Island. western South Shetland
Islands. between latitudes 63°20'S and 63°35'S and between longitudes 62°45'W and
62°30'W (with reference to U.S. Defense Mapping Agency Hydrographic Topographic
Center Chart No. 29121). A small portion of the Low Island landmass snowmass
projects into the northern boundary of this domain: here the northern limit of the Site
will be the associated intertidal zone. East. west. and south of the island the bottom
slopes gently from the intertidal zone to depths of approximately 200 meters and then
drops off rapidly near the boundary limits of the Site.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

The bottom consists of a sand/mud/cobbled-rock matrix and supports a rich benthos.
e.g.. numerous fish species. invertebrates (sponges. anemones. annelids. molluscs.
crustaceans. asteroids. ophiuroids. echinoids. holothurolds. brachiopods. tunicates), and
marine plants. In several distinct communities. Fish species commonly collected near
Low Island include Notothenia gibberifrons. Chaenocephalus aceratus. Harpagifer bispinis.
Parachaenichthys charcoti. Trematomus newnesi. and N. coriceps neglecta. Species rarely
found at Low Island include Pseudochaenichthys georgianus. Champsocephalus gunnari.
and Chionodraco rastrospinosus. In addition. the Low Island shelf appears to be a
major spawning ground for several fish species (e.g.. N. coriceps neglecta and the ice
fish C. aceratus).

(ii) Reason for designation

The shallow shelf south of Low Island is one of only two known sites in the vicinity of
Palmer Station that are suitable for bottom trawling for fish and other benthic
organisms. From an ecological standpoint. the Low Island site offers unique
opportunities to study the composition. structure. and dynamics of several accessible
marine communities. The Site. and in particular. its benthic fauna. are of exceptional
scientific interest and require long-term protection from potential harmful interference.

(iii) Outline of research

Studies of this area by scientists from Palmer Station began in the early 1970s. The
current research programme uses fish from Low Island to study the biochemical
adaptations that enable proteins to function at low temperatures and physiological
adaptation of muscle and energy metabolism to low temperatures. These studies are
conducted each year during the austral summer.

1
(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.

(v) Access points
Any boundary point may be used for entry. Free passage of ships through this area is 
permitted.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Not applicable.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations that would not cause harmful interference
Ecological studies of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted 
to the minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal 
disturbance of the Site.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Sampling of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted to the 
minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal 
disturbance of the Site.

(ix) Other restraints
Ships should, where possible, avoid anchoring within the boundaries of the Site.

2
64° W                      60° W
62° S                                     62° S

      SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS
      
LIVINGSTON ISLAND      
SNOW ISLAND      
DECEPTION ISLAND      
SMITH ISLAND      
LOW ISLAND      
HOSEASON ISLAND      
TRINITY ISLAND      
      
      BRANSFIELD STRAIT
      
1 : 2,000,000
0        25       50       75       100 Kilometres
64° S                                     64° S
61°45' W                                 16 Kilometers
                                                
                                                
                       BRANSFIELD
                       1000 fathoms
                       STRAIT
                                                
                                                
                       20         10         0
                                                
                       LOW ISLAND
                                                
                       Cape [?][?]y
                                                
                                                
                                                
                       1:129,000
                                                
                                                
62°30' W                                 63°35' S
                                                
                                                
63°20' S -                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                

ANNEX 2 TO RECOMMENDATONS XVI .

Marine Site of Special Scientific Interest No.35

EAST DALLMANN BAY

1. Geographical Location
The Site is located in East Dallmann Bay off the western shore of Brabant Island.
Palmer Archipelago, between latitudes 64°00'S and 64°20'S and from longitude
62°50' east to the intertidal zone of the island's western shore (with reference to
U.S. Defense Mapping Agency Hydrographic/Topographic Center, Chart No. 39121).
West of Brabant Island the bottom forms a gently sloping shelf from the intertidal zone
to depths of approximately 200 m and then drops off rapidly near the western boundary
of the Site.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The bottom consists of a sand/mud/cobbled-rock matrix. The benthic community
includes numerous fish species, invertebrates (sponges, anemones, annelids, molluscs,
crustaceans, asteroids, ophiuroids, echinoids, holothunoids, tunicates), and marine plants.
Fish species commonly collected at East Dallmann Bay include Notothenia gibberifrons,
Chaenocephalus aceratus, Champsocephalus gunnari, Pseudochaenichthys georgianus, and
Chionodraco rastrospinosus. Specimens of Trematomus newnesi and Notothenia coriiceps
neglecta are rare in this area.

(ii) Reason for designation
The shallow shelf west of East Dallmann Bay is one of only two known sites near
Palmer Station that are suitable for bottom trawling for fish and other benthic
organisms. The Site and, in particular, its benthic fauna are of exceptional scientific
interest and require long-term protection from potential harmful interference.

(iii) Outline of research
Studies of this area by scientists from Palmer Station began in the early 1970s. The
current research programme uses fish from East Dallmann Bay to study the biochemical
adaptations that enable proteins to function at low temperatures and the physiological
adaptation of muscle and energy metabolism to low temperatures.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.

(v) Access points
Any boundary point may be used for entry. Free passage of ships through this area is
permitted.

1
(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Not applicable.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations that would not cause harmful interference
Ecological studies of the composition, structure, and dynamics of the marine communities would not be harmful.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Sampling of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted to the minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal disturbance of the Site.

(ix) Other restraints
Ships should, where possible, avoid anchoring within the boundaries of the Site.

2
63°2.5' W                  62°50' W                  62°15' W
63°55' S
                       
64°00' S -
                       
C ROUX
METCHNIKOFF
POINT
CLAUDE POINT
ASTROLABE ?
NEEDLE
DALLMANN BAY                  BRABANT ISLAND
MELCHIOR
ISLANDS
                       
64°20' S -
GAND ISLAND
                       
64°25' S -
          1 : 330,000
0                8              16 kilometers
XVI - 3
Antarctic Protected Area System

Specially Protected Area:
Re-Desigantion of Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 30, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay,
Antarctic Peninsula as a Specially Protected Area

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been approved by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that Avian Island, together with its littoral zone is unique in the Antarctic
Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds, including Adélie
Penguins, Blue-eyed Shags, Giant Petrels, Dominican Gulls, South Polar Skuas and Wilson's
Petrels, and that the colony of Adélie Penguins is the largest on the Antarctic Peninsula, and
that other species are at or near the southern limits of their breeding range, and that the
island is vulnerable to visits by tourists, and uncontrolled personnel.

Recommend to their Goverments that:

(i)    the designation of Avian Island as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 30
       under Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4 be terminated;

(ii)   the number 30 should not be used for another Site of Special Scientific Interest;

(iii)  The following area of outstanding ornithological interest be inserted in Annex
        B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
        Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), along with the Management Plan
        accompanying the description of the said Specially Protected Area;

Specially Protected Area No. 24

Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula (67°46'S, 68°54'W).
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-

Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan

Avian Island, North West Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Avian Island (67°46'S, 68°54'W) lies 0.25 km south of the south-west tip of Adelaide 
Island in north-west Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area consists of Avian Island together with its littoral zone. It is 1.45 km long by 0.8 
km at its widest (total area about 49 ha), and rises to just over 40 m altitude in the south. It 
is almost entirely ice-free in summer. There are several shallow melt pools, the largest 
being on the eastern raised beach terrace. There are two small dilapidated refuge huts, one 
near the north-west and the other near the mid-east shores of the island.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of 
breeding seabirds, the most important of which are: Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) 
about 36,000 pairs; blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) about 670 pairs; southern 
giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) about 250 pairs; Dominican gulls (Larus 
dominicanus) about 60 pairs (total adult birds about 200); skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) 
30 pairs (total adult birds about 200); Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) several 
hundred pairs. Several other birds are frequent visitors, breeding elsewhere in Marguerite 
Bay. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed in small numbers around the shores 
of the island, and other species of seals occasionally come ashore, particularly fur seals 
(Arctocephalus gazella) in increasing numbers during summer. Bryophyte vegetation is 
sparse but nitrophilous lichen communities are well-developed; vascular plants are absent. 
The giant petrel colony is the farthest south known breeding population and represents 
about a quarter of the population breeding on the entire Antarctic Peninsula. The blue-eyed 
shag colony is one of the largest known in the Antarctic and is very close to the southern 
limit of the species breeding range; it represents about 85% of the total population breeding 
south of the Antarctic Circle. The Adélie penguin colony is the largest on the Antarctic 
Peninsula and contains a third of the total population breeding in the region.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
Originally designated as SSSI No.30, November 1989, Recommendation XV-6, by UK; 
July 1990; UK.

(iv) Access points
Access should be from the sea as close as possible to either of the refuges.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.
vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area (over-snow vehicles used to visit the island
must be left at the shoreline);

(b) bring any dog into the Area;

(c) land a helicopter within the Area;

(d) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(e) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in
accordance with the permit;

(f) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(g) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, except at the
refuges, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of
which they must be removed.

(h) erect any form of building within the Area, besides the restoration and
maintenance of the two existing refuges.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding
bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or
seal, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits should be made to the Area at least once every five years to assess the state
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

AVIAN ISLAND                                 
                         68°54'W          68°53'W
-67°48'15"S                                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                

XVI - 4

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST: INTERIM GUIDELINES:
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO. 6. BYERS PENINSULA. LIVINGSTON 
ISLAND. SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VIII-4 and the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific 
Interest No 6; Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed thereto;

Noting that its Twenty-First Meeting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
(SCAR), held at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 1990) reviewed the Management Plan and 
scientific interests of SSSI No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands;

Recommend to their Government that:

1)      the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6, Byers 
        Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed to 
        Recommendation VIII-4 be terminated;

2)      they voluntarily take account of the Management Plan, annexed to this 
        Recommendation, for Site No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South 
        Shetland Islands.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-4

Amendment to Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6

Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands

This Site currently comprises three areas of varying shape and size on Byers Peninsula designated solely for their sedimentary and palaeontological interest. However, the peninsula is also of considerable biological and archaeological importance. The following amended management plan is proposed:

1. Geographical Location

Byers Peninsula is an extensive, largely ice-free area at the western end of Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, centred on lat. 62°38'S, long. 61°05'W.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site

The Site comprises the entire area of Byers Peninsula extending from the ice margin on the west side of Rotch Dome (to a point directly north of Stackpole Rocks) westwards to the west end of Ray Promontory. The littoral zone of the peninsula is included within the Site. The nearby offshore islets and islands are not included in the Site. Most of the Site is low and undulating, below 100 m altitude, except for Ray Promontory which has a more rugged topography, rising to over 200 m at Penca and Start hills. Numerous volcanic plugs, lakes, pools and streams occur between Ray Promontory and the Rotch Dome ice field. Coastal areas often have broad beaches several hundred metres wide, with raised beaches behind.

(ii) Reason for designation

The fossils found in this area provide evidence of the former link between Antarctica and the other southern continents. A long-term palaeontological research programme has been in progress since the mid-1960's. It is important to protect these Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks from being used as building materials or taken as souvenirs.

The site is of special biological importance. It has a sparse but diverse flora of both calcicolous and calcifuge plants and cyanobacteria associated with the lavas and basalts, respectively. Basaltic plugs are particularly well-vegetated. Several rare cryptogams and the two native vascular plants (Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) occur at several sites. There are several coastal and inland lakes, the latter having a particularly important biota, including aquatic mosses, and serve as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steineni, the only native winged insect in the Antarctic and with exceptionally restricted distribution. The only other Antarctic dipteran, the apterous Belgica antarctica, occurs in stands of wet moss.

The site is also unique in possessing the greatest concentration of historical sites in Antarctica, namely the remains of refuges, together with contemporary artefacts, and shipwrecks of early nineteenth century sealing expeditions.

It is important that both the biological and archaeological features are also afforded protection.

(iii) Outline of research

A long-term geological and palaeontological research programme was established in 1964. The main objectives are the description of sediments and fossils found in this area. Botanical, zoological, limnological, ornithological and archaeological investigations have also been undertaken throughout the Site at various times since the late 1950s.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 2001.
(v) Access points
None defined.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Vehicles should not enter the Site, except in an emergency. Helicopters should land only on unvegetated ground at least 500 m from any bird or seal concencrations, or freshwater bodies.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference.
Scientific research other than archaeological, biological and geological should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Samples of rocks or biological specimens should only be taken for compelling scientific purposes.

(ix) Other restraints
Buildings and other facilities should not be erected in the Site. All non-human waste should be removed from the area. No combustible waste should be incinerated within the Site. There should be no interference of any sealers' refuges (huts, caves, etc) nor removal of any associated artefacts (including implements, timbers, fabrics, etc) from these features or from the beaches. No skeletal remains of any animal should be moved within or removed from the Site.


 
                                                     ORIGINAL BOUNDARIES OF SITE



Rugged Islands
Byrne 
Storna Peninsula
Livingston Island
Byers 
South 
North 
1Km 
0        1        2        3        4 Km
XVI-5

Antarctic Protected Area System:

Specially Protected Areas:
Revised Descriptions and Proposed Management Plans for Specially Protected Areas

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that revised Area Description and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Recommend to their Governments that for the Specially Protected Sites listed below:

(i)    the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna be deleted;

(ii)   that the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna.

The Specially Protected Areas involved are:

Site No. 8:  Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

Site No. 9:  Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula

Site No. 13: Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

Site No. 14: Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 15:  Southern Powell Island, and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands

Site No. 16:  Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands

Site No. 18:  North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands

Site No. 19:  Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-5

Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 8

Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

The Dion Islands (67°52'S. 68°43'W) are a small group of low-lying rocky islands lying about 13 km south of the southern end of Adelaide Island, in the north-western part of Marguerite Bay.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area comprises all of the Dion Islands archipelago, which lie within an area of about 12 km². together with the intervening sea.  The islands and islets are small, rocky and often precipitous, notably Emperor Island which is also the highest (46 m altitude).  The main islands are the largest of the Courtier Islands group (c. 8 ha), Emperor Island (c. 5 ha) and the largest of the Consort Islands group (c. 3 ha). Low lying areas occur on the two largest islands. There are a few small permanent ice patches, but there are no streams or permanent pools.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area possesses the only known breeding population of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula. It is situated on a low-lying raised beach and rocky headland in the south-eastern part of Emperor Island. It is also the most northerly and probably the smallest colony (annual numbers fluctuate between about 50 and 500 pairs), and is one of only two in which breeding occurs on land (see also SPA No.1). It is also the most isolated emperor colony, being about 2,500 km (by sea) from the nearest known rookery. Other breeding birds within the Area include a small colony of Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) near the emperor penguin colony, and about 200 pairs of blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) on the precipitous north side of the same island.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
November 1966, Recommendation IV-8, by U.K.

(iv) Access points
None specified, but access should be from the sea: landing on Emperor Island should be at least 100 m from the emperor penguin colony or any non-breeding aggregations of these birds.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only, in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) land a helicopter within the Area;
(b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(c) use any of the Area's coves, bays or intervening water for anchoring or mooring 
seacraft, except in accordance with the permit;

(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are 
further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
removed:

(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird or seal, particularly emperor penguins which pedestrians should not approach closer 
than 50 m, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state 
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits 
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 9

Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Green Island (65°19'S. 64°10'W) is a small island on the north side of the Berthelot Islands
group, lying between the north-west side of Collins Bay and Grandidier Channel, about 3
km off the Graham Coast of the mid-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area comprises all of Green Island, a small rocky island lying about 0.25 km to the
north of the largest of the Berthelot Islands. It is about 500 m from north to south and :70
m from east to west, rising to a dome-shaped peak at about 80 m altitude. The island - s
steeply on all sides, with high precipitous cliffs on the south and east sides. Along :e
north side is a gently sloping rock platform. There are several permanent snow patches
with the largest occurring to the south and east of the summit. There are no streams or
pools.

(ii) Reason for designation

Green Island is extensively vegetated on the north facing slopes and has especially well-
developed continuous banks of moss turf formed by Chorisodontium aciphyllum and
Polytrichum alpestre which, over much of their extent, overlie peat of more than 1 m in
depth. Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) is frequent in small patches near the
shag colony. The island has two important bird colonies. A large blue-eyed shag
(Phalacrocorax atriceps) colony with about 250 nests occurs on the steep, rocky north-
west corner; this is one of the largest shag colonies on the Antarctic Peninsula. There are
also large numbers of brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii) and a few south polar skuas (C.
maccormicki) and hybrids, but only a few of the former are known to breed.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966, Recommendation IV-9, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified, but landings by boat or helicopter are easiest on the north side of the
island.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the rock platform near sea level on
        the north side of the island:

    (b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point:

    (c) use any of the Area's coves for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in
        accordance with the permit:
(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must removed;

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to cause minimal damage to the luxurient moss banks and avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activiies must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be at least once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 13

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Moe Island (60°45’S, 45°41’W) is a small island lying about 0.5 km off the south-west extremity of Signy Island, South Orkney Islands, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area is an irregularly shaped island about 1.8 km from north-east to south-west, and 1 km from north-west to south-east. It rises precipitously on the north-eastern and south-eastern sides to Snipe Peak (226 m altitude); there is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m), Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on the east and south facing slopes, with late lying snow patches on the steeply dipping western slopes. There are no streams or pools.

(ii) Reason for designation
Moe Island provides an excellent representative sample of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial ecosystem, with particularly well-developed stands of vegetation typical of the South Orkney Islands. The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the main stand of which is continuous over 5 ha, including large areas of eroded peat, and represents the largest known example of this community type in the Antarctic). The cryptogamic flora and arthropod fauna are diverse. There are five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about 11,000 pairs. Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2,000 pairs of cape petrels (Daption capensis) and large numbers of Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata). Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are sometimes frequent in the bays on the west side of the island. An increasing number of immature bull fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and are causing some damage to vegetation. However, the nature of the terrain should restrict the animals to this small headland.

Because of the long-established intensive experimental field research and the very extensive destruction of the lowland terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems caused by fur seals on neighbouring Signy Island, Moe Island serves as an important control site with which future comparisons may be made with particular regard to biological and environmental change in the region.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
November 1966, Recommendation IV-13, by U.K.

(iv) Access points
None specified, but preferably and most safely, from the sea at the north-east corner of Landing Cove.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

      (a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the col between hill 89 m and the
western slope of Snipe Peak, to the south of Landing Cove;

      (b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point, except for
access to the landing area specified in (a), which should be directly from the
cove to the north or south avoiding any seabird colonies;

      (c) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in
accordance with the permit;

      (d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

      (e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are
further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be
removed;

      (f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding
bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit; in particular,
stands of Polytrichum-Chorisodontium moss banks and areas of eroding peat should be
avoided wherever possible.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made once every year to assess the state of the site
and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes, particularly with regard
to increasing damage caused by fur seals to the island's vegetation. Such visits should also
be used to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 14

Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Lynch Island (60°40'S, 45°38'W) is a small island situated at the east end of Marshall Bay,
in the mid south coast of Coronation Island and directly to the north of Signy Island, South
Orkney Islands.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area is a small rocky island, c. 200 m from the east coast of Coronation Island, and
about 500 m from east to west and 300 m from north to south, rising to a flat plateau with a
maximum altitude of 33 m. On the south, east and west sides there are low cliffs up to 20
m high, and boulder-filled gulleys, while the northern side has a low cliff below a rock
terrace at about 5-8 m altitude. There are no streams or pools, and only a few small late-
lying snow patches occur on the southern side of the island.

(ii) Reason for designation

Lynch Island supports one of the most extensive and dense stands of Antarctic hair grass
(Deschampsia antarctica) known in the Treary Area. The only other Antarctic flowering
plant, Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), is also abundant. The cryptogamic
vegetation is typical of the region, but several species of moss are unusually fertile here
(notably Polytrichum alpinum and Muelleriella crassifolia). Beneath the grass swards on
the moist north-facing slope a shallow loam-like earth resembling tundra brown soil has
developed and contains a rich invertebrate fauna. Moist moss in rock crevices on the north
side of the island harbours a rare terrestrial enchytraeid worm. Breeding birds are poorly
represented, but most species of Antarctic seals are common around the island and
occasionally ashore (particularly an increasing number of immature bull fur seals,
Arctocephalus gazella, which come ashore in summer).

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966, Recommendation IV-14, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

Access should be from the sea, landing at a prominent low rocky promontory or the
adjacent cove to the west, on the north side of the island.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within the Area;

(c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit;

(e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area: all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit: in particular, areas of Deschampsia and Colobanthus should be avoided wherever possible.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every year to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes, particularly with regard to increasing damage caused by fur seals to the island's grass-dominated communities. Such visits should also be used to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 15

Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Powell Island (60°45'S, 45°02'W) is the third largest of the South Orkney Islands, lying between Coronation Island to the west and Laurie Island to the east.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area includes all of Powell Island south of the latitude of the southern summit of John Peaks (375 m altitude), together with Michelsen Island (a peninsula rising to 38 m altitude and separated from a long promontory at the south end of Powell Island by a low isthmus which floods at high tide) and adjacent unnamed rocky islets, Christoffersen Island (96 m altitude) to the west, Grey Island (43 m altitude) to the south, and Fredriksen Island (about 300 m altitude) to the east. All but southern Powell Island (Crutchley Ice Piedmont) are mainly ice-free in summer. All intervening sea is included within the Area.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Area is of exceptional biological interest, supporting limited stands of vegetation typical of biotically influenced coastal habitats of the region, and considerable populations of a diversity of bird and seal species. The bryophyte vegetation is best developed at the extreme north-west comer of the Area on south-west Powell Island, on Christoffersen Island and locally on northern Fredriksen Island; elsewhere there are extensive nitrophilous lichen communities on the rocks and cliffs. There are several biotically contaminated melt pools and streams, especially on the beach on the east side of southern Powell Island where Crutchley Ice Piedmont is receding.

Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are about 50,000 breeding pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) of which about 80% occur on Fredriksen Island, and about the same number of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) of which almost all occur in the southern Powell-Michelsen Island area. There are about 3,000 pairs of gentoo penguins (P. papua) breeding on the southern promontory of Powell Island, Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island. There are also a few pairs of macaroni penguins (Eudyptes chrysolophus). Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), cape petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata), brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergi), sheathbills (Chionis alba), and possibly Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata) and black bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica). The isthmus between southern Powell Island and Michelsen Island is the longest-known breeding site in the Antarctic for fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) since their extermination in the nineteenth century. However, the small number of pups born annually has not increased substantially; a few pups are also born on suitable beaches on Fredriksen Island. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, e.g. elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx), and crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally seen on ice floes within the Area.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966, Recommendation IV-15, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified, but access should preferably be from the sea.
(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participaring Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;
(b) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the north-eastern part of the beach
on the east side of the promontory of southern Powell Island and providing there
are no aggregations of wildlife, or on unvegetated areas in the north of
Fredriksen Island, both to be at least 0.5 km from any bird or seal colonies or
aggregations;
(c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in
accordance with the permit; ships may anchor only in the strait between
Michelsen and Fredriksen Islands;
(e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are
further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be
removed;
(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding
bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or
seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 16

Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands

1. Geographical location

Coppermine Peninsula (62°23'S. 59°42'W) is situated on the west side of Robert Island.
which lies between Nelson Island to the east and Greenwich Island to the west, midway
along the South Shetland Islands archipelago.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area comprises all land west of a north-south line across the isthmus between Carlota
Cove and Coppermine Cove, 100 m west of a small group of Chilean refuge huts. The
peninsula is about 1.7 km from south-east to north-west and up to 0.6 km from north-east
to south-west, and is largely surrounded by precipitous cliffs. There are three prominent
low hills which reach a highest point at about 220 m. The easternmost lies close to the
isthmus; there is a central hill composed of basaltic columns referred to as "Neptune's
Cathedral". and the westernmost is situated above Fort William at the extreme west of the
peninsula. The isthmus (mainly outside the Area) is a 250 m wide raised beach reaching
about 10 m altitude. Much of the higher ground is permanently ice covered. There are
numerous small streams and pools in summer.

(ii) Reason for designation

Coppermine Peninsula is a biologically rich area with a diverse biota typical of the South
Shetland Islands. It supports a wide range of plant communities with associated
invertebrate fauna; the vertebrate fauna is also particularly well represented.  The
outstanding feature of the vegetation is a 1.5 ha closed carpet of the mosses Calliergidium
austro-stramineum, Calliergon sarmentosum and Drepanocladus uncinatus, representing
one of the largest continuous moss stands in the Antarctic. It overlies a thick layer of wet
moss peat. Large stands of the foliose cyanobacterium Nostoc commune occur on moist
slopes and in depressions. A large number of bryophyte and lichen species occur within
the Area, and Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) is frequent. A small colony of
chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) occurs at Fort William. There are about 30 small
colonies of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). Other breeding species include
about 2,000 nests of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) in at least 13 colonies,
up to 1,000 Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata) in nine colonies, 300-400 Dominican gulls
(Larus dominicanus) in ten colonies, and numerous brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii).
Seals are common around the peninsula and frequently haul out at the isthmus, notably
elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and
increasingly large numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

(iii) Date of designation and proposer nation

November, 1966. Recommendation IV-10, by Chile.

(iv) Access points

Access should be from the isthmus outside the Area by sea from Coppermine Cove or
Carlota Cove, or by helicopter also to the east of the Area.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry to the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within the Area;

(c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in 
accordance with the permit;

(e) Incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they 
are required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or 
seal or stand of vegetation (especially the extensive carpet of moss on the isthmus), unless 
required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every three years to assess the 
state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other 
visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 18
North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location
Coronation Island (60°38'S, 45°35'W) is the largest of the South Orkney Islands, situated 
at the west end of the archipelago.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area lies on the central north side of Coronation Island. It is bounded to the east by 
Foul Point (60°32'S, 45°29'W) and to the west by Conception Point (60°31'S, 45°41'W); 
the entire area of these points, together with the intervening sea, is included in the site. The 
eastern boundary follows a precipitous ridge 6 km southward to a position at 2,500 ft (c. 
750 m) altitude immediately to the west of Mount Nivea summit (60°35'S, 45°29'W), 
thence west-south-westward for 5.5 km to a position at 3,000 ft (c. 900 m) altitude to the 
north-east of Wave Peak summit (60°37'S, 45°36'W), and from there 4 km westward 
across the Brisbane Heights plateau, then 4 km north-north-west to an unnamed summit at 
3,532 ft (c.1,060 m) and north for 6 km to Conception Point. The summits of Mount 
Nivea and Wave Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside the Area. Ommanney 
Bay and the unnamed bay to the west are included within the Area, south of the boundary 
between Conception and Foul points (11.5 km).

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain (Conception, Prong and Foul Points) 
with large seabird colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and permanent icefields (two major 
glaciers and ice cliffs rising to the Brisbane Heights plateau) which provide an excellent 
representative area of a pristine ice environment near the northern limit of the maritime 
Antarctic and Antarctic Treaty Area. The inter-related terrestrial, ice and marine 
components of the Area comprise an integrated example of the coastal permanent ice and 
sublittoral ecosystems typical of the maritime Antarctic environment.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
October 1985, Recommendation XIII-10, by UK.

(iv) Access points
None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within 0.5 km of any bird or seal colonies or aggregations, or 
on any of the icefields;
(c) overfly Conception, Prong or Foul Points below 250 m above their respective 
highest points; 
(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in 
accordance with the permit; ships must not enter the Area; 
(e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
all such waste, including human waste in all ice-covered areas, must be 
removed from the Area; 
(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they 
are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
removed; 
(g) erect any form of building within the Area. 

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird or seal. 

(viii) Scientific research and sampling 
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area. 

(ix) Inspection and maintenance 
Inspection visits to the Area should be made no more than once every five years to assess 
the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. 
Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 19

Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Lagotellerie Island (67°53'S, 67°24'W) lies about 3 km west of the southern part of Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
Lagotellerie Island is about 2 km from east to west by about 1 km from north to south, and rises steeply to twin summits of c. 270 and 290 m altitude separated by a broad saddle. The north side of the island is largely snow-free with extensive low-lying ground. The south and east sides have precipitous cliffs up to 180 m high; much of the north side also has steep cliffs dissected by gulleys and traversed by broad rock terraces. There are no permanent streams or pools.

(ii) Reason for designation
The island has a relatively diverse flora and luxuriant development of plant communities, representative of the southern maritime Antarctic region. The north side supports an abundance of Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) which on some of the terraces forms closed swards up to 10 m2. Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) is also frequent. Both species are close to the southern limit of their range. There is also a rich cryptogamic flora with well-developed communities containing several rare mosses and lichens. Beneath the closed grass and moss stands a rich loamy earth up to 25 cm deep has developed, with a rich invertebrate fauna and microbiota. The island is one of the southernmost sites for the apterous midge Belgica antarctica. There is a colony of about 1,000 pairs of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at the south-east corner of the island. Here, there is also a small colony of about 30 pairs of blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), which is one of the farthest south breeding sites for the species. Brown and south polar skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii and C. maccormicki) are abundant and several pairs of each nest on this island.

(iii) Date of designation and proposer nation
October 1985, Recommendation XIII-11, by U.K.

(iv) Access points
None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the low-lying unvegetated ground in the mid north side of the island and on the saddle between the two peaks;

    (b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(c) use any of the Area's coves for anchoring or mooring seacraft except in 
accordance with the permit;

(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they 
are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
removed:

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird or seal or stand on vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state 
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits 
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
XVI - 6

Antarctic Protected Area System:
Sites of Special Scientific Interest: Extension of Designation

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4, XII-5 and XIII-7;

Noting that:

(i)     in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3, the
        Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), at its Twenty-First
        Meeting at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 1990) had reviewed the eight
        Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated in Recommendations
        VIII-4, XIII-8 and XIV-5;

(ii)    experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites
        has shown them to be an effective means of reducing the risks of harmful
        interference in areas of special scientific interest;

(iii)   no changes to the Management Plans of these sites had been proposed by
        SCAR.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.      The date of expiry of designation of Site Numbers:

        4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island;
        
        5 - Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands;
        
        7 - Haswell Island;
        
        10 - Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island;
        
        11 - Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island;
12 - Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land;

18 - North-West White Island, McMurdo Sound

be extended to 31 December 2001.

2.  The date of expiry of designation of Site Number:

22 - Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow - Holm Bay

be extended to 31 December 2003.

3.  They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs
3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans of these sites
are observed.
XVI - 7

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, CRYPTOGRAM RIDGE:
MOUNT MELBOURNE, VICTORIA LAND

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that Cryptogram Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater of Mount Melbourne includes areas of geothermal activity which are ice-free and surrounded by numerous ice hummocks and scattered ice towers, and that the geothermal ground supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae and micribiota including very rare species, and that this fragile and sterile habitat is of exceptional biological interest and, to maintain its unique pristine state, should be afforded maximum protection from human influence;

Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Management Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 22

Cryptogram Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land. Mount Melbourne (74°21'S, 164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell Glacier, northern Victoria Land, on the western side of the Ross Sea.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI.

Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan
Cryptogam Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land

1. Geographical location

Mount Melbourne (74°21'S, 164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell Glacier,
northern Victoria Land, on the western side of the Ross Sea.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area includes most of Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater
(2,733 m altitude), and extends about 1,200 m by 500 m. Geothermal activity occurs
along about 300-400 m of the ridge and is marked by discontinuous areas of ice-free
ground, surrounded by numerous ice hummocks up to 1 m high and scattered hollow ice
towers up to several metres in diameter and 4 m high. The warm ice-free areas are mostly
gently sloping with narrow terraces up to 1.5 m wide. More general details for the adjacent
areas are given for the surrounding SSSI No. 24.

(ii) Reason for designation
The geothermal ground within the Area supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae
and microbiota, including the only known occurrence in the Antarctic of the moss
Campylopus pyriformis and the very rare continental occurrence of the liverwort
Cephaloziella exiliflora, otherwise unknown above about 500 m elsewhere in the Antarctic.
This site is comparable with the only other known high altitude geothermally influenced
ice-free area near the summit of Mount Erebus. This fragile and sterile habitat is of
exceptional biological interest and should be afforded maximum protection from human
influence to maintain its unique pristine state.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
June 1990; New Zealand and Italy.

(iv) Access points
Access should be only from either end of Cryptogam Ridge and not from the ridge slopes.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry to the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose with cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

      (a) enter the Area without wearing sterile protective overclothing and footwear, to
          be provided by the supporting national operator;

      (b) Use any sampling or other equipment within the Area which has not been first
          sterilized using an acceptable method;

      (c) land a helicopter within the Area: helicopters should land near the summit of
          Mount Melbourne only at a specified point in or adjacent to the main crater, no
          closer than 200 m from the boundary of the Area;

      (d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any waste, including all human waste,
          within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(e) bring into the Area any fuel or food, or leave any form of other supplies within the Area, other than markers required for monitoring studies;

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but pedestrians must not use the ridge crest as a way of access to parts of the surrounding SSSI. Extreme precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of all ice-free ground or interference with ice structures within the Area, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

Where at all possible collections and general observations of geothermal soils and organisms should be made from positions outside the Area, unless directly related to the monitoring of Cryptogam Ridge; all activities within the Area must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits should be made to the Area no more than once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

[Diagram of Cryptogam Ridge area]

1 km
Geothermal area
Ice towers

[Inset map showing location of Cryptogam Ridge]

75°15'
Wood Bay
Mt. Melbourne
Campbell Glacier
10 km
165° 
2000
1000
400
2733m
Summit
Caldera
Proposed S.P.A.
Cryptogam Ridge
XVI - 8

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, FORLIDAS POND AND DAVIS VALLEY PONDS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that the Area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds
known in Antarctica containing plant life, and that these ponds and their immediate
catchments should be protected as examples of unique near-pristine ecosystems which
should be afforded maximum protection from human influence;

Recommend to their Governments that the following Area of outstanding scientific
interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for
the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, together with the annexed
Management Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 23

Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley Ponds, situated near the east end of the Dufek Massif at
position 82°27'15"S, 51°21'W. The Area includes smaller ponds that occur along the ice
margin at the northern edge of Davis Valley, a short distance east of Forlidas Pond.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-8

Proposed Specially Protected Area No. 2 1

FORLIDAS POND AND DAVIS VALLEY PONDS

1. Geographical Location
Forlidas Pond, about 100 m in diameter, is situated near the east end of the Dufek
Massif in a small unnamed dry valley about 1 km east of the northern edge of Forlidas
Ridge and about 1 km northwest of Davis Valley. The unnamed dry valley is separated
from Davis Valley by a northeast trending ridge several kilometres long. The position
of Forlidas Pond is 82°27'15"S, 51°21'W. The Area includes smaller ponds that occur
along the ice margin at the northern edge of Davis Valley, a short distance east of
Forlidas Pond.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area consists of two parts, shown on the attached map, about 500 m apart:

    A. All that area within 500 m of the centre of Forlidas Pond;

    B. All that area with a 500 m radius of several meltwater ponds at the ice
margin along the northern edge of Davis Valley.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds known in Antarctica
containing plant life which would be threatened by possible contamination by human
activity. The only visitors to Forlidas Pond have been geologists and geophysicists in
1957 and possibly one or two other parties. The ponds in Davis Valley were visited in -
1978 by geologists. No botanists or zoologists have visited the Area. These ponds are
located in SRA No. L, North Side of Dufek Massif, which could attract visitors such as
scientists or tourists. They should be protected as examples of unique near-pristine
freshwater ecosystems and their catchments.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
October, 1991, USA.

(iv) Access points
None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirements
Entry to the Area should be in strict accordance with a current permit, issued
by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a
compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site
inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its
1
biota within the Area. Details of visits should be included in national annual 
reports of exchange of information for the same Antarctic season in which the 
activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions   
None specified, but camping and the landing of helicopters should be avoided within 
1 kilometre of the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes   
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of 
biota, soil, water, and periglacial features, unless required as specified in the 
permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling   
Taking of samples of biota or soils should be done only for a compelling scientific 
purpose and must conform strictly with the activities specified in the permit to enter the 
Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance   
Inspection visits should be made when opportunity arises to assess the state of the Area 
and to monitor biological and environmental change, and to maintain boundary 
markers, notices, etc.

 
2
82°30'
          SRA                SPA       
         Boundary           Boundary      
DUFEK                                    
MASSIF                                   
     Fossil Ridge                     
              Davis                        
               Valley                       
              Edge                           
             Glacier                        
3 km                                        
MAP SOURCE: U.S. Geological Survey      
1:250,000 scale                          
Davis Valley map                         
82°45’ 
          53°
82°30’                                  22°                                  81°                                  
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                
Forlidas pond
Davis Valley
Forlidals Pond
Lewis Valley
Algae on frozen surface of pond at glacier front in Davis Valley
XVI - 9

Antarctic Protected Area System:
New Historic Sites and Monuments

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-10, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic site (monument) be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter it be accorded the respect and protection required by the Recommendations recalled above:

56.      Waterboat Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (64°49'S, 62°52'W). The remains and immediate environs of the Waterboat Point hut, situated close to the unoccupied Chilean station, 'Presidente Gabriel González Videla'. The Waterboat Point hut, of which only the base of the boat, roots of door posts and an outline of the nut and extension still exist, was occupied by the UK two-man expedition of Bagshawe and Lester in 1921-22. This was, and indeed remains, the smallest expedition to ever overwinter in Antarctica.

57.      Commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands, near the Chilean refuge located at latitude 62°32'S and longitude 59°45'W, to the memory of Captain Robert MacFarlane, who in 1820 explored the Antarctic Peninsula Area in the brigantine Dragón.

58.      Cairn with memorial plaque erected at Whalers' Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, in the vicinity of the whalers' cemetery [historic monument No.31] 62°59'S,60°34'W, to honour captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, Antarctic pioneer who was first to establish a whaling operation at Deception Island in 1906.

59.      A cairn on Half Moon beach, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, commemorating the officers, soldiers and seamen on board the San Telmo, which sank in September 1819; possibly the first people to live and die in the Antarctica wastes.
XVI - 10
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:
REVIEW OF THE SYSTEM

The Representatives,

Recalling Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora and Recommendations V - 4, VI - 14, VII - 2, VII - 9, VIII - 3, XV -
10, XV - 11;

Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty done at
Madrid on 4th October 1991;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.	The Annex attached to this Recommendation form Annex V on Area Protec-
tion and Management to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty;

2.	The Annex become effective upon the date on which both the Protocol on Envi-
ronmental Protection shall have entered into force and this Recommendation
shall have been approved by all Consultative Parties entitled to attend the
XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
1

ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI - 10

ANNEX V TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY

AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 1

DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:

a)	"appropriate authority" means any person or agency authorised by a Party to 
issue permits under this Annex;

b)	"permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an appropriate 
authority;

c)	"Management Plan" means a plan to manage the activities and protect the 
special value or values in an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area.

ARTICLE 2

OBJECTIVES

For the purposes set out in this Annex, any area, including any marine area, may be 
designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area. 
Activities in those Areas shall be prohibited, restricted or managed in accordance with 
Management Plans adopted under the provisions of this Annex.

ARTICLE 3

ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

1.	Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially 
Protected Area to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or 
wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.

2.	Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical 
framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:

	(a)	areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be 
possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;

	(b)	representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, 
ecosystems and marine ecosystems;

	(c)	areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major 
colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(d) the type locality or only known habitat of any species;

(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;

(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;

(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;

(h) sites or monuments of recognised historic value; and

(i) such other areas as may be appropriate to protect the values set out in
paragraph 1 above.

3. Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by
past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas and shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly.

4. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Protected Area shall be prohibited except in
accordance with a permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 4

ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in
the future be conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area to assist
in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation
between Parties or minimise environmental impacts.

2. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas may include:

    (a) areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative
environmental impacts; and
    (b) sites or monuments of recognised historic value.

3. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Managed Area shall not require a permit.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 above, an Antarctic Specially Managed Area may contain
one or more Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, entry into which shall be prohibited except
in accordance with a permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 5

MANAGEMENT PLANS

1. Any Party, the Committee, the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research or the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources may propose an area
for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed
Area by submitting a proposed Management Plan to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.

2. The area proposed for designation shall be of sufficient size to protect the values for
which the special protection or management is required.
3. Proposed Management Plans shall include, as appropriate:

(a) a description of the value or values for which special protection or management is required;

(b) a statement of the aims and objectives of the Management Plan for the protection or management of those values;

(c) management activities which are to be undertaken to protect the values for which special protection or management is required;

(d) a period of designation, if any;

(e) a description of the area, including:

(i) the geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features that delineate the area;

(ii) access to the area by land, sea or air including marine approaches and anchorages, pedestrian and vehicular routes within the area, and aircraft routes and landing areas;

(iii) the location of structures, including scientific stations, research or refuge facilities, both within the area and near to it; and

(iv) the location in or near the area of other Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas designated under this Annex, or other protected areas designated in accordance with measures adopted under other components of the Antarctic Treaty System;

(f) the identification of zones within the area, in which activities are to be prohibited, restricted or managed for the purpose of achieving the aims and objectives referred to in subparagraph (b) above;

(g) maps and photographs that show clearly the boundary of the area in relation to surrounding features and key features within the area;

(h) supporting documentation;

(i) in respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area, a clear description of the conditions under which permits may be granted by the appropriate authority regarding:

(i) access to and movement within or over the area;

(ii) activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including restrictions on time and place;

(iii) the installation, modification, or removal of structures;

(iv) the location of field camps;

(v) restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the area;

(vi) the taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna;

(vii) the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the permit-holder;
(viii) the disposal of waste;

(ix) measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of 
the Management Plan can continue to be met; and

(x) requirements for reports to be made to the appropriate authority 
regarding visits to the area;

(j) in respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area, a code of conduct regarding:

(i) access to and movement within or over the area;

(ii) activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including 
restrictions on time and place;

(iii) the installation, modification, or removal of structures;

(iv) the location of field camps;

(v) the taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna;

(vi) the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the 
visitor;

(vii) the disposal of waste; and

(viii) any requirements for reports to be made to the appropriate authority 
regarding visits to the area; and

(k) provisions relating to the circumstances in which Parties should seek to 
exchange information in advance of activities which they propose to conduct.

ARTICLE 6

DESIGNATION PROCEDURES

1. Proposed Management Plans shall be forwarded to the Committee, the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research and, as appropriate, to the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. In formulating its advice to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Committee shall take into account any comments provided 
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and, as appropriate, by the Commission 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. Thereafter Management Plans 
may be approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a measure adopted at an 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic 
Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the Plan shall be deemed to have been 
approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was 
adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that 
time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.

2. Having regard to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Protocol, no marine area 
shall be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
3.    Designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area shall be for an indefinite period unless the Management Plan provides 
otherwise. A review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least every five years. The 
Plan shall be updated as necessary.

4.    Management Plans may be amended or revoked in accordance with paragraph 1 
above.

5.    Upon approval Management Plans shall be circulated promptly by the Depositary to 
all Parties. The Depositary shall maintain a record of all currently approved Management 
Plans.

                                  ARTICLE 7

                                  PERMITS

1.    Each Party shall appoint an appropriate authority to issue permits to enter and engage 
in activities within an Antarctic Specially Protected Area in accordance with the requirements 
of the Management Plan relating to that Area. The permit shall be accompanied by the 
relevant sections of the Management Plan and shall specify the extent and location of the 
Area, the authorised activities and when, where and by whom the activities are authorised and 
any other conditions imposed by the Management Plan.

2.    In the case of a Specially Protected Area designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings which does not have a Management Plan, the appropriate authority 
may issue a permit for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere and 
which will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in that Area.

3.    Each Party shall require a permit-holder to carry a copy of the permit while in the 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area concerned.

                                  ARTICLE 8

                                  HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

1.    Sites or monuments of recognised historic value which have been designated as 
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, or which are 
located within such Areas, shall be listed as Historic Sites and Monuments.

2.    Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognised historic value which has not 
been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed 
Area, or which is not located within such an Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument. 
The proposal for listing may be approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a 
measure adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX 
(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the proposal shall be 
deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the 
Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to 
approve the measure.

3.    Existing Historic Sites and Monuments which have been listed as such by previous 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be included in the list of Historic Sites and 
Monuments under this Article.

4.    Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed.
5. The list of Historic Sites and Monuments may be amended in accordance with 
paragraph 2 above. The Depositary shall maintain a list of current Historic Sites and 
Monuments.

ARTICLE 9
INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY

1. With a view to ensuring that all persons visiting or proposing to visit Antarctica 
understand and observe the provisions of this Annex, each Party shall make available 
information setting forth, in particular:

    (a) the location of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially 
        Managed Areas;
    (b) listing and maps of those Areas;
    (c) the Management Plans, including listings of prohibitions relevant to each Area;
    (d) the location of Historic Sites and Monuments and any relevant prohibition or 
        restriction.

2. Each Party shall ensure that the location and, if possible, the limits, of Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and 
Monuments are shown on its topographic maps, hydrographic charts and in other relevant 
publications.

3. Parties shall co-operate to ensure that, where appropriate, the boundaries of Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and 
Monuments are suitably marked on the site.

ARTICLE 10
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. The Parties shall make arrangements for:

    (a) collecting and exchanging records, including records of permits and reports of 
        visits, including inspection visits, to Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and 
        reports of inspection visits to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas;
    (b) obtaining and exchanging information on any significant change or damage to 
        any Antarctic Specially Managed Area, Antarctic Specially Protected Area or 
        Historic Site or Monument; and
    (c) establishing common forms in which records and information shall be submitted 
        by Parties in accordance with paragraph 2 below.

2. Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the Committee before the end of 
November of each year of the number and nature of permits issued under this Annex in the 
preceding period of 1st July to 30th June.

3. Each Party conducting, funding or authorising research or other activities in Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas shall maintain a record of
such activities and in the annual exchange of information in accordance with the Treaty shall 
provide summary descriptions of the activities conducted by persons subject to its jurisdiction 
in such areas in the preceding year.

4.     Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the Committee before the end of 
November each year of measures it has taken to implement this Annex, including any site 
inspections and any steps it has taken to address instances of activities in contravention of the 
provisions of the approved Management Plan for an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area.

ARTICLE 11
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.     The restrictions laid down and authorised by this Annex shall not apply in cases of 
emergency involving safety of human life or of ships, aircraft, or equipment and facilities of 
high value or the protection of the environment.

2.     Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated immediately 
to all Parties and to the Committee.

ARTICLE 12
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1      This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with 
Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment 
or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year 
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless 
one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that 
time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the 
measure.

2.     Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance 
with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of 
approval by it has been received by the Depositary.
