ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
XVIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         

                                  Bonn       
                                  07 - 18 October 1991

TRATADO ANTARTICO                 
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ             
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩ       

XVI ATCM/WP28                     
8 October 1991                    
Original: French                  

EXAMINATIONS OF RECOMMENDATIONS  

Agenda item 7 c)                  

(submitted by Belgium)
1

EXAMINATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS

Agenda item 7 c)

(Comments presented by the Delegation of Belgium)

The adoption, on 3 October 1991, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty makes the item appearing on the Agenda under the heading "Examination of 
Recommendations" one of particular interest.

As was stressed by the Delegation of China in document XVI ATCM/PREP/WP3 of 
15.04.1991, in a fairly near future we shall have to cope with the simultaneous existence of 
many recommendations concerning the environment adapted in the framework of the 1959 
Washington Treaty together with an operating 1991 Protocol the object of which is precisely 
to develop a set of rules for environmental protection.

In that prospect there is probably a case for wondering whether it might not be possible 
in future to harmonize the machinery available to the Consultative Parties for the taking of 
decisions on matters connected with environmental protection.

To that end, the following comments are submitted:

1.    Article IX of the 1959 Treaty provides for representatives of the Consultative Parties 
      to meet for the purpose of "formulating (...) and recommending to their Governments 
      measures" regarding a variety of matters including "preservation and conservation of 
      living resources in Antarctica". Such measures become effective once approved by all 
      the Consultative Parties having participated in their adoption.

      To date, some 186 recommendations have been adopted and about 64 of them 
      relate to environmental protection.

      Logically, such measures become legally binding1) once all governments 
      concerned have approved them.

(1)   The binding nature of such measures depends of course on the terms employed in 
      them (e.g. cf. Rec. XV-4 which specifically sets out certain obligations).
2

While that remark reflects the position of the majority of Contracting Parties,
the legal status of the "recommendations" is nevertheless open to query in the eyes of
certain Contracting States.

2.      The Protocol on Environmental Protection features identical machinery (Art. 10) since
it provides that "Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall (...) adopt measures
under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty for the implementation of this Protocol". The
Article IX procedure (measures are recommended to Governments and become
effective when approved by all Consultative Parties having participated in their
adoption) is therefore applicable to the measures taken. The mandatory nature of
those measures appears to have been recognized unanimously during the negotiations
over the Protocol.

3.      The 1991 Protocol further provides (Article 9) the possibility to adopt annexes
additional to the original four, in accordance with Article IX of the 1959 Treaty.

4.      a)   In order to avoid having a multiplicity of decision-making mechanisms in
matters of environmental protection, it would appear reasonable, when the
Protocol comes into force, to entrust management of all this to the Contracting
Parties acting within the framework established by the provisions of this new
instrument. Such a course is justified by the very object of the Protocol. In that
case, it might be a good idea to give another name to the measures which will be
adopted on the basis of Article 10 of the Protocol (decisions?, measures?) in
order to remove any doubt over the binding character they have once they
become effective.

        b)   Of course this does not mean that until such time as the Protocol comes into
force the whole system must be brought to a halt in order not to adopt such
recommendations under Article IX of the 1959 Treaty as may be required for
the preservation of the environment.

        c)   It does, however, appear judicious to start preparations without delay for the
operation of the Protocol, and to consider whether it would not be useful to
organize a possible carrying-over of recommendations hitherto adopted into the
framework of the new Protocol.

It would then be necessary to review the content of existing
recommendations in order to determine which among them should be
maintained or harmonized in relation to the provisions of the Protocol and its 
Annexes.

That exercise should not normally give rise to any difficulty of an 
institutional nature, since the 1959 Treaty and the 1991 Protocol have the 
benefit of a common decision-making body, i.e. the meeting of Consultative 
Parties.
