ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       


                          TRATADO ANTÁRTICO       
                          XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA       

                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
                          XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       

Bonn                                  
07 - 18 October 1991                  

XVI ATCM/WP 53/Rev.1                  
17 October 1991                       
Original: English                     

Draft Report of Working Group II      

(submitted by Working Group II)       
Item 9
Environmental Monitoring

( ) Discussions on agenda item 9 focussed on the need to implement Recommendation XV-
5 through the action of the Parties and the group of experts mentioned by this
Recommendation.

( ) The Meeting warmly received the reports of SCAR and COMNAP on this subject and
considered them to be a good basis for further steps to be undertaken.

( ) It was stressed that there is a need for an expert meeting to be convened as soon as
possible in order to consider and provide the advice required under Recommendation XV-5.

( ) There was consensus that the scheduled meetings of SCAR and COMNAP in Argentina
in June 1992 would provide an appropriate opportunity to hold such an expert meeting. It was
agreed that consultations among the Parties should be undertaken promptly in this regard.

( ) With a view to preparing for the implementation of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and pursuant to Recommendations XV-5 and XV-16 the
Meeting agreed that the group of experts should be provided with the following terms of
reference:

To Consider Monitoring for the following Purposes:
To obtain a regular and verifiable record of activities and environmental data
necessary to:

-   assess and quantify impacts of activities, including impacts predicted in the
course of environmental impact assessments;
-   provide early warning of negative impacts;
-   identify preventative or remedial measures needed to reduce or eliminate
adverse impacts;
-   plan similar activities in the future.

Topics to be Considered by a Group of Experts
Identification of the nature and possible significance of adverse impacts on the values
of Antarctica as set forth in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty which might require monitoring;
Identification of activities, environmental and other data required to detect and monitor possible impacts and to distinguish these impacts from natural variability;

Identification of methodologies and technologies available for monitoring (especially inexpensive and automated systems);

Identification of steps needed to create national and co-operative data systems which would provide for collection, quality control, archiving, evaluation, exchange and retrieval of environmental data;

Identification of existing, relevant, data sets, including baseline data repositories, including programs which generate these data.
Item 10
Human Impact on the Antarctic Environment

( ) The Meeting discussed the item on human impact on the Antarctic environment.

Within this framework there was general discussion of waste disposal, marine pollution and the implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures. There was also discussion on the protection of fauna and flora, because the Meeting felt that this item was related closely to the agenda item under discussion and was also one of the Annexes concluded at Madrid. The Meeting stressed that these issues were particularly important. With respect to the implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures, the Meeting noted COMNAP's intention to review the draft guidelines developed at Bologna in June 1991 and revise them to ensure consistency with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its EIA Annex.

( ) It was noted that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have adopted Recommendation XV-3, paragraphs 18, 19 and 21 of which address the topic of marine dumping. Notwithstanding that most Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are members of the International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by the Dumping of Wastes and other Matter, it was noted that the problem of marine dumping should be kept in mind and that particular attention should be paid to it in further considerations relating to marine pollution as required by Recommendation XV-4 .

( ) The Meeting noted the existing recommendations concerning the aforementioned issues and the four annexes to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, covering "Environmental Impact Assessment", "Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora", "Waste Disposal and Waste Management" and "Prevention of Marine Pollution". Taking into account that not all of those instruments are yet in force, it was agreed that efforts should be made to urge parties to ratify the Protocol as soon as possible and that meanwhile efforts also should be made to implement the provisions of the Annexes as rapidly and completely as possible.

( ) Concerning the item on marine pollution, the Meeting welcomed the timely and important work by SCALOP on the prevention of oil pollution by national Antarctic programmes and the continuing development of a comprehensive format for oil spill contingency plans in the Antarctic. However, the Meeting recognised that other wider marine pollution issues in Antarctica still had to be addressed fully.
( ) The Meeting noted the provisions of Recommendation XV-4 (7) which called for the 
Parties to convene a Meeting of experts to review, consider and provide advice on the preven-
tion of marine pollution in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The Meeting agreed to encourage 
SCALOP to convene the Meeting of experts in close consultation with the Marine Environ-
ment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the IMO. The MEPC has international and long-
established experience of the necessary procedures required to prevent and combat marine 
pollution.

( ) It was agreed that the Meeting of experts should consider the following topics:

1)      review of the work carried out by SCALOP on the prevention of oil pollution 
        and the development of oil spill contingency plans in Antarctica and their appli-
        cation to non-governmental activities;

2)      assessment of the environmental effects of marine dumping and the disposal of 
        sewage and food wastes into the sea in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and review of 
        the best practicable means to prevent or reduce such pollution;

3)      investigation of the best practicable means to monitor marine pollution in the 
        Antarctic, particularly as regards compliance with Annex IV of the Protocol and 
        the proposed amendments for the designation of the Antarctic Treaty Area as a 
        'Special Area' under Annexes I, II and V of MARPOL 73/78, as well as the 
        establishment of base-line surveillance programmes to quantify actual levels of 
        marine pollution in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Item 11
The Antarctic Protected Area System

Item 11 a
Proposals for new Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

( ) Draft recommendations were tabled by the United Kingdom setting out management 
plans for two new Sites of Special Scientific Interest: Lions Rump, King George Island, South 
Shetland Islands (XVI ATCM/WP 12) and Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, 
South Shetland Islands (XVI ATCM/WP 16). These proposals had been recommended and 
approved at SCAR XXI. Recommendation XVI-...... was adopted

Item 11 b
Proposals for new Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest

( ) Draft Recommendations were tabled by the United Kingdom for management plans for 
two Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest:
    - Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands;
    - East Dallmann Bay, off Brabant Island
(XVI ATCM/WP 18). These plans had been recommended and approved by SCAR. 
Recommendation XVI...... was adopted.

Item 11 c
Changes to existing SSSI's and SPA's

( ) The United Kingdom tabled four draft recommendations referring to: Avian Island (XVI 
ATCM/WP 15), Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands (XVI ATCM/WP 
17), Specially Protected Areas Nos 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 19 (XVI ATCM/WP 19) and 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest Nos. 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 18 and 22 (XVI ATCM/WP 20). 
These proposals had been recommended and approved by SCAR. Recommendations XVI-
....., XVI-....., XVI-..... and XVI-..... were adopted.

( ) Following advice from the delegation of Australia about the detection of errors in the 
original site description for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 17 it was agreed that the site 
description should be amended to read as follows:
Clark Peninsula is situated on the north side of Newcomb Bay at the west end of 
Vincennes Bay, opposite Windmill Islands, on Budd Coast, at Lat 66°15'S, Long 
110°36'E. The Site comprises all land on Clark Peninsula within the southern boundary 
line connecting the east side of Powell Cove to trigonometrical station G7, 
trigonometrical station G8 and a point to the east-south-east on Løken Moraines. The 
eastern boundary is the westernmost limit of Løken Moraines as far north as a point 
due east of Blakeney Point, and thence to the coast. The boundary of the Site will be 
indicated by prominent markers, and is shown on the attached map.

A copy of the revised map showing these corrections is attached as ANNEX............

Item 11 d
Proposals for new Specially Protected Areas (SPA)

( ) Draft Recommendations were tabled by the United Kingdom for: Cryptogam Ridge, 
Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land (XVI ATCM/WP 13) and Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley 
Ponds (XVI ATCM/WP 14). The proposals had been recommended and approved by SCAR. 
Recommendations XVI-...... and XVI-...... were adopted.

Item 11 e
Proposals for Specially Reserved Areas (SRA)
and
Item 11 f
Proposals for Multiple Use Planning Areas (MPA)

( ) ATCM XV adopted Recommendation XV-10 providing for the establishment of 
Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs) to protect areas of outstanding geologic, aesthetic, and 
other value in Antarctica. It also adopted Rec. XV-11 providing for the establishment of 
Multiple-Use Planning Areas (MPAs) to assist in planning and coordinating activities to avoid 
mutual interference and minimize cumulative environmental impacts in high-use areas.
( ) To begin to give effect to these recommendations, the United States presented proposals 
to establish a Multiple-Use Planning Area on the Southwest side of Anvers Island and a 
Specially Reserved Area on the North side of the Dufek Massif (XVI ATCM/WP 22).

Both proposals had been reviewed and endorsed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research.

( ) Recognizing that the recommendations were not in force and were expected to be 
superceded by an additional Annex to the Antarctic Treaty Protocol on Environmental 
Protection signed in Madrid on 4 October 1991, the United States proposed that the Meeting 
adopt a recommendation calling upon national program operators and, to the maximum 
extent possible, persons subject to the jurisdiction of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to 
voluntarily take account of the provisions of the proposed MPA and SRA.

( ) During discussion of the proposals, it was noted that the draft Annex on Area Protection 
and Management under consideration by the Meeting included provisions for the special 
protection and management of areas as provided by Recommendations XV-10 and 11. It also 
was noted and was agreed that it therefore would be desirable to begin gathering practical 
experience in implementing such provisions.

( ) Several delegations pointed out that each Party would have to take steps to ratify or 
otherwise approve the proposed recommendation before it could enter into force and that the 
same end could be achieved largely by having the Consultative Meeting agree that Parties 
should voluntarily comply with the provisions of the proposed MPA and SRA. Several 
delegations also pointed out that provisions in the proposed MPA calling for the maintenance 
of careful records and reporting of information concerning commercial fishing operations in 
the area would be addressed more appropriately by the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources. It was agreed that these provisions should be deleted 
from the proposed MPA management plan.

( ) The SRA proposal and the amended MPA proposal are appended to this report as 
Annexes  and . The Meeting agreed that Parties should require, voluntarily, that their 
national program operators and, to the maximum extent possible, persons subject to their 
jurisdiction comply with the provisions of the proposed SRA and MPA as amended.
Item 11 g
Review of the System

( ) The United Kingdom and the United States of America presented their proposals to 
introduce a new Draft Annex (V) for the Antarctic Protected Area System (XVI ATCM/WP 
1 - UK - and XVI ATCM/WP 6 -USA). It was recalled that this item had already been 
discussed during the XI Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting.

( ) The United Kingdom pointed out that, because of the many types of designation, the 
present system had led to confusion in the regulations relating to Protected Areas. The 
United Kingdom recommended that the system required major rationalisation but without 
any loss to the existing quality of protection. It was stressed that the system should be concise, 
unambiguous and in conformity with the existing Annexes to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

( ) The United States of America, in presenting its proposal, fully supported the UK 
delegation's views concerning the inadequacies of the present system and the desirability of 
having a new more workable regime.

( ) Italy introduced a paper (XVI ATCM/WP 35/rev 1) and noted that it was not the 
intention of the Italian delegation to table a third proposal for a new annex to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty but that it simply wanted to support the 
general trend set out in the papers presented and in the discussions held at the XIth ATSCM.

Italy drew the Meeting's attention to the handbook on management plans, being prepared by 
SCAR, which would provide a general guideline in this context.

( ) Several delegations indicated that the new system of area protection and management 
should allow for a buffer zone so that the designated areas are of sufficient size to ensure the 
greatest range of protection.

( ) SCAR and ASOC also submitted comprehensive papers on the Protected Areas System 
(XVI ATCM/INFO 14 and XVI ATCM/INFO 63, respectively).

( ) Some delegations mentioned that visits by tourists should be taken into account and that 
there would be value in collecting data on such visits.

( ) One delegation observed that the new annex should contain provisions to integrate 
existing protected areas into the new regime.
( ) After intensive discussion the Meeting reached consensus on a final text, based upon the aforementioned working papers, of an Annex on Area Protection and Management that would form Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Recommendation XVI-....... was adopted.

( ) The Meeting requested that the Depositary convene a linguistic committee in Washington to bring into accordance with the English text of the Annex the French, Russian and Spanish language texts with a view to rectification in accordance with the rules and procedures set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969.

( ) The Meeting agreed that the definition of "Antarctic Specially Managed Areas" set out in Article 4 of the Annex would allow such areas to be established for the purpose of prohibiting, restricting or managing activities, including tourism conducted in accordance with any provisions adopted under the Protocol, to avoid mutual interference or minimise environmental impacts.

The Meeting agreed that if an activity is permitted under a management plan this would not derogate from the obligation to meet all other requirements of the Protocol including environmental assessment before any decision to proceed with such activity. It was noted that it would be a responsibility of the appropriate authority issuing the permit to require that the planned activity is in accordance with all aspects of the Protocol prior to issuing a permit.

The Meeting agreed that under Article 10 paragraph 1 (a) the arrangements for exchanging records do not necessarily require that detailed records be transmitted to all Parties and that it would be possible for some or all such records to be exchanged only following a request.

Item 11 h
Historic Sites and Monuments

( ) Proposals were submitted for the following sites in the list of Historical Sites and Monuments annexed to Recommendation VII-9.

( ) Chile and the United Kingdom submitted a draft recommendation to erect a commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands, near the Chilean refuge located 62°32'S and 59°45'W, to the memory of Captain Robert MacFarlane, who in 1820 explored the Antarctic Peninsula Area in the brigantine Dragón (XVI ATCM/WP 38).
( ) Chile, Spain and Peru (XVI ATCM/WP 39) submitted a draft recommendation to place a cairn on Half Moon beach, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, commemorating the officers, soldiers and seamen on board the San Telmo which sank in September 1819: possibly the first people to live and die in the Antarctic wastes.

( ) Norway and Chile further put forward a draft recommendation (XVI ATCM/WP 40) to have a cairn with memorial plaque erected at Whalers' Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, in the vicinity of the whalers' cemetery (Historic Monument No. 31) 62°59'S, 60°34'W, to honour Captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, Antarctic pioneer who was first to establish a whaling operation at Deception Island in 1906.

( ) Finally, Chile and the United Kingdom submitted a draft recommendation (XVI ATCM/WP 45/rev 1), to designate Waterboat Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (64°49'S, 62°52'W) in the List of Historic Sites and Monuments: the remains and immediate environs of the Waterboat Point hut, situated close to the unoccupied Chilean station, "Presidente Gabriel González Videla". The Waterboat Point hut, of which only the base of the boat, roots of door posts and an outline of the hut and extension still exist, was occupied by the UK two-man expedition of Bagshawe and Lester in 1921-22.

The aforementioned proposals were adopted as Recommendations XVI-......

During the discussions of this subject SCAR and some delegations mentioned the problem of vulnerability of some monuments such as the cemetery situated in Deception Island (Historic Site No 31). Other delegations referred to the value of an archeological survey of such areas as Byers Peninsula, Cape Shirreff and other areas particularly rich in archeological and historical remains.
Item 15
Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

( ) A report was presented by WMO (XVI ATCM/INFO 31) which provided factual 
information on the observational networks and communications arrangements for the 
transmission of Antarctic meteorological data both within and outside the Antarctic region 
emphasising the importance of automatic weather stations and the increasing development of 
satellite communications. The deficiencies of the network were noted, particularly the lack of 
upper air observations in the Pacific sector of West Antarctica and the southern Antarctic 
Peninsula. Formal WMO resolutions were drawn to the attention of the meeting which sought 
the support of Treaty Parties to improved observations, particularly by use of automatic 
weather stations, ocean buoys, voluntary observing ships and automated aircraft observations. 
IOC noted co-operation with WMO in seeking to improve Antarctic ocean observations.

( ) The continuing efforts of WMO in monitoring the performance of the communication 
system and the holding of expert meetings to improve the system were reported. The next 
such meeting will be held in October 1991. The continuation of frequent dialogue between 
the Permanent Representatives of WMO and the Managers of National Antarctic 
Programmes at a national level was emphasized in seeking to improve Antarctic observation 
and communication networks.

( ) One delegation referred to Recommendation XV-18 and noted the importance of this 
item, taking into account the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
and possible accidents in the area. Consequently the need for improving meteorological 
services in the Antarctic was pointed out. In this context, this delegation stressed that the 
support of SCAR and national agencies would be needed; it should also be required to 
continue the coordination of national services with the assistance of WMO, SCAR and 
COMNAP.

( ) In response to a delegation's request for information the IOC Representative noted that 
the basic issue appears to involve data exchange and archiving. In this respect, there may be a 
need for greater co-ordination of Southern Ocean activities and data with the IOC Committee 
on IODE (International Oceanographic Data Exchange). It should be further noted that the 
Regional Oceanographic Data Centre for the Southern Ocean was established within the 
Argentine National Oceanographic Data Centre in 1987. Delegations requiring additional 
information on IOC activities were invited to contact the IOC Secretariat in Paris.
Item 16 .
Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern Ocean

(   ) In response to the request of XV ATCM a paper was presented by WMO (XVI
ATCM/INFO 48), in which the results of its further examination of the question of the
provision of marine hydrometeorological services in the Antarctic were outlined. This paper
which had also previously been made available to COMNAP, elaborated on the report of the
joint SCAR/WMO/IOC meeting held in Leningrad in 1989 and provided basic principles for
the provision of these services. It further defined the facilities which should exist at Antarctic
forecasting offices and the meteorological products which they should seek to provide. WMO
did not believe that a "Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre" was at present required
in Antarctica but offered to facilitate as far as possible support from existing meteorological
centres outside Antarctica which would complement the work of forecasting offices in
Antarctica.

(   ) The requirement for marine hydrometeorological services for the safety and economy of
Antarctic operatives was emphasised by WMO and by the Finnish (XVI ATCM/INFO 35)
and USSR (XVI ATCM/INFO 26) delegations, and the essential prerequisite of an improved
observational network for their provision was noted. In the latter respect the joint cooperation
between Germany and Chile in establishing a research programme utilising very-high-
resolution Synthetic Aperture Radar satellite data to delineate sea ice under cloudy
conditions was described. Such research programmes have the potential to lead eventually to
valuable operational systems, although at considerable cost.

(   ) The IOC Representative informed the Meeting that IOC co-operates with WMO
through IGOSS (Integrated Global Oceanographic Services System) and DBCP (Drifting
Buoy Cooperation Panel) with the objective of providing data required for
hydrometeorological services. In 1989, the IOC initiated the development of the Global
Ocean Observing System (GOOS) in co-operation with WMO and UNEP. Co-operation with
SCAR is welcomed in designing and planning elements of GOOS in the southern ocean area.

(   ) The Meeting had an exchange of views on this item. In this context the inter-relation
between items 15 and 16, the desirability to establish a centre for ice forecasts and the
necessity of improving the co-operation and coordination between WMO and COMNAP was
noted, although the Meeting noted COMNAP's conclusion that there is no requirement for
further joint or individual action.

(   ) In the course of the exchange of views which took place, a consensus was reached that at
the present time questions concerning the improvement of meteorological and ice
information services should be dealt with mainly at national level while consultations continue
in COMNAP and WMO.
Item 17
Cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic waters

(  ) The representative of SCAR presented an information paper (XVI ATCM/INFO 76) 
containing its proposals on cooperation in hydrographic charting of Antarctic waters which 
had been elaborated by the SCAR Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information.

(  ) The delegate of IHO commented on the results of the meeting of a "Working Group on 
Cooperation Concerning Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical Charting", established by IHO 
and also attended by SCAR and COMNAP, which had been held in Bonn on 9 - 10 October 
1991.

For further information he referred to the Report of this Working Group (see XVI 
ATCM/INFO 74). In this context, he pointed out that the working group had considered the 
proposals of SCAR, contained in XVI ATCM/INFO 76, and had taken action which would 
take into account the proposals which had been put forward by the SCAR Working Group on 
Geodesy and Geographic Information.

He drew the Meeting's attention to the IHO special publication SP 55 ANNEX 1 (Status of 
Hydrographic Surveying and Nautical Charting in Antarctica). The IHO representative 
stressed that the information shown in SP 55 ANNEX 1 should not convey the impression that 
Antarctic waters were well charted but, on the contrary, that there were serious shortcomings 
in the adequacy of the charts and other associated hydrographic information. This would not 
only lead to the potential for dangers to shipping but to the lack of basic data required for the 
pursuit of marine science in the area.

The IHO representative informed the Meeting about a proposal which had come up during 
the meeting of the Working Group on Cooperation Concerning Hydrographic Surveying and 
Nautical Charting to establish a permanent working group on coordination of hydrographic 
cooperation in the Antarctic with the following terms of reference:

-   Examine INT Chart standards and application to Antarctica

-   Develop an INT Chart scheme or a scheme of charts agreed to by members covering 
    all Antarctic waters (South of 60 degrees latitude)

-   Examine the status and quality of hydrographic surveys, and encourage the publication 
    of source/reliability diagrams on newly published charts
-   Identify the needs for improved surveys and charts (taking account of advice from COMNAP, etc)

-   Develop an annual report of the status and plans for hydrographic surveys, including updating and amplifying SP 55, ANNEX 1.

-   Develop cooperative approaches to meeting the needs/priorities for surveys and charting

-   Maintain appropriate liaison with relevant scientific organizations, including SCAR (Geodesy and Geographic Information Working Group), IOC and COMNAP

-   Establish and maintain liaison with the IHO/IOC GEBCO organization concerning Antarctic bathymetric data collection and mapping.

Finally he underlined that it would be useful if all ships travelling from and to Antarctica recorded bathymetric data and that the results be transmitted to their respective flag state's national hydrographic offices.

(   ) The Soviet Union presented a working paper (XVI ATCM/WP 44) expressing the importance of developing an atlas of large scale topographic maps or plans of the Antarctic stations and proposing that SCAR - together with COMNAP - should establish an ad hoc group for carrying out the preparatory work.

(   ) The SCAR representative informed the Meeting that the SCAR Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information had published a SCAR map catalogue in 1989/90 which had been distributed to all SCAR member nations. He announced that the question of producing an atlas along the lines of the Soviet delegate's proposal will be discussed on the occasion of the next SCAR working group meeting to be held at Bariloche, Argentina, in June 1992.

The IHO representative explained the technical difficulties in producing hydrographic charts and in particular commented on the differences between land mapping and nautical charting.

(   ) The Meeting had an exchange of views on the report submitted by IHO (see XVI ATCM/INFO 74). Delegates expressed their satisfaction over the action taken by the IHO, in cooperation with SCAR and COMNAP in response to Recommendation XV-19. The need to further implement this Recommendation was stressed. In this context some delegations
supported the terms of reference established by the IHO working group for its proposed 
working group on hydrographic cooperation in the Antarctic.

(  ) One delegation went further in underlining the importance of surveying and charting the 
continental shelf of Antarctica, in particular the shallow water areas.

The Meeting warmly thanked SCAR and IHO for their positive and constructive response to 
Recommendation XV-19.
Item 18 
Air Safety in Antarctica

( ) The question of improving air safety in Antarctica was discussed in detail by the Meeting.

( ) One delegation recalled that, upon invitation of the Contracting Parties a meeting of 
experts had been convened in May 1989 in Paris to develop measures relating to air safety in 
Antarctica. It pointed out that this expert meeting had submitted 10 proposals on air safety for 
consideration to ATCM, and that, ATCM XV, in taking up the said proposals, had adopted 
Recommendation XV-20.

( ) The said delegation further recalled, that the task of implementing Recommendation 
XV-20 had been taken up by COMNAP/SCALOP through the SCALOP subgroup on 
Antarctic Air Safety. It drew the Meeting's attention to the results which were summarized as 
follows:

Pursuant to Recommendation XV-20

-   a library of ICAO publication is acquired to ensure that all measures are 
implemented on the basis of ICAO criteria;

-   a standardized format for advance notices on air operations has been developed 
and introduced for use;

-   Primary and Secondary Air Information Stations in Antarctica have been 
designated, through which air operations are being co-ordinated;

-   the TIBA frequency of 129.7 MHz has been adopted and confirmed by the 
nations; the procedures are in accord with ICAO Annex 11;

-   national points of contact have been designated to be used as addresses for 
distress messages through the COSPAS/SARSAT system;

-   a handbook entitled "Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)" has been 
developed to Recommendation XV-20 and ICAO Annex 15. The first edition 
has been assembled and introduced to ATCM XVI. Copies will be sent through 
the diplomatic channels to the Treaty Parties. The manual comprises 
information on aircraft, airfields, equipment, operational procedures, areas of 
national operations, etc.;
a flight planning format is being developed for the pre-flight transmission

( ) The afore mentioned delegate informed the Meeting that the full wording of the 
proposals of the SCALOP subgroup is set forth in the first Report of COMNAP to ATCM 
XVI. He added that the work of the Scalop subgroup will be continued taking into account 
the remaining recommendations by giving due regard to the increasing importance of 
Antarctic air safety.

( ) The Soviet delegation underlined the importance of air safety in Antarctica with regard 
to transport and scientific research, especially considering the increase of activities in the 
future. The delegation submitted an Information Paper on this matter (XVI ATCM/INFO 
45). It was proposed that adequate measures should be taken to set up regulations with a view 
to the use of air space, to traffic control and a system of air safety based on ICAO principles 
and the special conditions of the Antarctic. It was further noted that COMNAP and SCAR 
should continue their work in this field.
