ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                Bonn
             07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 8
07 October 1991
Original: English

Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

(submitted by the United States of America)
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

The question of infrastructure to serve the Antarctic
Treaty has been discussed at the last three Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings.  At the Special Consultative Meeting in
Vina del Mar (SCM XI), there was general agreement that the
topic should be an action item at the Sixteenth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XVI).  Most Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties have endorsed the need to establish such a
structure in the past, and at Vina del Mar, there seemed to be
consensus to move the process forward.

The participation in the Antarctic Treaty system has grown
significantly since the Treaty's entry into force.  There are
now 26 Consultative Parties and 13 non-Consultative Parties.
In addition, there are observers and experts from a number of
international organizations now attending ATCMs.  Nine attended
ATCM XV.  This increased participation alone has resulted in a
greater need for coordinated collection and distribution of
information.

Equally important are the information requirements
themselves.  Those carrying out or seeking to carry out
activities in Antarctica require accurate and up-to-date
information and data concerning, among other things, the
measures applicable to such activities, the physical and
environmental conditions in the areas of such activities, other
activities in the relevant areas, and any available
communications procedures and facilities, including emergency
procedures.

Up until now, some of this information and data has been
exchanged directly among the Treaty Parties, in large part
through the annual exchange of information. The Antarctic
Treaty itself, as well as ATCM recommendations and reports,
address aspects of the issue, and a number of categories of
information and data have been identified that the Parties
should share with each other. These include, in addition to the
annual activities reports, notifications of tourist and other
non-governmental expeditions, inspection reports, reports on
the number of tourists visiting stations, environmental impact
assessments and reports on site visits to protected areas.

As has been widely recognized, however, much of the data
and information exchange is not accomplished on a timely basis
and takes place in a fragmented fashion.  In addition, it is
not uniform in content or format.  Thus, it is often not
- 3 -

7) preparation of information for public dissemination on 
the Antarctic Treaty system;

8) attendance at meetings of, and communications with,
relevant international organizations;

9) coordination among the components of the Antarctic 
Treaty system;

10) meeting the costs of the operation of the consultative 
mechanism.

The Secretariat would also be tasked with maintaining 
additional types of information developed under the Treaty 
system, such as:

-- agreed management plans for protected areas;

-- records of permits issued under the Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and for 
entry into protected areas;

-- information relating to air and maritime navigation in 
Antarctica;

-- up-to-date communications frequencies for stations in 
Antarctica;

-- information on available capabilities to respond to 
emergencies, including pollution incidents in Antarctica;

-- steps taken by the Treaty Parties to give effect to 
ATCM recommendations and measures; and

-- environmental evaluations.

This repository could collate and integrate information 
from an ever-growing number of sources to support the needs of 
the Treaty Parties.  It would facilitate the timely submission 
of reports and information and generally assist in 
communications among the Treaty Parties.

An infrastructure to provide this consolidated data base 
would also offer an important means to serve the Treaty 
Parties' objective of ensuring the availability of complete and 
accurate information about the Antarctic Treaty system.  In 
coordination with national contact points, designated pursuant 
to Recommendation XIII-1, it would encourage and facilitate 
distribution and exchange of data and information between and 
among Treaty parties, components of the Treaty System (such as 
SCAR and CCAMLR), and relevant international organizations,  and 
ensure that Parties obtain information on a timely basis.
