ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                  Bonn
                                  07 - 18 October 1991

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVI ATCM/WP 12
7 October 1991
Original: English

Draft Recommendation
(Item 11)

Specially Protected Areas:
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS :

LIONS RUMP, KING GEORGE ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

(Working Paper Submitted by the UK Delegation)

MR2ABA/23
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, LIONS RUMP, KING GEORGE ISLAND,
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting  that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering  that the area bounded by Lions Head,
Twin Pinnacles, and Lajkonik Rock and the area inland to the
south includes the coastline of raised beaches, freshwater
pools and streams on the south side of King George Bay and,
around Lion Cove, moraines and slopes leading up to the lower
ice tongue of White Eagle Glacier, and that the Area is
representative of the terrestrial, limnological and littoral
ecosystems of King George Island, possessing interesting rock
formations of tertiary lavas and tuffs and a diverse biota
which include a rich flora and ornithological community and
large numbers of seals.

Recommend  to their Governments that the following area of
outstanding scientific interest be inserted in Annex B,
Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the
annexed Management Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 21

Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.  The
Area is situated on the south coast of King George Bay,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands, and is bounded by
the following co-ordinates:-

MR2ABA/24
62°07'48"S,   58°09'17"W.
62°07'49"S,   58°07'14"W.
62°08'19"S,   58°07'19"W.
62°08'16"S,   58°09'15"W.

MR2ABA/25
Annex

Proposed Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan
Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

1. Geographical location

The Area is situated on the south coast of King George Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, and is bounded by the following co-ordinates:

62°07'48"S,58°09'17"W
62°07'49"S,58°07'14"W
62°08'19"S,58°07'19"W
62°08'16"S,58°09'15"W

2. Management plan

(i) Description of Area
The area is named after Lions Rump, a prominent rocky hill between the southern extremity of King George Bay and Lion Cove. It includes the littoral and sublittoral extending from the eastern end of "Lajkonik Rock" to the northernmost end of Twin Pinnacles Island, and from that point to the easternmost end of the columnar plug "Lions Head" to the east of White Eagle Glacier. On land the Area includes the coastline of raised beaches, freshwater pools and the streams on the south side of King George Bay and around Lion Cove, moraines and slopes leading up to the lower ice tongue of White Eagle Glacier and westward to a small moraine protruding through the ice cap south-east of Sukiennice Hills. Lions Rump comprises Tertiary lavas and tuffs with thin brown coal intercalations and silicified wood fragments. The moraine west of Lion Cove consists of several Holocene stages of glacier advance and retreat. A small refuge is situated near the shore close to the main stream within the Area, about 300 m west of Lions Rump.

(ii) Reason for Designation
The Area is representative of the terrestrial, limnological and littoral ecosystems of King George Island, possessing diverse biota and rock formations.
There is a rich flora, especially of lichens, and the two native vascular plants, Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica, are frequent. Twelve species of birds breed within the Area, including many colonies of three species of pygoscelid penguins, Adélie, chinstrap and gentoo. There are large numbers of elephant seals and fur seals on the beaches. It is a rich part of the coastal ecosystem which has not been disturbed by human activity, other than various biological, geological and geomorphological studies which have been undertaken within the Area.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
July 1990: Poland.

(iv) Access Points
Access from the sea should be close to the outflow of the main stream within the Area about 300 m west of Lions Rump. Helicopter landings should be restricted to the area south of the southern boundary of the Area, so as not to disturb the fauna.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area should be in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorised representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
However, access to the Area shall be unlimited to parties wishing only to traverse or pass through the site to carry out bona fide scientific research inland of the Area. Such parties shall pass through the site as speedily as is reasonable and shall not disturb any part of the site. Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of exchange of information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out. Research parties passing through the site as permited above should also report their visits in the same way.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to :

    (a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

    (b) land a helicopter within the Area;

    (c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

    (d) anchor or moor any seacraft within the Area, except in accordance with the permit;

    (e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
        all such waste must be removed from the Area;

    (f) leave depots of fuel, food or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

    (g) erect any form of building additional to the existing refuge within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but precautions must be taken to avoid disturbance to any breeding bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess its state and to monitor significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

                                                                 58 09                                 58 08                                 58 07 W
K I N G G E O R G E                                                                 B A Y                Twin Pinnacles
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      

