ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       

Bonn       
07 - 18 October 1991       

XVI ATCM/WP 52       
17 October 1991       
Original: English       

Agenda for Next ATCM and Invitation of Experts       

Draft Paragraphs for Inclusion in the Final Report       

(submitted by the United Kingdom)       

Explanatory note: The provisional agenda for ATCMs has hitherto been decided at Preparatory Meetings. Similarly the invitation of experts from international organizations has also been decided at Preparatory Meetings. As there is to be no Preparatory Meeting before the next ATCM, an interim procedure needs to be adopted at this Meeting, pending appropriate amendments of the Rules of Procedure being adopted. The attached Rules set out proposals for such an interim procedure, based on the Rules of Procedure of CCAMLR, and Rule 35 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure.
1

Agenda for Next ATCM and Invitaiton of Experts

Draft paragraphs for inclusion in the Final Report

Agenda for Consultative Meetings

Rule 1.     At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the host of that Meeting shall 
prepare a preliminary agenda for the next ATCM. Such a preliminary agenda shall be 
restricted to items which the Meeting has specifically remitted to the next ATCM. Subject to 
any amendment by the Meeting, this preliminary agenda for the next ATCM shall be annexed 
to the Final Report of the Meeting.

Rule 2.     Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) proposing supplementary 
items for the preliminary agenda shall inform the Host Government for the forthcoming 
ATCM no later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting, and shall accompany their 
proposal with an explanatory memorandum. The Host Government shall draw the attention 
of all ATCPs to this Rule not less than 210 days before the Meeting.

Rule 3.     The Host Government shall thereafter prepare a provisional agenda for 
the ATCM. The provisional agenda shall include:

    (a) all items on the preliminary agenda decided in accordance with Rule 1;

    (b) all items the inclusion of which has been requested by an ATCP;

    (c) proposed place and dates for the next regular ATCM following the one to which 
the provisional agenda relates.

The Host Government shall transmit to all Contracting Parties, at least 120 days in 
advance of the ATCM, the provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda and any 
other papers related thereto.

Rule 4.     The ATCM shall adopt its agenda as the first item of business following 
the opening of the Meeting and the election of officers.
Experts from international organisations

Rule 5.     At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting shall decide in 
relation to the preliminary agenda adopted in accordance with Rule 1, on invitations to be 
extended to international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica 
to designate an expert to attend the forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it in the 
consideration of a particular item, in accordance with the organizational arrangements 
established for consideration of that item.

Rule 6.     Any ATCP proposing a supplementary item for the preliminary agenda 
in accordance with Rule 2 may also propose that an invitation be extended to an international 
organisation having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica (which has not been 
identified in accordance with Rule 5) to assist the Meeting in the consideration of its 
proposal.

Rule 7.     Such proposals shall be transmitted to all Contracting Parties in 
accordance with Rule 3. Any ATCP wishing to object to such a proposal shall do so not less 
than 90 days before the Meeting.

Rule 8.     The Host Government shall subject to Rule 7, extend invitations to 
international organisations identified in accordance with Rules 5 and 6 not less than 75 days 
before the Meeting and shall request the international organisation to communicate the name 
of the designated expert to the Host Government prior to the opening of the Meeting.
