ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                        XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 34
9 October 1991
Original: English

Japanese Proposal on Tourism
and Non-Governmental Expedition

        (Item 14)

(submitted by Japan)
Japanese Proposal on Tourism
and Non-Governmental Expedition

1.    The environmental influence on the Antarctica by the activities of the Tourism and Non-Governmental expedition which utilize Antarctica for the purpose of performing sports has not yet been sufficiently evaluated.

There is a serious concern, that the increase of such activities will bring a deterioration of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. Actual situation, however, is not clear.

The Japanese Delegation, therefore, recognizes it necessary to take a survey and to make clear the actual situation before discussing how to regulate those activities.

2.    Based upon this recognition, the Japanese Delegation would like to propose to con-vene a meeting of environmental experts at the earliest opportunity for the purpose of grasp-ing the present situation of environmental impact of those activities on the Antarctica.

The proposed process towards it is as follows;

(1)   Survey by the individual country

Prior to the meeting, those countries which have enterprises of organizing a tour or non-governmental expedition to the Antarctica, are requested to make survey on the following items.

      (a)    Number of tourists who visited the Antarctica in the past 5 years.

      (b)    Number of non-governmental expedition to the Antarctica in the past 5 years.

      (c)    Outline of the tour programs which are organized by the private enterprises (number and nationality of participants, period, frequency, places for visit, activities in the visiting place).

      (d)    Outline of the activities of the non-governmental expedition (places for activities, size, period and pattern of activities).

(2)   Expert Meeting for the evaluation

Convene an environmental experts meeting at the earliest possible time after the survey data are collected. Based upon the result of the survey, the Meeting will undertake evaluation of the influence of these activities on the Antarctica and study the practical measures to regulate these activities.

(3)   A survey team could be sent to the Antarctica for the practical evaluation in case the Meeting so requests.
