ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                       Bonn
                                                     07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 38
9 October 1991
Original:Spanish

Historical Site

(Agenda item 11 h)

(submitted by Chile and the United Kingdom)
The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9,

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic monument be added to the "list of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter it be accorded the respect and protection required by the recommendations recalled above:

- 57. Commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands, near the Chilean refuge located at latitude 62° 32' S and longitude 59° 45' W, to the memory of Captain Robert MacFarlane, who in 1820 explored the Antarctic Peninsula Area in the brigantine Dragón.

Background Information

In the course of the history of geographical discoveries, the Antarctic has given rise to controversies, salient among which are those over the first sighting, the first landing, the first wintering, etc. Only three landings on the continental land mass of the Antarctic Peninsula are recorded in the 1820s: by the North American seal hunter John Davis in the Cecilia on 7 February 1821; by the English Captain Joseph Usher in the Caraquette of Liverpool; and by the Scotsman Robert MacFarlane in the Dragón of Valparaíso. The dates of the landings by MacFarlane and by Usher are not known but it is known that the latter was only in the Antarctic in summer 1821-22, so that his feat came after that of Davis.

MacFarlane's landing is recorded in the Journal of Captain Robert Fildes who relates as follows their meeting on 16 December 1820: "...shortly afterwards a launch belonging to the brigantine Dragón, late of Liverpool, now of Valparaíso, came alongside; it had been seven weeks on the coast and had obtained five thousand sealskins..." (re-translation). We can thereby deduce that Captain MacFarlane reached the Shetlands in late October 1820, which fits in with the records of the Valparaíso harbourmaster.

After describing Port Foster on Deception Island, Fildes writes: "Half a mile seaward from the entry on a clear day there can be a good view of the land to the south, which appears covered in snow and bespattered here and there with black spots where rocks emerge, it being
very high much like a counterpart to the land lying northward. Captain MacFarlane of the 
brig Dragón, a highly intelligent man, told me he had landed there, finding sea leopards and 
elephants but no seals. The Caraquette of Liverpool also found a bay and anchored in it for a 
few days, but not getting seals it left the place".

MacFarlane was likewise very probably the discoverer of Deception Island, which was 
not spotted by Bransfield, although it does appear on a sketch done by Captain Smith - as 
Edwards Island and without its characteristic inland bay. When Palmer reached that island he 
noted in his logbook "stood over for Deception", which implies a predecessor since the name 
thus appears already known. This was on 15 November 1820 and on 30 December, when 
Davis entered Deception Bay he wrote: "...I came in through Dragon narrows". The Argentine 
historian Fitte points out that the name associated with the Dragón of Valparaíso is indicative 
of the credit due to MacFarlane, even although its place was taken later by that of Neptune's 
Bellows imposed by North American seal hunters. The North American historian Bertrand 
stresses that only MacFarlane could have preceded Palmer in the discovery of Deception.

That seal hunter who was only once in the Antarctic but who explored the area 
extensively and later sold ten thousand skins in Buenos Aires is commemorated basically by 
MacFarlane Strait between Greenwich and Livingston Islands. That name appears for the 
first time on George Powell's chart dated 1822. There is also Dragon creek on the north coast 
of Livingston Island to the immediate SW of William's Point, i.e. the western entry to 
MacFarlane Strait. It is so named on the British Chart (British Antarctic Territory, South 
Shetland Islands, year 1968, scale 1:200.000, Sheet W 62 60) and described in The Antarctic 
Pilot 1964, page 167; and the name was made official by a resolution of the Chilean Navy 
hydrographic and oceanographic department.

Captain Robert Anderson MacFarlane was originally from Glasgow, South Scotland 
and came of a family most of whom emigrated to New Zealand. He was called to Chile by 
Lord Cochrane, with whom he had served in the Royal Navy, to look after his hacienda at 
Quintero. When the estate was expropriated by the Chilean Government, MacFarlane set 
himself up at Casablanca. He was a progressive-minded farmer, founder and main partner of 
the trading firm MacFarlane & Green, first subscriber to the daily El Mercurio in Valparaíso, 
active in Pacific trade and a pioneer breeder of Australian merino sheep, with family 
connections and descendants in our country.

The Dragón arrived in Chile in April 1819 and was acquired by a merchant consortium 
in Valparaíso, as testified by Captain Shireff, commanding the British Pacific naval station 
who officialized the transaction. It was a ship of 167 tons with a single deck and a copper-
protected wooden hull. Built in 1814 at the Bordeaux shipyards in France, it became a prize of
3

the British and belonged to a Liverpool firm before being purchased by the Valparaíso 
merchants. Its original rigging comprised additional masting to carry more sail, a special 
configuration known by the British as "snow ship". Before coming to Chile it performed 
cabotage between England, Ireland and Spain. After its single voyage to the Shetlands it 
remained based in Valparaíso, being used for cabotage trade on the west coast of South 
America, and is last referred to inbound from Peru in 1823. It was later transferred to the 
Compañía Chilena de Calcula and continued operations in the Pacific.

Monument

It has been felt that the most appropriate place for a plaque to the memory of Captain 
MacFarlane would be Yankee Bay on the north-west coastline of MacFarlane Strait, which 
offers seaward access with a few restrictions and on the shores of which is located the Chilean 
refuge called "Yankee Bay" which the Chilean Navy contemplates refitting and renaming in 
honour of Robert MacFarlane. The legend of the commemorative plaque would be:

"MacFarlane Strait. So called to commemorate its surveying in 1820 by Captain Robert 
MacFarlane exploring Deception Island and the Antarctic Peninsula aboard the brigantine 
Dragón."

The description of the place where the plaque would be set up during the 1991-92 
summer is as follows:

I. Geographical location

    A. Yankee Bay, Greenwich Island, South Shetlands.
       Latitude 62° 32'S. Longitude 59° 45' W.
    B. Chilean collection 1400; Chilean chart 1405; Chilean plan 1402.
    c. Anchorage: Chilean plan 1402 (Chilean route book volume VI)

II. Description and purposes of the refuge

The Navy refuge, built during its 1952/53 Antarctic mission to support Prat Base 
personnel in their explorations, is located in the vicinity of a Penguin colony on a stony plain 
east of Yankee Bay, and consists of a small 3 x 3 m hut with a flat roof. In winter when 
MacFarlane Strait is iced over it can be crossed on skis or by sledge to reach the Teniente 
Cámara Argentine naval detachment on Half Moon Island, 4 miles to the south.
4

III Facilities

Since there are neither mole nor landing stage, boats are required to go aground on 
the pebbly beach a hundred metres NW of the refuge. There is no suitable helicopter landing 
place beside the refuge, owing to unevenness of the ground. A fully levelled strip 30 metres 
wide parallel to the coastline 90 metres from the refuge has to be used.

IV Illustration

Attached is a 1:10000 sketch map of Yankee Bay.
Bibliography

Kenneth J.Bertrand. Americans in Antarctica, 1775-1948, New York, 1971.

David John Cobitt. Lord Cochrane and the Chilean Navy with an inventory of the Dundonald 
Papers relating to his service with the Chilean Navy. University of Edinburgh, 1974.

Robert Fildes. A Journal of a Voyage kept on board Brig Cora of Liverpool bound to New-
South Shetland. Manuscript, Public Record Office, London, 753 (Adm) 55/43.

Gazeta Ministerial de Chile, 1819-1822. Collection of old newsheets Biblioteca Nacional 
(record of arrivals and sailings cleared by the Valparaíso harbourmaster's office).

A.G.E.Jones "British Sealing on New South Shetland, 1819-1826" Parts I and II, The Great 
Circle 7, Nº 1, 9-22 & 2, 74-87.

A.G.E. Jones Ships employed in the South Seas Trade. 1775-1861: Parts I and II) and Register 
General of Shipping and Seamen Transcripts of Registers of Shipping. Canberra 1986.

Douglas Liversidge. The Last Continent, London, 1958.

Lloyds List, 1815-1826.

John Miers. Travels in Chile and La Plata, London 1827.

George Powell. Notes on South Shetlands, etc.,R.H. Laurie, London, 1822.
(CROQUIS)
BAHIA YANKEE
ISLA GREENWICH

P.deR.+(62° 31'65" S.
          pit  opt. 59° 48'20"W.
E. del P. VIIa 15m.
A.de la Mars[?]e.
Escala 1 :10000

          1    km.
