ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                     TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                                     XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

                                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                     XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 25
8 October 1991
Original: English

Siting of Stations

Item 13 (c)

(submitted by Italy)
Siting of Stations

Scientific research in Antarctica and the freedom of scientific research are fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty. the general interest of countries for antarctic research has caused a very sharp increase in the fields of research. Antarctic research has made a fundamental contribution to knowledge of both atmospheric and oceanic processes.

In a working paper presented at the XV ATCM by the French and the FRG delegations a number of problems related with the increasing scientific interest in Antarctica were identified:

-   overcrowding of old and new stations in areas of easier accessibility

-   duplication of scientific efforts and results

-   larger waste disposal problems

-   high impact of logistics

In the same working paper SCAR were invited to prepare a list of desirable scientific projects to be suggested to countries performing or wishing to perform research activities.

The same concepts were expressed in a paper presented by Uruguay and in another presented by Chile, the U.K. and Uruguay, also at the XV ATCM.

In these papers the Recomendation XIII-6 was quoted. It states that, when stations are established in the same general area, there should be appropriate consultations to safeguard existing scientific activities and to preclude operational logistic difficulties and adverse effects by cumulative impacts.

In recommendation XV-7 it is stated that when new stations or facilities are planned, measures should be taken to avoid excessive concentration; such measures imply a process of consultation with other countries, co-ordination and co-operation with them and this should go on in all stages of each project, covering not only scientific but also logistic aspects. Furthermore, before establishing a new station or facility, a CEE should be prepared.

In conclusion, on the problem of siting of bases, the question or their excessive crowding is a real problem, both scientifically and logistically. The question has been raised in the past ATCM's and SCAR intervention has been sought to indicate a solution in terms of designating areas not desirable fo further research activity.
Perhaps it would be time to move one more step forward.

The ATCM could ask SCAR and COMNAP to investigate the possibility of performing a con-
tinent-wide survey of Antarctica, both from the scientific and the logistic points of view to ar-
rive at a master plan for antarctica in which authoritative and scientifically sound advice could 
be given to countries wishing to start scientific research work or to locate new stations there.

SCAR has been active for a long time and has enough data and information to start such a 
major activity.

COMNAP has a much shorter life, but it can and should draw on the very extensive experi-
ence of the Managers.

These two groups in which the best of Antarctic science and logistics are concentrated could 
provide an almost ideal forum where the question of siting of stations and facilities could find 
answers.

Some of the main parameters to consider would be the object of the Antarctic activity, the co-
verage that a region or an area has already received, the need for information, the completion 
of a research activity, the possibility of establishing a base, the possibility of implementing 
contingency plans in case of emergencies, etc...

The criteria for this survey would thus include:
-   minimization of mutual interference in research work
-   avoidance of area where there is already a large amount of data
-   areas with a potential for widening the fields of research
-   areas where new and meaningful research can be performed
-   areas where the addition of new stations does not worsen the environmental impact
-   sites which lend themselves to an integrated logistics
-   sites for which is possible to establish harbour or mooring facilities and airport facili-
ties with a low level of environmental disturbance

This is just a very preliminary set of criteria. Many others can be established. However, the re-
sult of such a survey, a master plan for Antarctica, could be extremely useful in rationalize the 
siting of stations and facilities.
