ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                   XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                             Bonn
                                                   07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 16
07 October 1991
Original: English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

Facilitation of Scientific Research:
Proposal for a New Site of Special Scientific Interest
(Item 11)

(submitted by the United Kingdom)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

FACILITATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH:
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST:     INTERIM GUIDELINES:
                                       ADDITIONAL SITE

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;

Noting  that Management Plans have been prepared and approved
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for
certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest additional to
those already designated;

Considering  that it would be advantageous to gather
experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans
prepared for these sites;

Recommend  to their Governments that they voluntarily take
account of the Management Plan, annexed to this Recommenda-
tion, for the following site:

-   Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island,
    South Shetland Islands.

    (Location:  62°13'S, 58°56'W).

MR2ABA/2
Annex

Proposed Site of Special Scientific Interest
Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island

1. Geographical Location

Ardley Island (62°13'S, 58°56'W) is situated c. 500 m east of the coast of Fildes 
Peninsula, Maxwell Bay, King George Island. It is c.1 km south-east of the Soviet station 
Bellingshausen and the Chilean station Teniente Marsh, and c. 0.5 km east of the Chinese 
station Great Wall.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The Site comprises the entire island and its associated littoral zone, including the isthmus 
between the island and Fildes Peninsula to the west. The island is c. 2.0 km long and 1.0 
km at its widest, and rises to about 50 m altitude. It comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-
basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are some raised beach terraces. It is snow- and ice-free in 
summer. There is a small (c.100 m long) freshwater pond on the south-west of the island. 
There is a refuge hut (FRG) near Braillard Point, and two more refuge huts (Argentina, 
Chile) are situated near the middle of the northern coast of the island, the latter comprising 
several huts.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Site is of exceptional biological interest. It has a diverse avifauna with 12 breeding 
species, and is of particular importance for its breeding colonies of gentoo penguins 
(Pygoscelis papua); the average number of breeding pairs is about 4,000, which is the 
largest concentration of Gentoos within the South Shetland Islands and probably in the 
Antarctic. There are also about 1,200 pairs of breeding Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis 
adeliae) and a small number of chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica). Other breeding species 
of particular importance are southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). Wilson's 
storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and black-bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica). 
The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive plant communities in 
the South Shetland Islands, notably the climax fellfield ecosystem dominated by 
macrolichens (Himantormia lugubris, Usnea spp). Such vegetation is extremely sensitive 
to human intervention and is very easily damaged.

(iii) Outline of Research
Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on Ardley Island for 
many years by Chilean, FRG and GDR scientists, with brief studies made also by 
scientists from other national stations in the area.

Results of a 10-year census and breeding study, commencing in 1979, of pygoscelid 
penguins have revealed large between-season fluctuations in numbers and the breeding 
success of each species. Also, the giant petrel breeding population has declined by about 
80% in recent years. There is strong evidence that these population fluctuations are a direct 
response to disturbance by large numbers of visitors and to vehicles and low-flying 
aircraft. The effects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the 
long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site.

Detailed investigations of the phytosociology of the island's vegetation and of the 
physiology of selected lichen species have been undertaken. Further terrestrial botanical, 
zoological and littoral research is planned. Because of the extreme importance of this area to 
biological research it is imperative that it is protected from the severe threat of human 
intervention to minimize its impact on this exceptional ecosystem.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.
(v) Access Points
None specified, although groups of more than five persons should not enter the site from 
the sea anywhere east of a north-south line running through the beacon on the mid-north 
coast of the island.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Pedestrian activity should be restricted whenever possible to areas with minimal vegetation, 
and should avoid any bird breeding sites, except as required for approved research studies. 
Tourists and non-scientific station and ship personnel should visit only the area designated 
for this purpose (see ix) in order to minimize disturbance of biota. The use of any type of 
vehicle, including amphibious craft on land, is not permitted. Helicopters should not land 
on or overfly the island below 300 m altitude. Aircraft landing at and taking off from 
Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference. 
Other scientific investigations may be permitted as long as they cause minimum impact on 
the biota and ecosystems. All markers and structures associated with field experiments 
must be removed as soon as the research is completed.

(viii) Scientific sampling 
All activities involving banding, capture, killing, etc. of any bird must conform with 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. 
Any other sampling should be restricted to the minimum required for the purpose of the 
respective studies.

(ix) Other restraints 
Large groups of visitors to the site should be limited to a maximum of 20 persons at any 
time. Such groups of persons should have access only to the "tourist area" marked on the 
map, i.e. the north coast of the island as far as 300 m west of Braillard Point and 300 m 
accompanied by a guide, provided from the national station approving the visit, who will 
be responsible for their conduct and who is fully conversant with the Site Management 
Plan, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, and the 
current research programmes. There should be no access to dogs whether or not they are 
required for sledging purposes. All non-human waste materials should be removed from 
the Site and returned to the Station of origin; no combustible materials should be incinerated 
within the Site.

 
                       62 13 S                      58 57 W                      62 13 S
 
                                                                    4
                                                                   Ardley Island
                                                         Beacan
                                                                 Braillard 
                                                                  Point
 
                   Tourist area
                   Pond
                   Contours at 10 m intervals
 
                         0        240     540 m
