ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                        
Bonn                                        
07 - 18 October 1991                
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                        
                                        
XVI ATCM/WP 17                
07 October 1991                
Original: English                
                                        
                                        
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION                
                                        
Facilitation of Scientific Research                
                                        
Proposed Amendment of the Management Plan and Extension of Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6, Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands                
(Item 11)                
                                        
(submitted by the United Kingdom)                
                                        
                                        
Explanatory Note

Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
was designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6 by
Recommendation VIII-4 on account of its considerable sedimentary
and palaeontological interest.  In particular, the Jurassic and
Cretaceous rocks contain fossils which provide evidence of the
former link between Antarctica and the other southern Continents.
The site currently comprises three distinct areas on the
peninsula.

However, the entire peninsula is also of considerable biological
interest, possessing several terrestrial and freshwater plants
and invertebrate species which are very rare in the Antarctic,
and numerous colonies of breeding birds and seals.  In addition,
the Peninsula is of exceptional historical interest, containing
the greatest concentration of nineteenth century archaeological
sites in Antarctica.

It is proposed that the site should be extended to include the
whole of Byers Peninsula, excluding the offshore islets, from the
ice margin on the west side of Rotch Dome (to a point directly
north of Stackpole Rocks) westwards to the western extremity of
Ray Promontory.  The description of the Site, together with the
amended Management Plan and amended map are provided as an Annex
to the draft Recomendation.

MR2ABA/9
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

FACILITATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH:

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST: INTERIM GUIDELINES:
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 6, BYERS PENINSULA,
LIVINGSTON ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

The Representatives,

Recalling  Recommendation VIII-4 and the Management Plan for
Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6; Byers Peninsula,
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed thereto;

Noting  that at its Twenty-First Meeting the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), held at Sao Paulo,
Brazil (24-27 July 1990) reviewed the Management Plan and
scientific interests of SSSI No 6: Byers Peninsula,
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands;

Recommend  to their Government that:

(i)     the Management Plan for Site of Special
Scientific Interest No 6, Byers Peninsula,
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands,
annexed to Recommendation VIII-4 be terminated;

(ii)    they voluntarily take account of the Management
Plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site
No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island,
South Shetland Islands.

MR2ABA/10
Annex

Proposed amendment to Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6

Byers Peninsula, Livingston Islar-1, South Shetland Islands

This Site currently comprises three areas of varying shape and size on Byers Peninsula designated solely for their sedimentary and palaeontological interest. However, the peninsula is also of considerable biological and archaeological importance. The following amended management plan is proposed:

1. Geographical Location

Byers Peninsula is an extensive, largely ice-free area at the western end of Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, centred on lat. 62°38'S, long. 61°05'W.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The Site comprises the entire area of Byers Peninsula extending from the ice margin on the west side of Rotch Dome (to a point directly north of Stackpole Rocks) westwards to the west end of Ray Promontory. The littoral zone of the peninsula is included within the Site. The nearby offshore islets and islands are not included in the Site. Most of the Site is low and undulating, below 100 m altitude, except for Ray Promontory which has a more rugged topography, rising to over 200 m at Penca and Start hills. Numerous volcanic plugs, lakes, pools and streams occur between Ray Promontory and the Rotch Dome ice field. Coastal areas often have broad beaches several hundred metres wide, with raised beaches behind.

(ii) Reason for designation
The fossils found in this area provide evidence of the former link between Antarctica and the other southern continents. A long-term palaeontological research programme has been in progress since the mid-1960's. It is important to protect these Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks from being used as building materials or taken as souvenirs.
The site is of special biological importance. It has a sparse but diverse flora of both calcicolous and calcifuge plants and cyanobacteria associated with the lavas and basalts, respectively. Basaltic plugs are particularly well-vegetated. Several rare cryptogams and the two native vascular plants (Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) occur at several sites. There are several coastal and inland lakes, the latter having a particularly important biota, including aquatic mosses, and serve as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steineni, the only native winged insect in the Antarctic and with exceptionally restricted distribution. The only other Antarctic dipteran, the apterous Belgica antarctica, occurs in stands of wet moss.

The site is also unique in possessing the greatest concentration of historical sites in Antarctica, namely the remains of refuges, together with contemporary artefacts, and shipwrecks of early nineteenth century sealing expeditions.
It is important that both the biological and archaeological features are also afforded protection.

(iii) Outline of research
A long-term geological and palaeontological research programme was established in 1964. The main objectives are the description of sediments and fossils found in this area. Botanical, zoological, limnological, ornithological and archaeological investigations have also been undertaken throughout the Site at various times since the late 1950s.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.
(v) Access points
None defined.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Vehicles should not enter the Site, except in an emergency. Helicopters should land only on unvegetated ground at least 500 m from any bird or seal concentrations, or freshwater bodies.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmless interference.
Scientific research other than archaeological, biological and geological should be kept to a minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Samples of rocks or biological specimens should only be taken for compelling scientific purposes.

(ix) Other restraints
Buildings and other facilities should not be erected in the Site. All non-human waste should be removed from the area. No combustible materials should be incinerated within the Site. There should be no interference of any sealers' refuges (huts, caves, etc) nor removal of any associated artefacts (including implements, timbers, fabrics, etc) from these features or from the beaches. No skeletal remains of any animal should be moved within or removed from the Site.

ORIGINAL BOUNDARIES OF SITE
