ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       


                                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO       
                                                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA       


                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
                                                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       

Bonn                                  
07 - 18 October 1991                  

XVI ATCM/WP 33                        
9 October 1991                        
Original: English                      

Draft Outline of the Rules and Procedures 
Relating to Liability for Damage to the Antarctic Environment 
and Dependent and Associated Ecosystems 

(Item 6)                                  

(submitted by Japan)                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  



                  




Draft Outline of the Rules and Procedures
Relating to Liability for Damage to the Antarctic Environment
and Dependent and Associated Ecosystems

The delegation of Japan believes that the rules must be formulated as soon as possible with
regard to the compensation for damage to the Antarctic environment in order to make the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty a really effective arrangement.
Japan is willing to participate in the expert meeting on this issue and others proposed by the
Netherlands. The following is the outline of such rules which the Japanese delegation would
like to propose for the consideration of other delegations.

1.      Provisions related to the Serious Responsibility of the Violators

        There has to be a distinction between the responsibility for the environment and rela-
ted ecosystems and the responsibility for people and their properties. More strict provisions
are necessary for the former, although the responsibility should not be limitless but be subject
to certain clearly defined escape clauses. Such escape clauses should be limited to cases of
force majeure and emergency nature such as saving distressed people, etc.

2.      Scope and Entities of the Liability

        The Government should assume not only the responsibility for their own or their agen-
cies' conducts (which should include conducts outside the mandate of such entities) but also
the responsibility for the conducts of their nationals if it is the case of negligence on the part
of the Governments in violating the obligations under the Antarctic Treaty. It also means that
the responsibilities of the Government should be limited to such cases and not more than
these.

3.      Injured Party

        In order to make this liability mechanism workable and preclude the possibility of legal
disputes, it is necessary to clearly identify who is the injured party. The Protocol (article XI) is
drafted in such a way that the environment of the Antarctica will be actually managed by the
Committee for Environmental Protection. It would, therefore, be appropriate that the Com-
mittee is regarded to be the injured party in this process of liability and compensation. There
could, however, be an argument to the effect that the Committee for Environmental Protec-
tion is not appropriate in this context because the Committee only has the role of an advisory
organ and does not have the mandate to make any decision. The Consultative Meetings or the
Secretariat (if established) could be more appropriate from this viewpoint. Further thought
should be given on this point.

4.      Assessment of Damage

        The Consultative Meetings should assess whether and to what extent the Antarctic en-
vironment is damaged, based on the report of the Committee for Environmental Protection.
5. The Way of Compensation for the Liability

Either the recovery of the original conditions or payment of compensation, the amount 
of payment should be equivalent to the actual loss or damage. The procedure of assessing the 
actual amount of compensation should be formulated by the experts.

6. Establishment of the Fund

The compensation will be paid to the Committee for Environmental Protection or to 
the Consultative Meetings (or to the Secretariat). The money should be pooled in the fund to 
be created for this purpose. The Committee will administer the fund subject to the guidance 
and direction of the Consultative Meeting.

7. Appeal Procedure for the Decisions on Liability

If the defendant party is not satisfied with the decisions on the existence of damage, 
amount of the compensation, etc, that party can make an appeal in accordance with the dis-
pute settlement procedures stipulated in Articles 18-20 of the Protocol.

8. With regard to the damage caused to people and their properties, there is no reason to 
treat differently because the damage has been caused in the Antarctic area.

Therefore the responsibility should be limited only to the cases of negligence.
