ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
                                                          
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                         
                            Bonn
                          07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 3
07 October 1991
Original: English

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

Item 8

(submitted by Sweden)
Sweden                                                                   Working Paper
September 23, 1991

ATCM XVI, Bonn: Item 8. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

Inspections in the terms of Article VII of the Treaty have served as a useful mechanism for safeguarding the openness of the Antarctic system and the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes. This will be the case also in future. However, the concept of inspection involves other aspects which in the present development of the Antarctic system should be brought to attention.

Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection provides for inspections to be arranged, individually or collectively, to ensure compliance with the Protocol. Observers could be either designated by any ATCP, being nationals of that Party, or they could be designated at ATCMs. It is stated that Parties shall co-operate fully with observers, and that reports of inspections, after comments by the inspected Parties and consideration at the next ATCM, shall be made publicly available.

Following the agreement on the Environment Protocol, concern for the Antarctic environment is today vital in Antarctic politics. At the same time, operations in Antarctica are growing in both number and complexity. There is an increasing emphasis on the need for mutual exchange of experience and knowledge. Inspections could provide a constructive way of exchanging practical experience of Antarctic operations, with special emphasis on environmental protection. However, it should be noted that inspections are in general costly and logistically complicated.

In developing the possibilities offered by the inspection system, we will have to consider a broad range of issues. For example, two or more Parties could make joint inspections. The inspection teams could include members with special competence to assist in solving specific problems relating to, for instance, waste management, energ supply etc.

To be as fruitful as possible, visits should be planned and announced at stations well in advance, and enough time should be spent at each site to develop a substantive dialogue with the personnel of the host station. Reports should be drafted so as to be helpful for all Parties to the Treaty.
2

Useful examples of guidelines for the drafting of inspection reports have been provided by the 
USA, based on their extensive experience in this field.

It is proposed that a working group is set up to develop the concept of Antarctic inspections, 
taking into account the issues raised above.
