ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                    XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                    Bonn
                                                    07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/INFO24         WP 31
8 October 1991
Original: English

Draft Proposal for a [Schedule, Appendix] on Inquiry to the Protocol on the Protection of the Antarctic Environment and Dependent and Associated Ecosystems

(submitted by the Netherlands)
Draft Proposal for a [Schedule, Appendix] on Inquiry to the Protocol on the Protection
of the Antarctic Environment and dependent and Associated Ecosystems

INQUIRY PROCEDURE

Article 1
Institution of Proceedings

1. Any Party or Parties to a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of Article 3 of
the Protocol, including questions of whether an activity referred to in Article 3 has, or is likely to
have, an adverse impact on the Antarctic environment or associated and dependent ecosystems,
may, in accordance with this [Schedule][Appendix], request the establishment of an Inquiry
Commission and institute the proceedings by written notification addressed to the other Party or
Parties.

2. The requesting Party or Parties shall inform the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration of the institution of the inquiry proceedings. The Secretary-General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration shall immediately communicate the notification to all Parties to the
Protocol and the Committee for Environmental Protection.

3. Any Party to the dispute, notified under paragraph 1, shall be obliged to submit to such
proceedings.

4. The notification shall state the subject-matter of the inquiry procedure.

Article 2
Constitution of the Inquiry Commission

1. The Inquiry Commission shall be constituted and shall function in accordance with the
Protocol, including this [Schedule][Appendix].

2. Subject to paragraph 6, the Inquiry Commission shall consist of [three] members. Both the
requesting Party and the other Party to the inquiry procedure shall appoint a scientific or
technical expert and the two experts so appointed shall designate by common agreement the
third expert who shall be the President of the Inquiry Commission. The latter shall not be a
national of one of the Parties to the Inquiry procedure, nor have his or her usual place of
residence in the territory of one of these Parties, nor be employed by one of them, nor have dealt
with the matter in any other capacity.

3. If the President of the Inquiry Commission has not been designated within [two] months of the
appointment of the second expert, the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
shall, at the request of either Party, designate the President within a further [two-month] period
in consultation with the Parties to the dispute.

4. If one of the Parties to the Inquiry Procedure does not appoint an expert within [one] month of
its receipt of the notification, the other Party may inform the Secretary-General of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, who shall designate the President of the Inquiry Commission
within a further [two-month] period. Upon designation, the President of the Inquiry Commission
shall request the Party which has not appointed an expert to do so within [one] month.
After such a period, the President shall inform the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court,
who shall make this appointment within a further [two-month] period.

5. Two or more Parties which determine by agreement that they are in the same interest shall
appoint one expert jointly.

-1-
6. Where two or more Parties have separate interests or there is a disagreement as to whether they are in the same interest, they shall appoint, within [one] month of the receipt of the notification, experts separately. In disputes involving more than two Parties, the Parties shall designate by common agreement one additional expert who shall be the President of the Inquiry Commission. The latter shall not be a national of one of the Parties to the Inquiry procedure, nor have his or her usual place of residence in the territory of one of these Parties, nor be employed by one of them, nor have dealt with the matter in any other capacity.

7. If, under paragraph 6, a Party does not appoint an expert within [one] month of its receipt of the notification, the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall, upon request of at least two Parties, designate the President of the Inquiry Commission within a further [two-month] period. Upon designation, the President of the Inquiry Commission shall request the Party or Parties not having made an appointment to do so within [one] month. After such a period, the President shall inform the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court, who shall make the necessary appointment(s) within a further [two-month] period.

Article 3
Procedure

1. The Inquiry Commission shall, unless the Parties agree otherwise, adopt its own rules of procedure.

2. The decisions of the Inquiry Commission on matters of procedure shall be taken by majority vote of its members.

Article 4
Seat of the Inquiry Commission

1. Unless the Parties to the dispute agree otherwise, the inquiry procedure shall take place at The Hague, where the records of the Inquiry Commission shall be kept.

2. The International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration acts as Registry for the Inquiry Commissions which sit at The Hague, and shall place its offices, facilities and staff at the disposal of the Parties for the use of the Inquiry Commissions.

Article 5
Intervention

Any Party which considers itself as having an interest of a factual nature in the subject-matter of the inquiry procedure, and which may be affected by an opinion in the matter, may intervene in the proceedings with the consent of the Inquiry Commission

Article 6
Functions of the Inquiry Commission

1. The Inquiry Commission shall, in order to facilitate a solution of the dispute in accordance with the Protocol and any Annex thereto, elucidate and define all questions of fact relevant to the matter in dispute by means of an impartial and conscientious investigation.

2. The Inquiry Commission shall hear the Committee for Environmental Protection and may invite any Party to the Protocol to submit to it its views orally or in writing. The Inquiry Commission is entitled to ask from the Committee for Environmental Protection and either Party for such explanations and information as it considers necessary.

3. The Parties to the inquiry procedure shall facilitate the work of the Inquiry Commission and, in particular, using all means at their disposal to:

- 2 -
a) provide it with all relevant documents, facilities and information; and
b) enable it, where necessary, to call witnesses or experts and receive their evidence.

Article 7
Report

1. The Report of the Inquiry Commission shall contain the final opinion of the Inquiry Commission, including its statement of facts and conclusions on all questions of fact relevant to the matter in dispute. The Report shall reflect the view of the majority of its members. Any dissenting view shall be included in the Report. The final opinion of the Inquiry Commission shall be based on accepted scientific principles.

2. The Inquiry Commission shall present its final Report within [two] months of the date on which it was established unless it finds it necessary to extend the time limit for a period which will not exceed [two] months.

3. The Report shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and shall be immediately transmitted by him to the Parties to the dispute and the Committee for Environmental Protection.

4. The Report of the Inquiry Commission, shall not be binding upon the Parties.

Article 8
Failure to reply or to submit to the inquiry procedure

1. If a Party to the inquiry procedure does not reply to notification of institution of proceedings or does not appear before the Inquiry Commission or fails to present its case, the other Party or Parties to the dispute may request the Inquiry Commission to continue the proceedings and to complete its work.

2. Failure to reply, absence of a Party or a failure of a Party to present its case shall not constitute a bar to the continuation and completion of the work of the Inquiry Commission.

Article 8
Fees and Expenses

The fees and expenses of the Inquiry Commision shall be born by the Parties to the dispute in equal shares.

3.
