ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE




TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 47/REV.1
17 October 1991
Original: English

Declaration by Contracting Parties on the 30th Anniversary of the Entry into 
Force of the Antarctic Treaty

(submitted by Australia)
DRAFT Thu, Oct 17, 1991 14:


DECLARATION


BY CONTRACTING PARTIES
ON THE 30TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY


The Representatives of the Contracting Parties present in Bonn for the XVIth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting:


Recalling the Antarctic Treaty, done at Washington on 1 December 1959 and which
entered into force on 23 June 1961;


Reaffirming the objective of the Treaty to ensure, in the interests of all mankind,
that Antarctica shall continue for ever to be used exclusively for peaceful
purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord;


Noting with pleasure the continuing growth in the number of states acceding to
the Treaty;


Conscious of the measures adopted pursuant to Article IX of the Treaty and the
associated and separate conventions regulating their activities in the Antarctic;


Welcoming the recent adoption in Madrid of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which designates Antarctica as a natural reserve
devoted to peace and science; and


Convinced of the continued effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty as the best means
for making decisions about Antarctica;


Declare that in the interests of all mankind Antarctica shall continue to be used
exclusively for peaceful purposes and, in this regard, dedicate themselves to
enhancing further their record of cooperation in a decade of international
Antarctic scientific cooperation, 1991 to 2000, and record their achievements over
the first thirty years of the Antarctic Treaty as set out in the Annex hereto.
DRAFT Thu, Oct 17, 1991 14:

Annex

30TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE ENTRY INTO FORCE
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

A unique agreement for a unique continent

The Antarctic Treaty has for thirty years united countries active in Antarctica in a
uniquely successful agreement for the peaceful use of a continent.  Scientific
research conducted by the Treaty parties, and the cooperation between them, have
signalled to the world that nations can work together for their mutual benefit and
for the benefit of international peace and cooperation.  Antarctica is the largest
unspoiled continent on earth and Treaty Parties have committed themselves to
its study and to protecting its unique environment.  The Antarctic Treaty
provides an example to the world of how nations can successfully work together
to preserve a major part of this planet, for the benefit of all mankind, as a zone of
peace, where the environment is protected and science is pre-eminent.

Thirty years ago

The Antarctic Treaty was adopted by twelve governments in 1959 at a time when
other parts of the world were subject to international tensions.  The governments
of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway,
South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States,
which had conducted scientific research in the Antarctic during the International
Geophysical Year, were convinced that the unique opportunities that the
Antarctic presented for science should not be jeopardised by disputes between
them.  The Treaty, which entered into force on 23 June 1961, ensures that in the
interests of all mankind Antarctica shall continue for ever to be used exclusively
for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international
discord.

A continent devoted to peace and cooperation

The Antarctic Treaty contains farsighted means to achieve its objectives.  It
prohibits measures of a military nature and prohibits nuclear explosions and the
disposal of radio-active wastes.  The Treaty guarantees freedom of scientific
research and promotes international scientific cooperation.  Article IV of the
Treaty ensures that differing positions regarding claims to territorial sovereignty
do not prevent Parties to the Treaty cooperating in the pursuit of the Treaty's
objectives.  It provides for exchange of detailed information about activities in
Antarctica and allows observers complete freedom of access to all areas of
Antarctica to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty are respected by Parties to it.
DRAFT Thu, Oct 17, 199? 14:

The Treaty has, through these means, been outstandingly successful in achieving 
its objectives.

The strength of the Antarctic Treaty continues to grow and Parties to the Treaty 
now represent over 70% of the world's population. Following their accession to 
the Treaty, Brazil, China, Ecuador, Finland, Germany, India, Italy, the Republic of 
Korea, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Spain, Sweden, and Uruguay have joined 
the original signatories as Consultative Parties. The Consultative Parties have 
welcomed the accession to the Treaty of Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, 
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, 
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Papua New Guinea, Romania and Switzerland.

In accordance with Article IX of the Treaty representatives of the Parties meet 
regularly to exchange information and consult together on matters of common 
interest and to formulate and recommend to their governments measures in 
furtherance of the objectives of the Treaty. In 1964 the Parties adopted the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. Two separate 
conventions, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the 
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, have 
subsequently entered into force.

Committed to protecting the environment

On 4 October 1991 the parties adopted in Madrid the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The Protocol, which is an integral part of the 
Antarctic Treaty, designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and 
science. It establishes a comprehensive legally binding regime for ensuring that 
activities that parties undertake in Antarctica are consistent with protection of the 
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.

Thirty-one Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty signed the Protocol on the 
date of its adoption, and have committed themselves to taking the necessary steps 
to achieve the earliest possible entry into force of the Protocol. In the meantime, 
parties will ensure that as far as possible and, consistent with their legal and 
constitutional processes, the provisions of the Protocol and its annexes are applied 
to their activities in Antarctica. Adoption of the Protocol in 1991 is a fitting 
tribute to the thirtieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty and signals the 
commitment of Parties to the future strength of the Treaty.

A priority to science

The Antarctic Treaty parties are fully committed to scientific research in 
Antarctica which has been effectively coordinated by the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research since the 1950s. Parties have long recognised the fundamental 
role that Antarctica plays in understanding global environmental processes and 
the unique opportunity it provides for research.
DRAFT Thu, Oct 17, 1991 14:

Antarctica provides an outstanding opportunity for the free conduct of science for 
the benefit of all mankind. It is a pristine laboratory, of world-wide significance, 
which has enabled research to detect and monitor global environmental 
phenomena such as the depletion of atmospheric ozone, global warming and sea 
level changes. Antarctic meteorological research has provided data essential to 
forecasting in the Southern Hemisphere.  Glaciological research provides 
important information about the heat exchange budget and Antarctica's influence 
on weather and climate.  Geophysical research in Antarctica provides new 
insights into global geological history and the formation of continents.  The 
earth's geomagnetic field makes Antarctica particularly well suited to the study of 
solar-terrestrial interactions and cosmic rays which travel from outside our 
galaxy.  The extreme environment of the Antarctic provides unique 
opportunities to study the specialised adaptations of organisms with the 
environment, and biological research is providing data essential to informed 
decision-making about marine living resources. Human biology and medicine 
provides information of the physiological adaptation of man to extreme climates 
and isolation. The Treaty Parties have ensured that the results of these important 
research efforts are freely available to all mankind.

A natural reserve devoted to peace and science

The Antarctic Treaty Parties are proud of their achievements over the last thirty 
years and the example of peaceful cooperation that the Treaty provides to the rest 
of the world.

The determination of Parties to maintain and strengthen the Treaty and protect 
Antarctica's environmental and scientific values is convincingly demonstrated in 
their adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty and their decision to designate Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to 
peace and science.
