ANTARCTIC TREATY          
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE    

                                                        
Bonn                                   
07 - 18 October 1991                   

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO           
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA       

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVI ATCM/WP 37        
9 October 1991     
Original: English     

Tourist Activities in Antarctica  

(Item 14)          

(submitted by Italy)     
Item 14 - Tourist activities in Antarctica

Working document presented by the delegation of Italy

This document is aimed to establish principles and provisions according to which 
tourist activities in the Antarctic should be regulated and controlled in the light of the existing 
principles of the Antarctic Treaty and of the principles of comprehensive protection of the 
Antarctic environment afforded by Rec. XV-1 and established in Art. 2 of the Madrid 
Protocol.

The increase of tourist activities in Antarctica has created serious concern among 
Treaty Parties in view of the potential threat to the envrionment and to scientific activities. 
Unregulated tourism may: 
-    a) cause adverse impacts on various environmental components, including air and 
water quality, the uncontaminated Antarctic ice, the sensitive ice-free geomorphic features, 
the unique terrestrial and marine ecosystems and their endemic fauna and flora. Such impacts 
may occur by disposal of wastes, pollution, contamination, etc. Special concern is raised by the 
risk of disruptive effects on the local environment in case of accidents
-    b) interfere with the scientific activities carried out at the stations and in the Antarctic 
land, ice, and seas
-    c) interfere with the logistic operations in support of scientific activities, and cause 
damage to unmanned installations and properties
-    d) impose serious burdens, including potential dangers to human life and loss of 
properties, to the national organizations in case of rescue operations, made difficult and risky 
by the severe natural conditions, whereas the logistic means and infrastructures in the area 
are solely intended and fully employed for science support activities.

In response to such concerns the Parties established that tourism required regulation 
(Rec. VIII-9); furthermore Rec. IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9, X-8 were adopted providing for:
--   timely and mutual information about tourist expeditions starting from Party states or 
operating under Party state flags
--   conditions and restictions for tourist visits to stations
--   avoiding interference with scientific activities, and in particular to avoid access to 
protected areas, SPA, SSSI, and historic sites and monuments
--   monitoring the environmental impacts of tourist activities, and in particular their 
cumulative effects
--   monitoring activities of non-Parties tour operators and tourists, and advising them 
about the relevant provisions
--   calling operators to provide for appropriate training and guidance for tourists, to state 
their acceptance of the principles and the relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System, 
and to comply to the code of conduct for Antarctic visitors proposed by SCAR and adopted in 
Rec. VIII-9

--   considering the establishment of Areas of Special Tourist Interest, in view of the 
desirability that activities in unexplorerd areas be carried out according to national scientific 
programmes

--   recommending operational self-sufficiency and liability of the operator by means of 
adequate insurance.

Rec. XI-3 took note of a major air disaster on Mt. Erebus.

After ATCM XI the tourist issue has been a major theme at all ATCMs as well as at 
the first session of XI ATSCM in Viña del Mar; however no further recommendations were 
adopted, in spite of a number of specific and detailed proposals, some of which were of 
comprehensive nature and aimed a mutually acceptable solutions for the various 
environmental, operational, logistic, and legal issues associated with Antarctic tourism. 
Documents were submitted by the delegations of Chile, France, Germany, the Netherlands, 
the United Kingdom and the United States; the Australian - Belgian - French - Italian 
proposal and the proposal by New Zealand at XI ATSCM also carried extensive regulatory 
provisions. The activities of non-governmental organizations in Antarctica have also been 
considered under the same item in the ATCM agendas.

The position of the Italian delegation on the issue of Antarctic tourism is based on the 
following considerations:

--   Tourism should be restricted in the Antarctic area in view of its recognized status of 
special conservation area, and of designated nature reserve by the Madrid Protocol.
--   The de facto existence of tourist operations in the Antarctic requires regulation in 
order to preserve its environmental values, and in the interest, safety and protection of the 
scientific activities carried out by the Parties. The basis for such regulation is provided, inter 
alia, by the principles of the Madrid Protocol, applicable to all human activities in the 
Antarctic area.

--   The present regulation of tourist activities is unsufficient, in the light of the growing 
concern and of the deepened debate held for over a decade at the ATCMs, which has not led 
as yet to new and adequate provisions. A general policy for tourism should be established by 
the Parties.
3

A timely and appropriate regulation of the Antarctic tourism should be established as 
an annex to the Madrid Protocol. The following general guidelines should be taken under 
consideration:

--    Tourism should not be allowed under less strict regulations than those applicable to 
the scientific activities and associated logistics. On the contrary, more stringent specific 
provisions should be made so that tourist activities be not carried out at environmental costs, 
such as may be, in some cases, acceptable by scientific activities in the light of the global and 
general benefits arising from science.

--    The existing recommendations on tourism should be reviewed and embedded in a new 
provision addressing systematically the principles, regulations, and the conditions under which 
tourist activities may be carried out.

--    A review of the legal requirements for tourist activities, including compliance by third 
parties, is also deemed necessary.

Italy proposes to convene a meeting of experts designed by ATC Parties and including 
a representative of SCAR, with the aim of establishing appropriate guidelines for the 
regulation of tourist activities in Antarctica. Such guidelines should be submitted for 
consideration at the next ATC Meeting.

The topics to be addressed at such meeting should include:

a) organizational regulations:
--    advance notice of the programme, including visits to stations; timing of advance notices
--    approval of tourist programmes and routes
--    conditions issued upon approval
--    EIA (when applicable)

b) operational provisions and restrictions:
--    selfsufficiency of operations
--    training of personnel and tourists
--    logistic requirements (shipbuilding, navigational equipment, special features e.g. 
lifeboats, helicopters, communication equipment, notice of positioning at all times in 
the Antarctic area; provisions for stays on land)
--    statement of acceptance of ATS principles, rules and practices (waste disposal; marine 
pollution, etc.)
--    list of prohibited activities (or list of permitted activities) e.g.
--    competitions
--    use of land vehicles
--    fixed installations and infrastructures by tourist operators
--     prohibition of exploration
--     restrictions and control of visits to stations and installations
--     Areas of Special Tourist Interest or other means for avoiding the scatter of tourism in 
the area
--     restrictions to the disembarkation points
--     individual tourism (by boat, plane, land vehicles)
--     adventure, long-range tourism

c) compliance and responsibility
--     liability of tourist operators
--     establishment of an insurance fund for compensation
--     State responsibility for tourist activities
--     Parties co-operation in controlling tourist activities
