ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      



TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ 

Bonn                                     
07 - 18 October 1991                  

XVI ATCM/WP 57                        
18 October 1991                       
Original: English                         

Recommendations                          

adopted at the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by the Secretariat)
Recommendation XVI - 1

Exchange of Information

The Representatives,

Recalling the provisions of Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that their Governments give effect in their domestic legislation to obligations arising from agreements reached at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;

Noting that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty contain provisions whereby information about such domestic legislation is, or is to be, exchanged between Parties;

Noting, however, that such provision has not been made in relation to obligations arising from Recommendations adopted at Consultative Meetings;

Aware that knowledge of this domestic legislation can be of interest to the other Consultative Parties;

Recommend to their Governments that they include in their exchange of information under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, information on any domestic legislation enacted to give effect to obligations arising from Recommendations adopted at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.
Recommendation XVI - 2

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM
NEW SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4;

Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for certain Sites of Special Scientific Interest addi-
tional to those already designated;

Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience of the practical effect of the
Management Plans prepared for these sites;

Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take account of the Management
Plans, annexed to this Recommendation, for the following sites:

Site No 32:   Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
              (Location: 62°13'S, 58°56'W).

Site No 33:   Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
              (Location: 62°08'S, 58°08'W).
2

ANNEX 1 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-2

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 32
ARDLEY ISLAND, MAXWELL BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Ardley Island (62°13'S, 58°54'W) is situated c. 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Penin-
sula, Maxwell Bay, King George Island. It is 1 km south-east of the Soviet station Bellingshau-
sen and the Chilean station Teniente Marsh, and c. 0.5 km east of the Chinese station Great
Wall.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

(i)  Description of Site

The Site comprises the entire island and its associated littoral zone, including
the isthmus between the island and Fildes Peninsula to the west. The island
is c. 2.0 km long and 1.5 km at its widest, and rises about 50 m altitude. It
comprises mainly Tertiary andesitic-basaltic lavas and tuffs, and there are
some raised beach terraces. It is snow- and ice-free in summer. There is a
small (c. 100 m long) freshwater pond ont the south-west of the island. There
is a refuge hut (FRG) near Braillard Point, and two more refuge huts
(Argentina, Chile) are situated near the middle of the northern coast of the
island, the latter comprising several huts.

(ii)  Reason for Designation

The Site is of exceptional biological interest. It has a divers avifauna with 12
breeding species, and is of particular importance for its breeding colonies of
gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua); the average number of breeding pairs is
about 4,000, which is the largest concentration of Gentoos within the South
Shetland Islands and probably in the Antarctic. there are also about 1,200
pairs of breeding Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) and a small number of
chinstrap penguins (P. antarctica). Other breeding species of particular im-
portance are southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). Wilson's strom
petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and black-bellied storm petrels (Fregatta tro-
pica). The island possesses some of the best-developed and most extensive
plant communities in the South Shetland Island, notably the climax fellfield
ecosystem dominated by macrolichens (Himantormia lugubris, Usnea spp.).
such vegetation is extremely sensitive to human intervention and is very
easily damaged.

(iii)  Outline of Research

Detailed ornithological and botanical research has been undertaken on
Ardley Island for many years by Chilean, FRG and GDR scientists, with
brief studies made also by scientists from other national stations in the area.
Results of a 10-year census and breeding study, commencing in 1979, of py-
goscelid penguins have revealed large between-season fluctuations in num-
bers and the breeding success of each species. Also, the giant petrel breeding
population has declined by about 80 % in recent years. There is strong evi-
dence that these population fluctuations are a direct response to disturbance
by large numbers of visitors and to vehicles and low-flying aircraft. The ef-
fects of these impacts will continue to be monitored as an integral part of the
long-term ornithological research being undertaken at this site. Detailed in-
vestigations of the phytosociology of the island's vegetation and of the phy-
siology of selected lichen species have been undertaken. further terrestrial
botanical, zoological and littoral research is planned. Because of the extreme
importance of this area to biological research it is imperative that it is
protected from the severe threat of human intervention to minimize its
impact on this exceptional ecosystem.

(iv)   Date of expiry of designation

       31 December 2001.

(v)    Access points

       None specified, although not more than five persons should enter the site
from the sea anywhere east of a north-south line running through the beacon
on the mid-north coast of the island.

(vi)   Pedestrian and vehicular routes

       Pedestrian activity should be restricted whenever possible to areas with mi-
nimal vegetation, and should avoid any bird breeding sites, except as re-
quired for approved research studies. Tourists and non-scientific station and
ship personnel should visit only the area designated for this purpose (see ix)
in order to minimize disturbance of biota. The use of any type of vehicle,
including amphibious craft on land, is not permitted. Helicopters should not
land on or overfly the island below 300 m altitude. Aircraft landing at and ta-
king off from Teniente Marsh airfield should avoid overflying the island.

(vii)  Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful inter-
ference

       Other kinds of scientific investigations may be permitted as long as they
cause minimum impact on the biota and ecosystems. All markers and struc-
tures associated with field experiments must be removed as soon as the re-
search is completed.

(viii) Scientific sampling

       All activities involving banding, capture, killing, etc. of any bird must con-
form with Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora. Any other sampling should be restricted to the minimum required for
the purpose of the respective studies.

(ix)    Other restraints

       Large groups of visitors to the site should be limited to a maximum of 20 per-
sons at any time. Such groups of persons should have access only to the
"tourist area" marked on the map, i.e. the north coast of the island as far as
300 m west of Braillard Point and 300 m west of the Chilean refuege, up to
an altitude of 20 m above sea level. Groups should be accompanied by a
guide, provided from the national station approving the visit, who will be re-
sponsible for their conduct and who is fully conversant with the Site Ma-
nagement Plan, the Agreed Measures for the Conversation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora, and the current research programmes. There should be no
access to dogs whether or not they are required for sledging purposes. All
human waste materials should be removed from the Site and returned to the
Station of origin; no comebustible materials should be incinerated within the
Site.
5

ANNEX 2 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI - 2
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST No.33

Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

1. Geographical location

The Area is situated on the south coast of King George Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands, and is bounded by the following coordinates:

        62°07'48"S, 58°09'17"W
        62°07'49"S, 58°07'14"W
        62°08'19"S, 58°07'19"W
        62°08'16"S, 58°09'15"W

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The area is named after Lions Rump, a prominent rocky hill between the southern extremity
of King George Bay and Lion Cove. It includes the littoral and sublittoral extending from the
eastern end of "Lajkonik Rock" to the northernmost end of Twin Pinnacles Island, and from
that point to the easternmost end of the columnar plug "Lions Head" to the east of White
Eagle Glacier. On land the Area includes the coastline of raised beaches, freshwater pools
and the streams on the south side of King George Bay and around Lion Cove, moraines and
slopes leading up to the lower ice tongue of White Eagle Glacier and westward to a small
moraine protruding through the ice cap south-east of Sukiennice Hills. Lions Rump
comprises Tertiary lavas and tuffs with thin brown coal intercalations and silicified wood
fragments. The moraine west of Lion Cove consists of several Holocene stages of glacier
advance and retreat. A small refuge is situated near the shore close to the main stream within
the Area, about 300 m west of Lions Rump.

(ii) Reason for Designation
The Area is representative of the terrestrial, limnological and littoral ecosystems of King
George Island, possessing diverse biota and rock formations. There is a rich flora, especially
of lichens, and the two native vascular plants, Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia
antarctica, are frequent. Twelve species of birds breed within the Area, including many
colonies of three species of pygoscelid penguins, Adélie, chinstrap and gentoo. There are
large numbers of elephant seals and fur seals on the beaches. It is a rich part of the coastal 
ecosystem which has not been disturbed by human activity, other than various biological, 
geological and geomorphological studies which have been undertaken within the Area.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
July 1990: Poland

(IV) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.

(V) Access Points
Access from the sea should be close to the outflow of the main stream within the Area about 
300 m west of lions Rump. Helicopter landings should be restricted to the area south of the 
southern boundary of the Area, so as not to disturb the fauna.

(VI) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area should be in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorised representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not 
jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).

However, access to the Area shall be unlimited to parties wishing only to traverse or pass 
through the site to carry out bona fide scientific research inland of the Area. Such parties shall 
pass through the site as speedily as is reasonable and shall not disturb any part of the site. 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of exchange of 
information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out. Research 
parties passing through the site as permitted above should also report their visits in the same 
way.

(VII) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) drive any vehicle within the Area;
    (b) land a helicopter within the Area;
    (c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
    (d) anchor or moor any seacraft within the Area, except in accordance with the 
        permit;
    (e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any human waste within the Area; all 
        such waste must be removed from the Area;
(f) leave depots of fuel, food or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building additional to the existing refuge within the Area.

(VIII) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but precautions must be taken to avoid disturbance to any breeding bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(IX) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(X) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess its state and to monitor significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

[Map with key legend]
»Recommendation XVI - 3

Antarctic Protected Area System

New Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, Recommendations
VII-3, VIII-3 and XIV-6;

Noting that Management Plans have been prepared and approved
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) for
two Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest;

Considering that it would be advantageous to gather experience
of the practical effect of the Management Plans prepared for
these sites;

Recommend to their Governments that they voluntarily take
account of the Management Plans, annexed to this
Recommendation, for the following sites:

No.34 Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands;

No.35 East Dallmann Bay, off Brabant Island.
ANNEX 1 TO RECOMMENDATION XVI·3

Marine Site of Special Scientiflc Interest No.34

WESTERN BRANSFIELD STRAIT

1. Geographical Location
The Site is locates off the southern shore of Low Island. western South Shetland
Islands. between latitudes 63°30' S and 63°35' S and between iongitudes 62°45' W and
62°30' W (with reference to U.S. Defense Mapping Agency Hydrographic Topographic
Center Chart No. 29121). A small portion of the Low Island landmass siowmass
projects into the northern boundary of this domain: here the northern imit of the Site
will be the associated intertidal zone. East. west. and south of the island the bottom
slopes gently from the intertidal zone to depths of approximately 200 meters and then
drops off rapidly near the boundary limits of the Site.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The bottom consists of a sand/mud/cobbled-rock matrix and supports a rich benthos.
e.g.. numerous fish species. invertebrates (sponges. anemones. annelids. molluscs.
crustaceans. asteroids. ophiuroids. echinoids. holothunoics. brachiopocs. tunicates), and
marine plants. in several distinct communities. Fish species commonly collected near
Low Island include Notothenia gibberifrons. Chaenocephalus aceratus. Harpagifer bispinis.
Parachaenichthys charcoti. Trematomus newnesi. and N. coriiceps neglecta. Species rarely
found at Low Island include Pseudochaenichthys georgianus. Champsocephalus gunnari.
and Chionodraco rastrospinosus. In addition. the Low Island shelf appears to be a
major spawning ground for several fish species (e.g.. N. coriiceps neglecta and the ice
fish C. aceratus).

(ii) Reason for designation
The shallow shelf south of Low Island is one of only two known sites in the vicinity of
Palmer Station that are suitable for bottom trawling for fish and other benthic
organisms. From an ecological standpoint. the Low Island site offers unique
opportunities to study the composition. structure. and dynamics of several accessible
marine communities. The Site. and in particular. its benthic fauna. are of exceptional
scientific interest and require long-term protection from potential harmful interference.

(iii) Outline of research
Studies of this area by scientists from Palmer Station began in the early 1970s. The
current research programme uses fish from Low Island to study the biochemical
adaptations that enable proteins to function at low temperatures and physiological
adaptation of muscle and energy metabolism to low temperatures. These studies are
conducted each year during the austral summer.

1
(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.

(v) Access points
Any boundary point may be used for entry. Free passage of ships through this area is 
permitted.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Not applicable.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations that would not cause harmful interference
Ecological studies of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted 
to the minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal 
disturbance of the Site.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Sampling of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted to the 
minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal 
disturbance of the Site.

(ix) Other restraints
Ships should, where possible, avoid anchoring within the boundaries of the Site.

2
64° W                                  60° W
62° S                                  62° S

                SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS
                        LIVINGSTON ISLAND
SNOW ISLAND
'SMITH ISLAND         DECEPTION ISLAND
LOW ISLAND
                BRANSFIELD STRAIT
HOSEASON ISLAND   TRINITY ISLAND
64° S                                  64° S

          1 : 2,000,000
          0      25       50      75     100 Kilometres
          |        |        |       |        |
63°20' S - 63°35' S
                       16 kilometers
                       1: 320,000
              0        8
61°45' W                        62°30' W
ANNEX 2 TO RECOMMENDATONS XVI -

Marine Site of Special Scientific Interest No.35

EAST DALLMANN BAY

1. Geographical Location
The Site is located in East Dallmann Bay off the western shore of Brabant Island.
Palmer Archipelago, between latitudes 64°00'S and 64°20'S and from longitude
62°50'W east to the intertidal zone of the island's western shore (with reference to
U.S. Defense Mapping Agency Hydrographic/Topographic Center, Chart No. 29121).
West of Brabant Island the bottom forms a gently sloping shelf from the intertidal zone
to depths of approximately 200 m and then drops off rapidly near the western boundary
of the Site.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The bottom consists of a sand/mud/cobbled-rock matrix. The benthic community
includes numerous fish species, invertebrates (sponges, anemones, annelids, molluscs,
crustaceans, asteroids, ophiuroids, echinoids, holothunoids, tunicates), and marine plants.
Fish species commonly collected at East Dallmann Bay include Notothenia gibberifrons,
Chaenocephalus aceratus, Champsocephalus gunnari, Pseudochaenichthys georgianus, and
Chionodraco rastrospinosus. Specimens of Trematomus newnesi and Notothenia coriiceps
neglecta are rare in this area.

(ii) Reason for designation
The shallow shelf west of East Dallmann Bay is one of only two known sites near
Palmer Station that are suitable for bottom trawling for fish and other benthic
organisms. The Site and, in particular, its benthic fauna are of exceptional scientific
interest and require long-term protection from potential harmful interference.

(iii) Outline of research
Studies of this area by scientists from Palmer Station began in the early 1970s. The
current research programme uses fish from East Dallmann Bay to study the biochemical
adaptations that enable proteins to function at low temperatures and the physiological
adaptation of muscle and energy metabolism to low temperatures.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.

(v) Access points
Any boundary point may be used for entry. Free passage of ships through this area is
permitted.

1
(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Not applicable.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations that would not cause harmful interference
Ecological studies of the composition, structure, and dynamics of the marine
communities would not be harmful.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Sampling of the sea floor and its benthos by any method should be restricted to the
minimum necessary for research activities and should be carried out with minimal
disturbance of the Site.

(ix) Other restraints
Ships should, where possible, avoid anchoring within the boundaries of the Site.

2
63°2.5' W                  62°50' W                  62°15' W
                       
63°55' S
                       
64°00' S              C ROUX
             METCHNIKOFF 
                  POINT
             CLAUDE POINT
 ASTROLABE 
 NEEDLE
             DALLMANN BAY         BRABANT ISLAND
 MELCHIOR 
 ISLANDS
64°20' S            
 GAND ISLAND
64°25' S            
                  1 : 320,000
                   0         8         16 kilometers
Recommendation XVI - 4

Antarctic Protected Area System

Specially Protected Area:

Re-Desigantion of Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 30, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay,
Antarctic Peninsula as a Specially Protected Area

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been approved by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that Avian Island, together with its littoral zone is unique in the Antarctic
Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds, including Adélie
Penguins, Blue-eyed Shags, Giant Petrels, Dominican Gulls, South Polar Skuas and Wilson's
Petrels, and that the colony of Adélie Penguins is the largest on the Antarctic Peninsula, and
that other species are at or near the southern limits of their breeding range, and that the
island is vulnerable to visits by tourists, and uncontrolled personnel.

Recommend to their Goverments that:

(i)     the designation of Avian Island as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 30
under Recommendations VIII-3 and VIII-4 be terminated;

(ii)    the number 30 should not be used for another Site of Special Scientific Interest;

(iii)   The following area of outstanding ornithological interest be inserted in Annex
B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964), along with the Management Plan
accompanying the description of the said Specially Protected Area;

Specially Protected Area No. 24

Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula (67°46'S, 68°54'W).
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-4

Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan

Avian Island, North West Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Avian Island (67°46'S, 68°54'W) lies 0.25 km south of the south-west tip of Adelaide 
Island in north-west Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area consists of Avian Island together with its littoral zone. It is 1.45 km long by 0.8 
km at its widest (total area about 49 ha), and rises to just over 40 m in altitude in the south. It 
is almost entirely ice-free in summer. There are several shallow melt pools, the largest 
being on the eastern raised beach terrace. There are two small dilapidated refuge huts, one 
near the north-west and the other near the mid-east shores of the island.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of 
breeding seabirds, the most important of which are: Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) 
about 36.000 pairs; blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) about 670 pairs; southern 
giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) about 250 pairs; Dominican gulls (Larus 
dominicanus) about 60 pairs (total adult birds about 200); skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) 
30 pairs (total adult birds about 200); Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) several 
hundred pairs. Several other birds are frequent visitors, breeding elsewhere in Marguerite 
Bay. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) breed in small numbers around the shores 
of the island, and other species of seals occasionally come ashore, particularly fur seals 
(Arctocephalus gazella) in increasing numbers during summer. Bryophyte vegetation is 
sparse but nitrophilous lichen communities are well-developed; vascular plants are absent. 
The giant petrel colony is the farthest south known breeding population and represents 
about a quarter of the population breeding on the entire Antarctic Peninsula. The blue-eyed 
shag colony is one of the largest known in the Antarctic and is very close to the southern 
limit of the species breeding range; it represents about 85% of the total population breeding 
south of the Antarctic Circle. The Adélie penguin colony is the largest on the Antarctic 
Peninsula and contains a third of the total population breeding in the region.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
Originally designated as SSSI No.30, November 1989, Recommendation XV-6, by UK; 
July 1990; UK.

(iv) Access points
Access should be from the sea as close as possible to either of the refuges.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.
vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area (over-snow vehicles used to visit the island 
    must be left at the shoreline);

(b) bring any dog into the Area;

(c) land a helicopter within the Area;

(d) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(e) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in 
    accordance with the permit;

(f) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
    all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(g) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, except at the 
    refuges, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of 
    which they must be removed.

(h) erect any form of building within the Area, besides the restoration and 
    maintenance of the two existing refuges.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or 
seal, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits should be made to the Area at least once every five years to assess the state 
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits 
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

 
            AVIAN ISLAND                                 
                         68°54'                                  CHANNEL
-67°46'15"S                                                 C      N
                                                             H      E
                                                             A      L
                                                             N      N
                                                             N      E
                                                             E      L
                                                             L       
                                                             68°53'W                  WOODFIELD
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
0                  500
                                 m
-67°46'45"                                 
Contours at 10 m
intervals
Recommendation XVI - 5

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST: INTERIM GUIDELINES:
SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NO 6, BYERS PENINSULA, LIVINGSTON
ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VIII-4 and the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific
Interest No 6; Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed thereto;

Noting that its Twenty-First Meeting the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR), held at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 1990) reviewed the Management Plan and
scientific interests of SSSI No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands;

Recommend to their Government that:

1)      the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 6, Byers
        Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, annexed to
        Recommendation VIII-4 be terminated;

2)      they voluntarily take account of the Management Plan, annexed to this
        Recommendation, for Site No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South
        Shetland Islands.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI- 5

Amendment to Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6

Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands

This Site currently comprises three areas of varying shape and size on Byers Peninsula designated solely for their sedimentary and palaeontological interest. However, the peninsula is also of considerable biological and archaeological importance. The following amended management plan is proposed:

1. Geographical Location

Byers Peninsula is an extensive, largely ice-free area at the western end of Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, centred on lat. 62°38'S, long. 61°05'W.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Site
The Site comprises the entire area of Byers Peninsula extending from the ice margin on the west side of Rotch Dome (to a point directly north of Stackpole Rocks) westwards to the west end of Ray Promontory. The littoral zone of the peninsula is included within the Site. The nearby offshore islets and islands are not included in the Site. Most of the Site is low and undulating, below 100 m altitude, except for Ray Promontory which has a more rugged topography, rising to over 200 m at Penca and Start hills. Numerous volcanic plugs, lakes, pools and streams occur between Ray Promontory and the Rotch Dome ice field. Coastal areas often have broad beaches several hundred metres wide, with raised beaches behind.

(ii) Reason for designation
The fossils found in this area provide evidence of the former link between Antarctica and the other southern continents. A long-term palaeontological research programme has been in progress since the mid-1960's. It is important to protect these Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks from being used as building materials or taken as souvenirs.
The site is of special biological importance. It has a sparse but diverse flora of both calcicolous and calcifuge plants and cyanobacteria associated with the lavas and basalts, respectively. Basaltic plugs are particularly well-vegetated. Several rare cryptogams and the two native vascular plants (Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) occur at several sites. There are several coastal and inland lakes, the latter having a particularly important biota, including aquatic mosses, and serve as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steineni, the only native winged insect in the Antarctic and with exceptionally restricted distribution. The only other Antarctic dipteran, the apterous Belgica antarctica, occurs in stands of wet moss.
The site is also unique in possessing the greatest concentration of historical sites in Antarctica, namely the remains of refuges, together with contemporary artefacts, and shipwrecks of early nineteenth century sealing expeditions.
It is important that both the biological and archaeological features are also afforded protection.

(iii) Outline of research
A long-term geological and palaeontological research programme was established in 1964. The main objectives are the description of sediments and fossils found in this area. Botanical, zoological, limnological, ornithological and archaeological investigations have also been undertaken throughout the Site at various times since the late 1950s.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation
31 December 2001.
(v) Access points
None defined.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes
Vehicles should not enter the Site, except in an emergency. Helicopters should land only on
unvegetated ground at least 500 m from any bird or seal concentrations, or freshwater
bodies.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause harmful interference.
Scientific research other than archaeological, biological and geological should be kept to a
minimum.

(viii) Scientific sampling
Samples of rocks or biological specimens should only be taken for compelling scientific
purposes.

(ix) Other restraints
Buildings and other facilities should not be erected in the Site. All non-human waste should
be removed from the area. No combustible waste should be incinerated within the Site.
There should be no interference of any sealers' refuges (huts, caves, etc) nor removal of
any associated artefacts (including implements, timbers, fabrics, etc) from these features or
from the beaches. No skeletal remains of any animal should be moved within or removed
from the Site.


                                                                     
                       1:250 000                                                  
            0          2          4                                        
     kilometres      Lake                                                    
                       Contours in metres                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 0            
                      Morton Strait                                        
                       61°10'                                               
                                                                                
                       ORIGINAL BOUNDARIES OF SITE                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                 1 km         
                       Fugged Island                                        
                       BYERS                                                
                       PENINSULA                                            
                       LIVINGSTON                                           
                       ISLAND                                               
                        1:250 000
XVI-6

Antarctic Protected Area System:

Specially Protected Areas:
Revised Descriptions and Proposed Management Plans for Specially Protected Areas

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that revised Area Description and proposed Management Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Recommend to their Governments that for the Specially Protected Sites listed below:

(i)    the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna be deleted;

(ii)   that the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna.

The Specially Protected Areas involved are:

Site No. 8:   Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

Site No. 9:   Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula

Site No. 13:  Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

Site No. 14:  Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 15:  Southern Powell Island, and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 16:  Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands
Site No. 18:  North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
Site No. 19:  Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI- 6

Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 8

Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

The Dion Islands (67°52'S. 68°43'W) are a small group of low-lying rocky islands lying about 13 km south of the southern end of Adelaide Island, in the north-western part of Marguerite Bay.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area comprises all of the Dion Islands archipelago, which lie within an area of about 12 km², together with the intervening sea.  The islands and islets are small, rocky and often precipitous, notably Emperor Island which is also the highest (46 m altitude).  The main islands are the largest of the Courtier Islands group (c. 8 ha), Emperor Island (c. 5 ha) and the largest of the Consort Islands group (c. 3 ha). Low lying areas occur on the two largest islands. There are a few small permanent ice patches, but there are no streams or permanent pools.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Area possesses the only known breeding population of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula. It is situated on a low-lying raised beach and rocky headland in the south-eastern part of Emperor Island. It is also the most northerly and probably the smallest colony (annual numbers fluctuate between about 50 and 500 pairs), and is one of only two in which breeding occurs on land (see also SPA No.1). It is also the most isolated emperor colony, being about 2,500 km (by sea) from the nearest known rookery. Other breeding birds within the Area include a small colony of Adelie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) near the emperor penguin colony, and about 200 pairs of blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) on the precipitous north side of the same island.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966, Recommendation IV-8, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified, but access should be from the sea; landing on Emperor Island should be at least 100 m from the emperor penguin colony or any non-breeding aggregations of these birds.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry into the Area is only, in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) land a helicopter within the Area;

(b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(c) use any of the Area's coves, bays or intervening water for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit;

(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
removed: 
(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal, particularly emperor penguins which pedestrians should not approach closer than 50 m, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling 
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance 
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 9

Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Green Island (65°19'S, 64°10'W) is a small island on the north side of the Berthelot Islands 
group, lying between the north-west side of Collins Bay and Grandidier Channel, about 3 
km off the Graham Coast of the mid-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area comprises all of Green Island, a small rocky island lying about 0.25 km to the 
north of the largest of the Berthelot Islands. It is about 500 m from north to south and 300 
m from east to west, rising to a dome-shaped peak at about 80 m altitude. The island rises 
steeply on all sides, with high precipitous cliffs on the south and east sides. Along the 
north side is a gently sloping rock platform. There are several permanent snow patches 
with the largest occurring to the south and east of the summit. There are no streams or 
pools.

(ii) Reason for designation

Green Island is extensively vegetated on the north facing slopes and has especially well-
developed continuous banks of moss turf formed by Chorisodontium aciphyllum and 
Polytrichum alpestre which, over much of their extent, overlie peat of more than 1 m in 
depth. Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) is frequent in small patches near the 
shag colony. The island has two important bird colonies. A large blue-eyed shag 
(Phalacrocorax atriceps) colony with about 250 nests occurs on the steep, rocky north-
west corner; this is one of the largest shag colonies on the Antarctic Peninsula. There are 
also large numbers of brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii) and a few south polar skuas (C. 
maccormicki) and hybrids, but only a few of the former are known to breed.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966. Recommendation IV-9, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified, but landings by boat or helicopter are easiest on the north side of the 
island.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the rock platform near sea level on 
the north side of the island;

(b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(c) use any of the Area's coves for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in 
accordance with the permit;
(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area;
all waste must be removed from the Area;

(e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must 
removed:
(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to cause minimal damage to the luxurient moss banks and avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be at least once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 13

Moe Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Moe Island (60°45'S, 45°41'W) is a small island lying about 0.5 km off the south-west extremity of Signy Island, South Orkney Islands, from which it is separated by Fyr Channel.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area is an irregularly shaped island about 1.8 km from north-east to south-west, and 1 km from north-west to south-east. It rises precipitously on the north-eastern and south-eastern sides to Snipe Peak (226 m altitude); there is a subsidiary summit above South Point (102 m altitude) and lower hills on each of three promontories on the western side above Corral Point (92 m), Conroy Point (89 m) and Spaull Point (56 m). Small areas of permanent ice remain on the east and south facing slopes, with late lying snow patches on the steeply dipping western slopes. There are no streams or pools.

(ii) Reason for designation
Moe Island provides an excellent representative sample of the maritime Antarctic terrestrial ecosystem, with particularly well-developed stands of vegetation typical of the South Orkney Islands. The dominant plant communities are Andreaea-Usnea fellfield and banks of Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf (the main stand of which is continuous over 5 ha, including large areas of eroded peat, and represents the largest known example of this community type in the Antarctic). The cryptogamic flora and arthropod fauna are diverse. There are five colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) totalling about 11,000 pairs. Numerous other birds breed on the island, notably about 2,000 pairs of cape petrels (Daption capensis) and large numbers of Antarctic prions (Pachyptila desolata). Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) are sometimes frequent in the bays on the west side of the island. An increasing number of immature bull fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) come ashore on the north side of Landing Cove and are causing some damage to vegetation. However, the nature of the terrain should restrict the animals to this small headland.

Because of the long-established intensive experimental field research and the very extensive destruction of the lowland terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems caused by fur seals on neighbouring Signy Island, Moe Island serves as an important control site with which future comparisons may be made with particular regard to biological and environmental change in the region.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
November 1966, Recommendation IV-13, by U.K.

(iv) Access points
None specified, but preferably and most safely, from the sea at the north-east corner of Landing Cove.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the. national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

      (a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the col between hill 89 m and the 
          western slope of Snipe Peak, to the south of Landing Cove;

      (b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point, except for 
          access to the landing area specified in (a), which should be directly from the 
          cove to the north or south avoiding any seabird colonies;

      (c) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in 
          accordance with the permit;

      (d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; 
          all such waste must be removed from the Area;

      (e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are 
          further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
          removed;

      (f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit; in particular, 
stands of Polytrichum-Chorisodontium moss banks and areas of eroding peat should be 
avoided wherever possible.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made once every year to assess the state of the site 
and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes, particularly with regard 
to increasing damage caused by fur seals to the island's vegetation. Such visits should also 
be used to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 14

Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Lynch Island (60°40'S, 45°38'W) is a small island situated at the east end of Marshall Bay,
in the mid south coast of Coronation Island and directly to the north of Signy Island, South
Orkney Islands.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area is a small rocky island, c. 200 m from the south coast of Coronation Island, and
about 500 m from east to west and 300 m from north to south, rising to a flat plateau with a
maximum altitude of 33 m. On the south, east and west sides there are low cliffs up to 20
m high, and boulder-filled gulleys, while the northern side has a low cliff below a rock
terrace at about 5-8 m altitude. There are no streams or pools, and only a few small late-
lying snow patches occur on the southern side of the island.

(ii) Reason for designation
Lynch Island supports one of the most extensive and dense stands of Antarctic hair grass
(Deschampsia antarctica) known in the Treaty Area. The only other Antarctic flowering
plant, Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), is also abundant. The cryptogamic
vegetation is typical of the region, but several species of moss are unusually fertile here
(notably Polytrichum alpinum and Muelleriella crassifolia). Beneath the grass swards on
the moist north-facing slope a shallow loam-like earth resembling tundra brown soil has
developed and contains a rich invertebrate fauna. Moist moss in rock crevices on the north
side of the island harbours a rare terrestrial enchytraeid worm. Breeding birds are poorly
represented, but most species of Antarctic seals are common around the island and
occasionally ashore (particularly an increasing number of immature bull fur seals,
Arctocephalus gazella, which come ashore in summer).

(iii) Date of designation and originator
November 1966, Recommendation IV-14, by U.K.

(iv) Access points
Access should be from the sea, landing at a prominent low rocky promontory or the
adjacent cove to the west, on the north side of the island.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within the Area;

(c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit;

(e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit; in particular, areas of Deschampsia and Colobanthus should be avoided wherever possible.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every year to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes, particularly with regard to increasing damage caused by fur seals to the island's grass-dominated communities. Such visits should also be used to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 15

Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Powell Island (60°45'S. 45°02'W) is the third largest of the South Orkney Islands, lying 
between Coronation Island to the west and Laurie Island to the east.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area includes all of Powell Island south of the latitude of the southern summit of John 
Peaks ( 375 m altitude), together with Michelsen Island (a peninsula rising to 38 m altitude 
and separated from a long promontory at the south end of Powell Island by a low isthmus 
which floods at high tide) and adjacent unnamed rocky islets, Christoffersen Island (96 m 
altitude) to the west, Grey Island (43 m altitude) to the south, and Fredriksen Island (about 
300 m altitude) to the east. All but southern Powell Island (Crutchley Ice Piedmont) are 
mainly ice-free in summer. All intervening sea is included within the Area.

(ii) Reason for designation

The Area is of exceptional biological interest, supporting limited stands of vegetation 
typical of biotically influenced coastal habitats of the region, and considerable populations 
of a diversity of bird and seal species. The bryophyte vegetation is best developed at the 
extreme north-west corner of the Area on south-west Powell Island, on Christoffersen 
Island and locally on northern Fredriksen Island; elsewhere there are extensive nitrophilous 
lichen communities on the rocks and cliffs. There are several biotically contaminated melt 
pools and streams, especially on the beach on the east side of southern Powell Island where 
Crutchley Ice Piedmont is receding.

Large numbers of penguins and petrels breed throughout the Area. There are about 50,000 
breeding pairs of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) of which about 80% occur on 
Fredriksen Island, and about the same number of Adélie penguins (P. adeliae) of which 
almost all occur in the southern Powell-Michelsen Island area. There are about 3,000 pairs 
of gentoo penguins (P. papua) breeding on the southern promontory of Powell Island, 
Michelsen Island and Christoffersen Island. There are also a few pairs of macaroni 
penguins (Eudyptes chrysolophus). Other breeding birds include southern giant petrels 
(Macronectes giganteus), cape petrels (Daption capensis), snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea), 
Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), 
Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata), brown skuas 
(Catharacta lonnbergii), sheathbills (Chionis alba), and possibly Antarctic prions 
(Pachyptila desolata) and black bellied storm petrels (Fregetta tropica). The isthmus 
between southern Powell Island and Michelsen Island is the longest-known breeding site in 
the Antarctic for fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella)

since their extermination in the nineteenth century. However, the small number of pups born annually 
has not increased substantially; a few pups are also born on suitable beaches on Fredriksen 
Island. Other seals are frequent on the beaches, e.g. elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), 
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx), and 
crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are occasionally seen on ice floes within the Area.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

November 1966, Recommendation IV-15, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified, but access should preferably be from the sea.
(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) drive any vehicle within the Area;
    (b) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the north-eastern part of the beach on the east side of the promontory of southern Powell Island providing there are no aggregations of wildlife, or on unvegetated areas in the north of Fredriksen Island, both to be at least 0.5 km from any bird or seal colonies or aggregations;
    (c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
    (d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit, ships may anchor only in the strait between Michelsen and Fredriksen Islands;
    (e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
    (f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;
    (g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or seal or stand of vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 16

Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands

1. Geographical location

Coppermine Peninsula (62°23'S, 59°42'W) is situated on the west side of Robert Island,
which lies between Nelson Island to the east and Greenwich Island to the west, midway
along the South Shetland Islands archipelago.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

The Area comprises all land west of a north-south line across the isthmus between Carlota
Cove and Coppermine Cove, 100 m west of a small group of Chilean refuge huts. The
peninsula is about 1.7 km from south-east to north-west and up to 0.6 km from north-east
to south-west, and is largely surrounded by precipitous cliffs. There are three prominent
low hills which reach a highest point at about 220 m. The easternmost lies close to the
isthmus; there is a central hill composed of basaltic columns referred to as "Neptune's
Cathedral". and the westernmost is situated above Fort William at the extreme west of the
peninsula. The isthmus (mainly outside the Area) is a 250 m wide raised beach reaching
about 10 m altitude. Much of the higher ground is permanently ice covered. There are
numerous small streams and pools in summer.

(ii) Reason for designation

Coppermine Peninsula is a biologically rich area with a diverse biota typical of the South
Shetland Islands. It supports a wide range of plant communities with associated
invertebrate fauna; the vertebrate fauna is also particularly well represented. The
outstanding feature of the vegetation is a 1.5 ha closed carpet of the mosses Calliergidium
austro-stramineum, Calliergon sarmentosum and Drepanocladus uncinatus, representing
one of the largest continuous moss stands in the Antarctic. It overlies a thick layer of wet
moss peat. Large stands of the foliose cyanobacterium Nostoc commune occur on moist
slopes and in depressions. A large number of bryophyte and lichen species occur within
the Area, and Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) is frequent. A small colony of
chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) occurs at Fort William. There are about 30 small
colonies of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). Other breeding species include
about 2,000 nests of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) in at least 13 colonies,
up to 1,000 Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata) in nine colonies, 300-400 Dominican gulls
(Larus dominicanus) in ten colonies, and numerous brown skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii).
Seals are common around the peninsula and frequently haul out at the isthmus, notably
elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) and
increasingly large numbers of fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella).

(iii) Date of designation and proposer nation

November, 1966, Recommendation IV-10, by Chile.

(iv) Access points

Access should be from the isthmus outside the Area by sea from Coppermine Cove or
Carlota Cove, or by helicopter also to the east of the Area.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry to the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within the Area;

(c) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;

(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit;

(e) Incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

(g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird (especially giant petrels, which pedestrians should not approach closer than 100 m) or seal or stand of vegetation (especially the extensive carpet of moss on the isthmus), unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scienúfic research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every three years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 18

North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands

1. Geographical location

Coronation Island (60°38'S, 45°35'W) is the largest of the South Orkney Islands, situated 
at the west end of the archipelago.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area lies on the central north side of Coronation Island. It is bounded to the east by 
Foul Point (60°32'S, 45°29'W) and to the west by Conception Point (60°31'S, 45°41'W); 
the entire area of these points, together with the intervening sea, is included in the site. The 
eastern boundary follows a precipitous ridge 6 km southward to a position at 2,500 ft (c. 
750 m) altitude immediately to the west of Mount Nivea summit (60°35'S, 45°29'W), 
thence west-south-westward for 5.5 km to a position at 3,000 ft (c. 900 m) altitude to the 
north-east of Wave Peak summit (60°37'S, 45°36'W), and from there 4 km west-north-west 
across the Brisbane Heights plateau, then 4 km north-north-west to an unnamed summit at 
3,532 ft (c.1,060 m) and north for 6 km to Conception Point. The summits of Mount 
Nivea and Wave Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside the Area. Ommanney 
Bay and the unnamed bay to the west are included within the Area, south of the boundary 
between Conception and Foul points (11.5 km).

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain (Conception, Prong and Foul Points) 
with large seabird colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and permanent icefields (two major 
glaciers and ice cliffs rising to the Brisbane Heights plateau) which provide an excellent 
representative area of a pristine ice environment near the northern limit of the maritime 
Antarctic and Antarctic Treaty Area. The inter-related terrestrial, ice and marine 
components of the Area comprise an integrated example of the coastal permanent ice and 
sublittoral ecosystems typical of the maritime Antarctic environment.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
October 1985, Recommendation XIII-10, by UK.

(iv) Access points
None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry into the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will 
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic 
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). 
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of 
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;

(b) land a helicopter within 0.5 km of any bird or seal colonies or aggregations, or 
on any of the icefields;
(c) overfly Conception, Prong or Foul Points below 250 m above their respective highest points;

(d) use any of the Area's coves or bays for anchoring or mooring seacraft, except in accordance with the permit; ships must not enter the Area;

(e) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area; all such waste, including human waste in all ice-covered areas, must be removed from the Area;

 (f) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be removed;

 (g) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes

 None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding bird or seal.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

 All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

 Inspection visits to the Area should be made no more than once every five years to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes.
 Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Management Plan for Specially Protected Area No. 19

Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

1. Geographical location

Lagotellerie Island (67°53'S, 67°24'W) lies about 3 km west of the southern part of Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area

Lagotellerie Island is about 2 km from east to west by about 1 km from north to south, and rises steeply to twin summits of c. 270 and 290 m altitude separated by a broad saddle. The north side of the island is largely snow-free with extensive low-lying ground. The south and east sides have precipitous cliffs up to 180 m high; much of the north side also has steep cliffs dissected by gulleys and traversed by broad rock terraces. There are no permanent streams or pools.

(ii) Reason for designation

The island has a relatively diverse flora and luxuriant development of plant communities, representative of the southern maritime Antarctic region. The north side supports an abundance of Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) which on some of the terraces forms closed swards up to 10 m2. Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) is also frequent. Both species are close to the southern limit of their range. There is also a rich cryptogamic flora with well-developed communities containing several rare mosses and lichens. Beneath the closed grass and moss stands a rich loamy earth up to 25 cm deep has developed, with a rich invertebrate fauna and microbiota. The island is one of the southernmost sites for the apterous midge Belgica antarctica. There is a colony of about 1,000 pairs of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at the south-east corner of the island. Here, there is also a small colony of about 30 pairs of blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps), which is one of the farthest south breeding sites for the species. Brown and south polar skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii and C. maccormicki) are abundant and several pairs of each nest on this island.

(iii) Date of designation and proposer nation

October 1985, Recommendation XIII-11, by U.K.

(iv) Access points

None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry into the area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

    (a) land a helicopter within the Area, except on the low-lying unvegetated ground in the mid north side of the island and on the saddle between the two peaks;

    (b) overfly the Area by any aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(c) use any of the Area's coves for anchoring or mooring seacraft except in 
accordance with the permit;

(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human waste within the Area: 
all such waste must be removed from the Area;

(e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area, unless they 
are further required within the same season, at the end of which they must be 
removed:

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of any breeding 
bird or seal or stand on vegetation, unless required as specified in the permit.

(viii) Scienafic research and sampling 
All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance 
Inspection visits to the Area should be made at least once every five years to assess the state 
of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. Other visits 
should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.
Recommedation XVI - 7

Antarctic Protected Area System:
Sites of Special Scientific Interest: Extension of Designation

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3, VIII-4, XII-5 and XIII-7;

Noting that:

      (i)     in accordance with paragraph 2 of Recommendation VIII-3, the
              Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), at its Twenty-First
              Meeting at Sao Paulo, Brazil (24-27 July 1990) had reviewed the eight
              Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated in Recommendations
              VIII-4, XIII-8 and XIV-5;

     (ii)     experience of the practical effect of the Management Plans for these sites
              has shown them to be an effective means of reducing the risks of harmful
              interference in areas of special scientific interest;

    (iii)     no changes to the Management Plans of these sites had been proposed by
              SCAR.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.    The date of expiry of designation of Site Numbers:
      4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island;
      5 - Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands;
      7 - Haswell Island;
     10 - Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island;
     11 - Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island;
     12 - Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land;
     18 - North-West White Island, McMurdo Sound

      be extended to 31 December 2001.

2.    The date of expiry of designation of Site Number:
     22 - Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lutzow - Holm   Bay

      be extended to 31 December 2003.

3.    They use their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs
      3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans of these sites
      are observed.
Recommendation XVI - 8

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, CRYPTOGAM RIDGE;
MOUNT MELBOURNE, VICTORIA LAND

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater of
Mount Melbourne includes areas of geothermal activity which are ice-free and sur-
rounded by numerous ice hummocks and scattered ice towers, and that the geothermal
ground supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae and miribiota including
very rare species, and that this fragile and sterile habitat is of exceptional biological in-
terest and, to maintain its unique pristine state, should be afforded maximum protec-
tion from human influence;

Recommend to their Governments that the following area of outstanding scientific in-
terest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, together with the annexed Manage-
ment Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 22

Cryptogam Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land. Mount Melbourne (74°21'S,
164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell Glacier, northern Victoria Land, on
the western side of the Ross Sea.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-8

Specially Protected Area, including Management Plan
Cryptogam Ridge, Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land

1. Geographical location

Mount Melbourne (74°21'S, 164°42'E) lies between Wood Bay and Campbell Glacier,
northern Victoria Land, on the western side of the Ross Sea.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area includes most of Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater
(2,733 m altitude), and extends about 1,200 m by 500 m. Geothermal activity occurs
along about 300-400 m of the ridge and is marked by discontinuous areas of ice-free
ground, surrounded by numerous ice hummocks up to 1 m high and scattered hollow ice
towers up to several metres in diameter and 4 m high. The warm ice-free areas are mostly
gently sloping with narrow terraces up to 1.5 m wide. More general details for the adjacent
areas are given for the surrounding SSSI No. 24.

(ii) Reason for designation
The geothermal ground within the Area supports a unique community of bryophytes, algae
and microbiota, including the only known occurrence in the Antarctic of the moss
Campylopus pyriformis and the very rare continental occurrence of the liverwort
Cephaloz[?]ella exiliflora, otherwise unknown above about 500 m elsewhere in the Antarctic.
This site is comparable with the only other known high altitude geothermally influenced
ice-free area near the summit of Mount Erebus. This fragile and sterile habitat is of
exceptional biological interest and should be afforded maximum protection from human
influence to maintain its unique pristine state.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
June 1990; New Zealand and Italy.

(iv) Access points
Access should be only from either end of Cryptogam Ridge and not from the ridge slopes.

(v) Entry permit requirement
Entry to the Area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling
scientific purpose with cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will
not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its biota within the Area (see Antarctic
Treaty Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII).
Details of the visit should be included in the national annual report of Exchange of
Information for the same Antarctic season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
To avoid or minimize human impact it is prohibited to:

(a) enter the Area without wearing sterile protective overclothing and footwear, to
be provided by the supporting national operator;

(b) Use any sampling or other equipment within the Area which has not been first
sterilized using an acceptable method;

(c) land a helicopter within the Area; helicopters should land near the summit of
Mount Melbourne only at a specified point in or adjacent to the main crater, no
closer than 200 m from the boundary of the Area;

(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any waste, including all human waste,
within the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(e) bring into the Area any fuel or food, or leave any form of other supplies within 
the Area, other than markers required for monitoring studies; 

(f) erect any form of building within the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes 
None specified, but pedestrians must not use the ridge crest as a way of access to parts of 
the surrounding SSSI. Extreme precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of all ice-free 
ground or interference with ice structures within the Area, unless required as specified in 
the permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling 
Where at all possible collections and general observations of geothermal soils and 
organisms should be made from positions outside the Area, unless directly related to the 
monitoring of Cryptogam Ridge; all activities within the Area must conform strictly with 
those specified in the permit to enter the Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance 
Inspection visits should be made to the Area no more than once every five years to assess 
the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. 
Other visits should be made as necessary to maintain boundary markers, notices, etc.

                                                                                  75°15'
                                                                             Wood
                                                                             Bay
                                                    
                                                                             Mt.Melbourne
                                                                   Campbell Glacier
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                        Ice fall
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                        Caldera                  Proposed
                                                 SPA
                                                      Cryptogam
                                                      Ridge
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                        1 km
                        Geothermal area
                        Ice tower                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    

Recommendation XVI - 9

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS, FORLIDAS POND AND DAVIS VALLEY PONDS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations XV-8 and XV-9;

Noting that a Management Plan has been prepared and approved by the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Considering that the Area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds
known in Antarctica containing plant life, and that these ponds and their immediate
catchments should be protected as examples of unique near-pristine ecosystems which
should be afforded maximum protection from human influence;

Recommend to their Governments that the following Area of outstanding scientific
interest be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for
the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, together with the annexed
Management Plan.

Specially Protected Area No 23

Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley Ponds, situated near the east end of the Dufek Massif at
position 82°27'15"S, 51°21'W. The Area includes smaller ponds that occur along the ice
margin at the northern edge of Davis Valley, a short distance east of Forlidas Pond.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVI-9

Proposed Specially Protected Area No. 23

FORLIDAS POND AND DAVIS VALLEY PONDS

1. Geographical Location
Forlidas Pond, about 100 m in diameter, is situated near the east end of the Dufek Massif in a small unnamed dry valley about 1 km east of the northern edge of Forlidas Ridge and about 1 km northwest of Davis Valley. The unnamed dry valley is separated from Davis Valley by a northeast trending ridge several kilometres long. The position of Forlidas Pond is 82°27'15"S, 51°21'W. The Area includes smaller ponds that occur along the ice margin at the northern edge of Davis Valley, a short distance east of Forlidas Pond.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of Area
The Area consists of two parts, shown on the attached map, about 500 m apart:

A. All that area within 500 m of the centre of Forlidas Pond;

B. All that area with a 500 m radius of several meltwater ponds at the ice margin along the northern edge of Davis Valley.

(ii) Reason for designation
The Area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds known in Antarctica containing plant life which would be threatened by possible contamination by human activity. The only visitors to Forlidas Pond have been geologists and geophysicists in 1957 and possibly one or two other parties. The ponds in Davis Valley were visited in 1978 by geologists. No botanists or zoologists have visited the Area. These ponds are located in SRA No. 1, North Side of Dufek Massif, which could attract visitors such as scientists or tourists. They should be protected as examples of unique near-pristine freshwater ecosystems and their catchments.

(iii) Date of designation and originator
October, 1991, USA.

(iv) Access points
None specified.

(v) Entry permit requirements
Entry to the Area should be in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere, or for site inspection, and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the natural ecosystem or its

1
biota within the Area. Details of visits should be included in national annual 
reports of exchange of information for the same Antarctic season in which the 
activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions
None specified, but camping and the landing of helicopters should be avoided within 
1 kilometre of the Area.

(vii) Pedestrian routes
None specified, but every precaution must be taken to avoid disturbance of 
biota, soil, water, and periglacial features, unless required as specified in the 
permit.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling
Taking of samples of biota or soils should be done only for a compelling scientific 
purpose and must conform strictly with the activities specified in the permit to enter the 
Area.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance
Inspection visits should be made when opportunity arises to assess the state of the Area 
and to monitor biological and environmental change, and to maintain boundary 
markers, notices, etc.

                
2
51°                                          
SRA         SP*
Boundary     Boundary                          
DUFEK                              
          MASSIF                           
82°30'      3 km                              
MAP SOURCE: U.S. Geological Survey 
1:250,000 scale
Davis Valley map
82°30'                                            
                      53°                                 52°                                 51°
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                
Recommendation XVI - 10

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:
REVIEW OF THE SYSTEM

The Representatives,

Recalling Article VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora and Recommendations V - 4, VI - 14, VII - 2, VII - 9, VIII - 3, XV -
10, XV - 11;

Recalling the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty done at
Madrid on 4th October 1991;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.      The Annex attached to this Recommendation form Annex V on Area Protec-
        tion and Management to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
        Antarctic Treaty;

2.      The Annex become effective upon the date on which both the Protocol on Envi-
        ronmental Protection shall have entered into force and this Recommendation
        shall have been approved by all Consultative Parties entitled to attend the
        XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION XVIII - 10

ANNEX V TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY

AREA PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex:

a)	"appropriate authority" means any person or agency authorised by a Party to 
issue permits under this Annex;

b)	"permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an appropriate 
authority;

c)	"Management Plan" means a plan to manage the activities and protect the 
special value or values in an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area.

ARTICLE 2
OBJECTIVES

For the purposes set out in this Annex, any area, including any marine area, may be 
designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area. 
Activities in those Areas shall be prohibited, restricted or managed in accordance with 
Management Plans adopted under the provisions of this Annex.

ARTICLE 3
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

1.	Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially 
Protected Area to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or 
wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.

2.	Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical 
framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:

	(a)	areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be 
possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;

	(b)	representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, 
ecosystems and marine ecosystems;

	(c)	areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major 
colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(d) the type locality or only known habitat of any species;

(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;

(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;

(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;

(h) sites or monuments of recognised historic value; and

(i) such other areas as may be appropriate to protect the values set out in
paragraph 1 above.

3. Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by
past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas and shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly.

4. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Protected Area shall be prohibited except in
accordance with a permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 4

ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREAS

1. Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in
the future be conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area to assist
in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation
between Parties or minimise environmental impacts.

2. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas may include:

        (a) areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative
environmental impacts; and

        (b) sites or monuments of recognised historic value.

3. Entry into an Antarctic Specially Managed Area shall not require a permit.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3 above, an Antarctic Specially Managed Area may contain
one or more Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, entry into which shall be prohibited except
in accordance with a permit issued under Article 7.

ARTICLE 5

MANAGEMENT PLANS

1. Any Party, the Committee, the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research or the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources may propose an area
for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed
Area by submitting a proposed Management Plan to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.

2. The area proposed for designation shall be of sufficient size to protect the values for
which the special protection or management is required.
3.       Proposed Management Plans shall include, as appropriate:

(a)    a description of the value or values for which special protection or management is required;

(b)    a statement of the aims and objectives of the Management Plan for the protection or management of those values;

(c)    management activities which are to be undertaken to protect the values for which special protection or management is required;

(d)    a period of designation, if any;

(e)    a description of the area, including:

       (i)     the geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
               that delineate the area;

      (ii)     access to the area by land, sea or air including marine approaches and 
               anchorages, pedestrian and vehicular routes within the area, and aircraft 
               routes and landing areas;

     (iii)     the location of structures, including scientific stations, research or refuge 
               facilities, both within the area and near it; and

     (iv)      the location in or near the area of other Antarctic Specially Protected 
               Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas designated under this 
               Annex, or other protected areas designated in accordance with measures 
               adopted under other components of the Antarctic Treaty System;

(f)     the identification of zones within the area, in which activities are to be 
        prohibited, restricted or managed for the purpose of achieving the aims and 
        objectives referred to in subparagraph (b) above;

(g)    maps and photographs that show clearly the boundary of the area in relation to 
        surrounding features and key features within the area;

(h)    supporting documentation;

(i)     in respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Specially 
        Protected Area, a clear description of the conditions under which permits may 
        be granted by the appropriate authority regarding:

       (i)     access to and movement within or over the area;

      (ii)     activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including 
               restrictions on time and place;

     (iii)     the installation, modification, or removal of structures;

     (iv)      the location of field camps;

       (v)     restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the 
               area;

      (vi)     the taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna;

     (vii)     the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the 
               permit-holder;
(viii) the disposal of waste;

(ix)  measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of 
the Management Plan can continue to be met; and

(x)  requirements for reports to be made to the appropriate authority 
regarding visits to the area;

(j)  in respect of an area proposed for designation as an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area, a code of conduct regarding:

     (i)     access to and movement within or over the area;

     (ii)    activities which are or may be conducted within the area, including 
restrictions on time and place;

     (iii)   the installation, modification, or removal of structures;

     (iv)    the location of field camps;

     (v)     the taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna;

     (vi)    the collection or removal of anything not brought into the area by the 
visitor;

     (vii)   the disposal of waste; and

     (viii)  any requirements for reports to be made to the appropriate authority 
regarding visits to the area; and

(k)  provisions relating to the circumstances in which Parties should seek to 
exchange information in advance of activities which they propose to conduct.

ARTICLE 6

DESIGNATION PROCEDURES

1.   Proposed Management Plans shall be forwarded to the Committee, the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research and, as appropriate, to the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. In formulating its advice to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Committee shall take into account any comments provided 
by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and, as appropriate, by the Commission 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. Thereafter Management Plans 
may be approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a measure adopted at an 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic 
Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the Plan shall be deemed to have been 
approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was 
adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that 
time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to approve the measure.

2.   Having regard to the provisions of Articles 4 and 5 of the Protocol, no marine area 
shall be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
3.    Designation of an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially 
      Managed Area shall be for an indefinite period unless the Management Plan provides 
      otherwise. A review of a Management Plan shall be initiated at least every five years. The 
      Plan shall be updated as necessary.

4.    Management Plans may be amended or revoked in accordance with paragraph 1 
      above.

5.    Upon approval Management Plans shall be circulated promptly by the Depositary to 
      all Parties. The Depositary shall maintain a record of all currently approved Management 
      Plans.

                                  ARTICLE 7

                                  PERMITS

1.    Each Party shall appoint an appropriate authority to issue permits to enter and engage 
      in activities within an Antarctic Specially Protected Area in accordance with the requirements 
      of the Management Plan relating to that Area. The permit shall be accompanied by the 
      relevant sections of the Management Plan and shall specify the extent and location of the 
      Area, the authorised activities and when, where and by whom the activities are authorised and 
      any other conditions imposed by the Management Plan.

2.    In the case of a Specially Protected Area designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty 
      Consultative Meetings which does not have a Management Plan, the appropriate authority 
      may issue a permit for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere and 
      which will not jeopardise the natural ecological system in that Area.

3.    Each Party shall require a permit-holder to carry a copy of the permit while in the 
      Antarctic Specially Protected Area concerned.

                                  ARTICLE 8

                        HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

1.    Sites or monuments of recognised historic value which have been designated as 
      Antarctic Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, or which are 
      located within such Areas, shall be listed as Historic Sites and Monuments.

2.    Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognised historic value which has not 
      been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed 
      Area, or which is not located within such an Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument. 
      The proposal for listing may be approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties by a 
      measure adopted at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in accordance with Article IX 
      (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the proposal shall be 
      deemed to have been approved 90 days after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
      Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Consultative Parties notifies the 
      Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or is unable to 
      approve the measure.

3.    Existing Historic Sites and Monuments which have been listed as such by previous 
      Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be included in the list of Historic Sites and 
      Monuments under this Article.

4.    Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed.
5.    The list of Historic Sites and Monuments may be amended in accordance with 
      paragraph 2 above. The Depositary shall maintain a list of current Historic Sites and 
      Monuments.

ARTICLE 9

INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY

1.    With a view to ensuring that all persons visiting or proposing to visit Antarctica 
      understand and observe the provisions of this Annex, each Party shall make available 
      information setting forth, in particular:

      (a)  the location of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially 
           Managed Areas;

      (b)  listing and maps of those Areas;

      (c)  the Management Plans, including listings of prohibitions relevant to each Area;

      (d)  the location of Historic Sites and Monuments and any relevant prohibition or 
           restriction.

2.    Each Party shall ensure that the location and, if possible, the limits, of Antarctic 
      Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and 
      Monuments are shown on its topographic maps, hydrographic charts and in other relevant 
      publications.

3.    Parties shall co-operate to ensure that, where appropriate, the boundaries of Antarctic 
      Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and Historic Sites and 
      Monuments are suitably marked on the site.

ARTICLE 10

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1.    The Parties shall make arrangements for:

      (a)  collecting and exchanging records, including records of permits and reports of 
           visits, including inspection visits, to Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and 
           reports of inspection visits to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas;

      (b)  obtaining and exchanging information on any significant change or damage to 
           any Antarctic Specially Managed Area, Antarctic Specially Protected Area or 
           Historic Site or Monument; and

      (c)  establishing common forms in which records and information shall be submitted 
           by Parties in accordance with paragraph 2 below.

2.    Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the Committee before the end of 
      November of each year of the number and nature of permits issued under this Annex in the 
      preceding period of 1st July to 30th June.

3.    Each Party conducting, funding or authorising research or other activities in Antarctic 
      Specially Protected Areas or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas shall maintain a record of
such activities and in the annual exchange of information in accordance with the Treaty shall 
provide summary descriptions of the activities conducted by persons subject to its jurisdiction 
in such areas in the preceding year.

4.     Each Party shall inform the other Parties and the Committee before the end of 
November each year of measures it has taken to implement this Annex, including any site 
inspections and any steps it has taken to address instances of activities in contravention of the 
provisions of the approved Management Plan for an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area.

ARTICLE 11
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1.     The restrictions laid down and authorised by this Annex shall not apply in cases of 
emergency involving safety of human life or of ships, aircraft, or equipment and facilities of 
high value or the protection of the environment.

2.     Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated immediately 
to all Parties and to the Committee.

ARTICLE 12
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1      This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with 
Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment 
or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year 
after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless 
one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that 
time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the 
measure.

2.     Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance 
with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of 
approval by it has been received by the Depositary.
Recommendation XVI - 11

Antarctic Protected Area System:
New Historic Sites and Monuments

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-10, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 and XIV-8;

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic site (monument) be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter it be accorded the respect and protection required by the Recommendations recalled above:

56.      Waterboat Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula (64°49'S, 62°52'W). The remains and immediate environs of the Waterboat Point hut, situated close to the unoccupied Chilean station, 'Presidente Gabriel Conzález Videla'. The Waterboat Point hut, of which only the base of the boat, roots of door posts and an outline of the hut and extension still exist, was occupied by the UK two-man expedition of Bagshawe and Lester in 1921-22. This was, and indeed remains, the smallest expedition to ever overwinter in Antarctica.

57.      Commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands, near the Chilean refuge located at latitude 62°32'S and longitude 59°45'W, to the memory of Captain Robert MacFarlane, who in 1820 explored the Antarctic Peninsula Area in the brigantine Dragón.

58.      Cairn with memorial plaque erected at Whalers' Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands, in the vicinity of the whalers' cemetery [historic monument No.31] 62°59'S,60°34'W, to honour captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, Antarctic pioneer who was first to establish a whaling operation at Deception Island in 1906.

59.      A cairn on Half Moon beach, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, commemorating the officers, soldiers and seamen on board the San Telmo, which sank in September 1819; possibly the first people to live and die in the Antarctica wastes.
Recommendation XVI - 12

Accessibility of Antarctic Geophysical Data

The Representatives,

Recalling that Article 3 of the Antarctic Treaty requires that scientific data be ex-
changed and made freely available;

Noting that Article 7 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty signed in Madrid on 4 October, 1991 prohibits any activity relating to mineral
resources other than scientific research;

Aware that solid earth science disciplines have made major contributions to the
understanding of our planet, and that such work has long been recognized as having global
significance as applied inter alia to studies of plate tectonics and Antarctic glacial history
including its effects on world climate;

Reiterating the importance of pursuing geological and geophysical research and their
commitment to the disclosure, availability and timely publication of scientific results;

Recommend to their governments that the Seismic Data Library System (SDLS)
approved by the SCAR Executive in 1991 and described in the report "A SCAR Seismic Data
Library System for Cooperative Research" of the SCAR Group of Specialists on the Evolution
of Cenozoic Paleoenvironments of the Southern High Latitudes (GSC) - Antarctic Offshore
Acoustic Stratigraphy Project (ANTOSTRAT) be implemented. The SDLS requires inter alia
that digital data from multichannel seismic reflection surveys be sent to the SDLS within four
years of collection and eight years after collection to the World Data Centers or other
archives for general dissemination.
Recommendation XVI - 13

on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,

Bearing in mind that the XVth Consultative Meeting agreed that a comprehensive review of tourism and non-governmental activities was required;

Noting that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes apply to tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica;

Recalling that the XIIth Special Consultative Meeting asked the XVIth Consultative Meeting to address the issue of tourism and non-governmental activities;

Acknowledging that the Protocol constitutes the framework for further progress in Antarctic environmental protection;

Concerned about the possible effect of increased tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica;

Conscious of the need to ensure that the presence of tourists and other visitors in Antarctica be regulated so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment;

Recommend to their Goverments that:

1.      An informal meeting of the Parties be convened with a view to making proposals to the XVIIth Consultàtive Meeting on the question of a comprehensive regulation of tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in accordance with the Protocol and taking into account the proposals made at the present XVIth Consultative Meeting, including proposals for a future Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

2.      Prior to the convening of that meeting and in order to ensure due preparation of its work, proposals should be prepared by them taking into account the list of issues stated below, which the meeting should, inter alia, primarily address:

a) environmental issues
    - implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes
- number of tourists / carrying capacity
- homologation of standards relating to vessels
- permanent infrastructure for tourists
- concentration / dispersal of tourist activities
- access to unexplored areas

b) operational issues
- notification and expansion of information to be exchanged
- system for granting permission to visit stations
- self-sufficiency
- insurance, including search and rescue insurance
- information obligation of Parties
- preparation and training of tour guides, and visitors' guides
- examination of the need for specific kinds of control and monitoring
- requirements for organisational procedures

3.	The Meeting shall begin its work in Venice on 9 November 1992.

4.	Representatives of the WTO, IUCN, IAATO, IMO, ASOC, PATA, SCAR and COMNAP be invited to attend the Meeting as observers.
