ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE




TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 56
17 October 1991
Original: English

Draft Final Report
of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(submitted by the Secretariat)
Draft Final Report
of the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

1. Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, representatives of the Consultative
Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brasil, Chile, China, Germany, Finland, France,
Ecuador, India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay) met in Bonn from 07 to 18 October 1991, for the purpose of exchanging
information, holding consultations, and considering and recommending to their Governments
measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty.

2. The Meeting was also attended by delegations from Contracting Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative Parties (Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Papua New Guinea, Romania and Switzerland).

3. The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (CCAMLR) and the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) were invited to attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with Rule 2 of the
revised Rules of Procedure of 1987 (see paragraphs .. and .. below).

4. At the Preparatory Meeting held in Bonn in April 1991, the Consultative Parties had
invited the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programns
(COMNAP) to present a report on the activities of COMNAP under agenda item 5 a of the
provisional agenda of the XVIth ATCM.

5. At the same Preparatory Meeting the Consultative Parties, pursuant to Rule 35 of the
revised Rules of Procedure of 1987, had invited several international organisations to appoint
experts to assist in discussion of specific agenda items. The following organisations took part
in the proceedings:

- the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, (ASOC)
        (agenda items 6, 9, 10, 11 and 14)
- the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, (IOC)
        (agenda items 10 b and 16)
- the International Civil Aviation Organization, (ICAO)
        (agenda item 18)
- the International Maritime Organization, (IMO)
(agenda item 10 b and 16)
- the World Meteorological Organization, (WMO)
        (agenda items 12 a, 15 and 16)
- the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, (IUCN)
        (agenda items 6, 9, 10, 11 and 14)
- the International Hydrographic Organization, (IHO)
        (agenda item 17)
- the World Tourism Organisation, (WTO)
        (agenda item 14)
- the United Nations Environmental Program, (UNEP)
        (agenda item 10 and 12 a)

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (IPCC) was invited to attend but was 
unable to take part.

6.      The Meeting was formally opened by Mr. Helmut Schäfer, Minister of State at the 
Federal Foreign Office of Germany. The opening address is reproduced at Annex ....

7.      Ambassador Dietrich Granow, Head of the German Delegation, was elected Chairman 
of the Meeting. After thanking the delegations for having elected him Chairman, Mr. Granow 
welcomed the States acknowledged as Consultative Parties at the Xth Antarctic Treaty 
Special Consultative Meeting (the Netherlands and Ecuador). He also welcomed Switzerland 
and Guatemala, which had acceded to the Antarctic Treaty, since the last Meeting.

8.      The Chairman proposed that Mr Hans-Christian Freiherr von Reibnitz and Mr Jürgen 
Borsch of the German Federal Foreign Office, be appointed Executive Secretary and Deputy 
Executive Secretary of the Meeting respectively. This proposal was adopted.

9.      In order to save time, it was agreed at the Preparatory Meeting that delegations not 
deliver opening statements but, instead, provide their text for circulation and inclusion in the 
Final Report. The texts of the opening statements are reproduced at Annex ....

10.     The following agenda was adopted:

1.      Opening of the Meeting

2.      Election of Officers

3.      Opening Addresses

4.      Adoption of the agenda
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

      a) under Recommendation XIII - 2:

           i)   the Chairman of the Commission for the 
                 Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
                 Ressources (CCAMLR)

          ii)   the Head of the Delegation of the United 
                 Kingdom in his capacity as representative 
                 of the Depositary Government of the Convention 
                 for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

         iii)   the President of the Scientific Committee on 
                 Antarctic Research (SCAR)

         iv)   the Head of the Delegation of the United States 
                 of America in his capacity as representative of the 
                 Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty

          v)   the Chairman of the Xth Antarctic Treaty Special 
                 Consultative Meeting

         vi)   the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special 
                 Consultative Meeting

        vii)   the Chairman of the Meeting relating to Article 
                 8 (7) of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic 
                 Mineral Resource Activities

       viii)   the Convenor of the informal group of Treaty Parties 
                 in the United Nations

         ix)   the Council of Managers of National Antarctic 
                 Programs (COMNAP)

      b) in relation to Article 3 (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

6. Report of the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special 
   Consultative Meeting

7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:

      a) Organisational aspects

      b) Public Availability of Documents

      c) Examination of recommendations

      d) Exchange of information

8. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

9. Environmental monitoring

10. Human impact on the Antarctic environment

      a) Waste disposal
b) Marine pollution
c) Implementation of environmental impact assessment 
      procedures

11. The Antarctic Protected Area System
    a) Proposals for new Sites of Special Scientific Inter-
        est (SSSI)
    b) Proposals for new Marine Sites of Special Scientific 
        Interest
    c) Changes to existing SSSI's and SPA's
    d) Proposals for new Specially Protected Areas (SPA)
    e) Proposals for Specially Reserved Areas (SRA)
    f) Proposals for Multiple Use Planning Areas (MPA)
    g) Review of the System
    h) Historic sites and monuments

12. Promotion of international scientific cooperation
    a) The role of Antarctic science in 
        understanding the global environment, 
        including depletion of the ozone layer
    b) Antarctic science conference, Bremen 1991

13. International Antarctic scientific and logistic 
    cooperation
    a) Measures for scientific and logistic 
        cooperation in Antarctica
    b) Comparability and accessibility of Antarctic 
        scientific data
    c) Siting of Antarctic stations

14. Tourism and non-governmental expeditions 
    in the Antarctic Treaty Area

15. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

16. Marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in the 
    Southern Ocean

17. Cooperation in hydrographic surveying and charting of antarctic 
    waters

18. Air safety in Antarctica

19. Frequency of future Consultative Meetings and date and place of 
    the XVIIth Consultative Meeting
20. Commemoration of the 30th anniversary of the entering into force 
of the Antarctic Treaty
21. Any other business
22. Adoption of the Report
23. Closing of the Meeting

11. In accordance with the Chairman's suggestion
    (a) discussion of items 1 to 6, 19 (as to the date and place of the XVIIth 
        Consultative Meeting), and 20 to 23 took place in plenary session;
    (b) the remaining items were remitted to two working groups:

        (i) Working Group I, under the chairmanship of Mr Hugh Wyndham 
            of Australia, discussed items 7, 8, 12, 13, 14 and 19 as far as the 
            Frequency of future Consultative Meetings are concerned.

        (ii) Working Group II, under the chairmanship of Mr Roberto 
             Puceiro Ripoll of Uruguay, discussed items 9 to 11 and 15 to 18.

Item 5 a
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

Pursuant to Recommendation XIII - 2, the Meeting received reports from the 
following:
    a)  the Chairman of the Commission for the 
        Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
        Ressources (CCAMLR)
    b)  the Head of the Delegation of the United 
        Kingdom in his capacity as representative 
        of the Depositary Government of the Convention 
        for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)
    c)  the President of the Scientific Committee on 
        Antarctic Research (SCAR)
    d)  the Head of the Delegation of the United States 
        of America in his capacity as representative of the 
        Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty
    e)  the Chairman of the Xth Antarctic Treaty Special 
        Consultative Meeting
    f)  the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special 
        Consultative Meeting
United Nations in
group of

g) the Chairman of the Meeting relating to Article 
8 (7) of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic 
Mineral Resource Activities

h) the Permanent Representative of Germany to the 
New York in his capacity as Convenor of the informal 
Treaty Parties

The President of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
submitted a report to the Meeting under item 5 a on the invitation of Consultative Parties 
extended to COMNAP during the Preparatory Meeting.

The Meeting recognized the valuable contribution of SCAR and encouraged it to 
continue working to identify, promote and coordinate research aimed at improving the 
understanding of Antarctica and its role in global processes. In this it should continue its 
liaison as appropriate with ICSU and other international organizations. The Meeting also 
recognized the importance of SCAR in providing objective scientific information and advice 
to the Parties.

The Meeting also recognized the important role of COMNAP in examining and solving 
practical problems relating to the implementation of scientific activities and their associated 
logistics.

The Meeting noted the importance of cooperation between SCAR and COMNAP in 
complementary fields of Antarctic activities. It encouraged SCAR and COMNAP to further 
their efforts in this regard. This cooperation will be essential for the effective pursuit of 
international scientific programs of global importance as well as the implementation of 
relevant recommendations adopted by the ATCMs and of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection.

It was agreed that COMNAP is an important component of the Antarctic Treaty System and 
should therefore be accorded a status comparable to that of SCAR under Recommendation 
XIII-2.

Item 6
Report of the Chairman of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting

The Meeting discussed under item 6 the question of future action with regard to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In this regard, the Meeting
stressed the absolute priority of the earliest possible ratification and entry into force of the Protocol.

The Meeting further agreed that, in the meantime, as far as possible and in accordance with their legal system, the provisions of the Protocol should be applied, as appropriate, by all Parties to the Treaty and that any Environmental Impact Assessment submitted to the next Consultative Meeting would be considered by that meeting.

Proposals were made for new Annexes on Protected Areas and on Tourism. These were discussed under items 11 and 14, reported below.

The Meeting also discussed the need for early considerations of an Annex on liability, as agreed in Madrid and recorded in the Final Act of the XIth ATSCM. The Meeting considered that, given the priority for early ratification of the Protocol, the XVIIth ATCM should decide when and how this matter should be addressed.

Item 19
Date and place of the XVIIth Consultative Meeting

Item 20
Commemoration of the 30th anniversary of the entering into force of the Antarctic Treaty

Delgations wish to mark the significance of 30 years of cooperation in the Antarctic under the Antarctic Treaty and the significant achievements under the Antarctic Treaty System. For this porpose they adopted a declaration commemorating the 30th Anniversary of the Entry into Force of the Antarctic Treaty attached to this report (Annex ..)

They requested the host Government to forward the Declaration to the Secretary General of the United Nations and recommended that the Goverments of all contracting parties distribute the Declaration to interested organisations and persons in their own countries.

Item 21
Any other business
