ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 39
9 October 1991
Original: Spanish

HISTORICAL SITE

(Agenda item 11 h)

(submitted by Chile and Spain)
The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14 and VII-9,

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic monument be added to the "List 
of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or 
Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter they be accorded the 
respect and protection required by the Recommendation recalled above.

-     59. A stone pillar on Half Moon beach. Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South 
Shetland Islands, commemorating the officers, soldiers and seamen on board the San Telmo, 
which sank in September 1819: the first people to live and die in the Antartctica wastes.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION

The first definite sighting of the South Shetland Islands was made on 19 February 1819 
by the British merchant marine captain William Smith, on the vessel William. However, when 
he came ashore on the archipelago in October of the same year, he discovered that 
a number of unfortunate shipwrecked mariners had already preceded him on those barren 
Antarctic coasts.

The wreck in question was that of a Spanish warship forming part of a squadron which 
had been sent by Ferdinand VII for the purpose of assisting the royalist contingent in Peru 
and breaking through the naval blockade set up by the South American forces of liberation. 
The convoy, which set out from Cadiz on 13 May 1819, was composed of four units: the 
frigates Primorosa Mariana and Prueba and the larger vessels Alejandro I and San Telmo. 
The squadron was commanded by Rear Admiral Rosendo Porlier, a Peruvian of European 
extraction born in Lima in 1770, who had been a midshipman in Cadiz and Gravina's assistant 
in the defence of that city against Nelson. He was an excellent seaman, who had done 
distinguished service at the battle of Trafalgar, in Mexico and in the Levant. The San Telmo 
was commanded by Don Joaquin de Toledo.

Of the above two larger vessels forming the squadron, the San Telmo, with its 74 guns, 
had been built in 1789 in the shipyards of Esteiro de Ferrol. The Naval Museum in Madrid 
has a fine contemporary engraving showing it "hoisting the mainsail". However, its keel was in 
poor condition and, after being irredeemably damaged in a storm on 2 September 1819, the 
ship sank at latitude 62° S and longitude 70 W approximately. It was presumably dashed 
against the reefs of Livingston Island, in the vicinity of Cape Shirreff, where Captain Smith 
found the remains of the wreck. Captain Fildes described the discovery of these remains in 
the following terms (retranslation):

"In Shirreff Cove, there were the brig William from London, the Mercury from 
London, the Lady Frances from London, the Dragon from Valparaiso and two American 
brigs... If you go across country, you will find a beautiful crescent-shaped sandy beach or bay, 
from three-quarters or a mile to a mile in length, going by the name of Half Moon Bay. It was 
here that an anchor stock from a 74-gun ship, with an iron fluke and a copper cleat, was 
found, together with booms with sails attached to them and other types of sparring,...all that 
was left by way of the grim remains of a few poor, unfortunate individuals. Captain Smith took 
the anchor stock home with him to have a casket made of it. It has been identified and shown 
to have belonged to a 74-gun Spanish vessel with 1,400 men on board, which was sent round 
Cape Horn to oppose the South American patriots and was never heard of again..."
to have belonged to a 74-gun Spanish vessel with 1,400 men on board, which was sent round 
Cape Horn to oppose the South American patriots and was never heard of again..."

Fildes' valuable testimony makes one mistake, in that the figure of 1,400 men actually 
represented the total complement of the expedition. The Spanish naval historian Cesareo 
Fernandez Duro considers that a total of 644 officers, soldiers and seamen went down with 
the San Telmo, including the leader of the expedition, Rear Admiral Rosendo Porlier y 
Astiqueta, and the ship's captain, Joaquin de Toledo.

Fildes'account appears to be corroborated by Captain Weddell, who discovered a large 
number of seal bones, which may go to suggest that the shipwreck victims survived but 
perhaps perished in attempting to cross the Drake Sea in a cutter or rowboat salvaged from 
the disaster. In his New Sailing Directory, published in 1845, John Purdy states 
(retranslation):"Part of what was obviously a Spanish anchor stock fitted with a copper cleat 
and bearing certain marks, was found on the shore and is presumed to have been the only 
remaining trace of a 74-gun ship from that country, of which nothing more was ever heard".

The Admiralty's Antarctic Directory and the Antarctic Directory of the US 
Department of the Navy also repeat this version of the disappearance of the San Telmo. At 
the time, however, news of the shipwreck was brought to Chile by the Livonia, a British seal-
hunting ship which was used as a courier by the South American patriots and arrived in 
Valparaiso on 6 April 1820. The traveller Maria Graham recounts that a child named Vicente 
Perez Rosales, who had been impressed at the fate of the victims of the sinking of the San 
Telmo, is reported as having said that the same fate was likely to await all those who 
purported to challenge the independence of Chile. O'Higgins and San Martin were concerned 
at the naval threat represented by the Spanish squadron and Cochrane resorted to the 
subterfuge of pretending that his flagship was the San Telmo in order to attack the Spanish at 
Valdivia. On a proposal from the Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, the San Telmo was declared 
lost on 6 May 1822.
Monument

Erect on Half Moon beach, where the remains of the wreck were found, a stone pillar 
bearing a commemorative plaque with the following inscription:
"To the memory of the officers, seamen and soldiers on board the ship San Telmo wrecked in 
September 1819. The first to live and die in the Atarctic wastes".

Designation

Cape Shireff, formerly a protected area, is now a Site of Special Scientific Interest and 
a Reserve in the CEMP Programme of CCAMLR. The designated site includes the Telmo 
islets, a corruption of San Telmo, which is the name approved by the United Kingdom 
Committee on Antarctic Names in 1958. The Telmo islets, which are situated at latitude 62° 
28'S, longitude 60° 49'W, form an important ecological and wildlife reserve, and agreement 
could be reached on recommending that the correct name be used for mapping purposes. 
Lastly, since the entire Cape Shirreff area has been the site of shipwrecks and flotsam from 
those wrecks can be found in the adjoining waters, and since there are also a number of 
buildings, as well as caves, dry-stone structures and other forms of accommodation used by 
seal-hunters, it could be additionally designated as a Historical Reserve if that concept is 
adopted in the future Annex on Protected Areas.

Research Programme

Chile and Spain plan to engage in joint investigations into the possible localization of 
the remains of the San Telmo or traces of the wreck, while at the same time pursuing the 
historical studies which are already being carried out. The field investigations will obviously 
be conducted in such a way that they do not interfere but will be compatible with the 
management requirements of the existing Site of Special Scientific Interest and CEMP 
Reserve.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

MIGUEL ARAGON: "La última singladura del San Telmo". Revista Española de Defensa. 
Madrid, July-August 1990. Reprinted in Boletín Antártico Chileno, October 1990-March 
1991.

JORGE BERGUNO: "Las 22 vidas de Shackleton", Santiago 1985.

Colección de antiguos periódicos chilenos, National Library, Santiago.

Derrotero de la Costa de Chile, Vol. VI. Territorio Antártico. 1a, pub.1962. IHA Publ. 3006.

CESAREO FERNANDEZ DURO: Armada Española desde la reunión de los reinos de Castilla y 
Aragón, Madrid 1903, Vol. IX.

ROBERT FILDES: A Journal of a Voyage kept on board Brig Cora of Liverpool bound to 
New South Shetland, Public Record Office, 753, Adm.55/143. The Scott Polar Research 
Institute in Cambridge has a typed copy bearing the title Remarks made during a Voyage to 
New South Shetland.

ERNESTO J. FITTE: El Descubrimiento de la Antártida, Buenos Aires, 1962.

MARIA GRAHAM: Journal of My Residence in Chile, London, 1824.

R.K. HEADLAND: Chronological List of Antartic Expeditions and related historical events, 
Cambridge University Press, 1989.

OSCAR PINOCHET DE LA BARRA: "El Misterio del San Telmo. ¿Naufragios españoles 
pisaron por primera vez la Antártida?" Historia, Year XVI No. 186, Madrid, October 1991.

JOHN PURDY: The New Sailing Directory for the Ethiopic Southern Ocean, including the 
coasts of Brazil, etc. to the Rio de la Plata, the coast thence to Cape Horn, etc., London, 1845.

Sailing Directories for Antarctica, US Hydrographic Office, 1943, 1st edition.

The Antarctic Pilot, comprising the coasts of Antarctica and all islands southward of the usual 
route of vessels, London 1948.
6

JAMES WEDDELL: A Voyage towards the South Pole performed in the years 1822-24,
London, 1827 (A Reprint with a new Introduction bz Sir Vivian Fuchs, London, 1970).
