ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                       Bonn
                                                     07 - 18 October 1991

                                  XVI ATCM/WP 22
                                  8 October 1991
                                  Original: English

Proposed Specially Reserved Area and Multiple-Use Planning Area

(submitted by the United States of America)
Proposed Specially Reserved Area and Multiple-Use Planning Area

ATCM XV adopted recommendations calling for the establishment of (a) Specially Reserved Areas (SPAs) to provide for protecting areas of outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic and wilderness value in Antarctica (Rev. XV-10); and (b) Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPAs) to minimize possible mutual interference and cumulative adverse environmental effects of human activities in high use areas.

Although all Consultative Parties have not yet adopted these recommendations and they consequently are not in effect, the United States believes that it would be advantageous to begin, as soon as possible, gathering practical experience implementing both SRAs and MPAs.

Towards this end, the United States has developed and proposes that ATCM XVI adopt a recommendation calling upon National Programs and, to the maximum extent possible, persons subject to the jurisdiction of the Antarctic Treaty Consultation Parties to voluntarily take account of the provisions of the proposed SRA and MPA which are attached. These proposals were forwarded previously by diplomatic note and collegues hopefully are familiar with them.
Proposed Specially Reserved Area No. 1

NORTH SIDE OF DUFEK MASSIF

1. Geographical Location
The Dufek Massif is situated at the north end of the Pensacola Mountains near the 
southern boundary of the Filchner Ice Shelf, centered about 82°30' S, 52° W.

2. Management Plan

(i) Description of site
All that area north of the mountain crest from 82°36' S, 52°33' W (Brown Nunataks) 
on the west to 82°26' S, 50°36' W (Cox Nunatak) on the east, to a line from Cox 
Nunatak, to a point on the snow surface 1 km north of the north edge of Forlidas 
Ridge to Brown Nunataks. The length is 48 km and the width is about 10 km. The 
boundaries are demarcated as shown on the attached map. SPA No. __, Forlidas Pond 
and Davis Valley Ponds, is located within the site.

Topography: Elevations range from about 500 meters in the Davis Valley to 
about 2,000 meters in the highest peaks. The northern part of the proposed Area 
consists of ice, the southern part of rock, ice, and soil.

Geology and Soils: The rock outcrops in the Area consist of the lowest exposed 
part of the layered mafic Dufek intrusion, which is of Jurassic age. The dry valleys 
contain rock outcrops, small alpine glaciers, moraines, and strongly developed patterned 
ground. Weathering of rock debris in the dry valleys has locally caused minor 
development of soil.

Meteorology: The Area is protected from the strong south winds flowing off the 
inland Antarctic ice sheet. The mean annual temperature is -30°C as measured on the 
ice sheet at the northern edge of the Area.

Biological Features: The only known biological features are the sparse lichens 
on rocks and the algae in ponds. Snow petrels were sighted over Davis Valley, and 
tracks of larger birds have been reported.

(ii) Rationale for designation
The Area contains outstanding geological, glaciological, geomorphological, aesthetic, 
scenic, and wilderness values. It is presently in a pristine condition, and it is important 
to preserve it in this condition while allowing multiple uses so as to permit access to 
scientists and others, while protecting these values.  The Area is of significant geological 
interest, being the lowest section of the second largest layered mafic intrusion (the 
Dufek Massif) in the world. This intrusion is also exposed in the Forrestal Range and 
south of the SRA. The Area has a very benign climate for such a southerly location.

1
The dry valleys preserve an unusual glacial and glacio fluvial record from Miocene to 
present time.

(iii) Permitted activities that would not jeopardize the values to be protected
The Dufek Massif dams the interior ice sheet allowing the existence of several 
spectacular dry valleys such as Davis Valley and blue ice areas in the north. Access is 
permitted freely to ice-covered areas by tracked or wheeled vehicles, by fixed wing 
aircraft and helicopters, and by pedestrians or skiers. Access to ice free valleys, 
including the dry valleys, is permitted by helicopters and by pedestrians. Erection and 
use of tents and temporary shelters is permitted provided that they are removed after 
their intended use.

(iv) Prohibited activities that could adversely affect the values to be protected
Permanent structures such as buildings and permanent stations are not to be established 
within the boundaries of the Area. Large shelters that may in effect become 
permanent fixtures when partly buried are also prohibited. (There are locations outside 
but adjacent to the boundaries where permanent structures could be erected without 
jeopardizing the values being protected.) Aircraft and vehicle fuel storage facilities 
within the Area are prohibited. Operation of tracked vehicles or wheeled vehicles is 
prohibited in the dry valley areas. Formed aircraft landing facilities (including formed 
helicopter pads) are prohibited in the dry valley areas. Marking of natural features is 
prohibited. Use of smoke canisters should be avoided whenever possible. All wastes, 
including human wastes, must be removed from the Area. Entry into SPA No. __, 
within the Area, is by permit only.

(v) Steps to minimize impacts of authorized access
Equipment used for scientific research or other activities should be removed when the 
activity is completed. Major modifications to soil and rock should be avoided within the 
Area. Minor modifications made during the course of scientific research or other 
activities should be restored to the original condition as near as possible after the 
activity is completed.

2
MULTIPLE-USE PLANNING AREA, NO.

SOUTHWEST ANVERS ISLAND AND VICINITY

MANAGEMENT PLAN

1. Site Description

The Southwest Anvers Island Multiple-Use Planning Area encompasses approximately 1,535 square kilometers (Figure 1).
This rectangular area lies between latitudes 64°41'S and 64°50'S
and longitudes 63°56'W and 64°32'W. Palmer Station (64°46'S,
64°03'W) is located on Gamage Point on the southwest side of
Anvers Island. Immediately adjacent to the station is Arthur
Harbor and Biscoe Bay to the southeast, Hero Inlet and Bonaparte
Point to the south, and the Marr Ice Piedmont sloping upward
north and east from Gamage Point and covering Anvers Island.
Torgersen Island, at the mouth of Arthur Harbor and about one
kilometer from Gamage Point, is the closest island to the
station. Within a 5.5 kilometer radius of Palmer Station are two
exposed, prominent points on Anvers Island (Norsel Point and
Bonaparte Point) and groups of islands that extend to the edge of
the Bismarck Strait to the southeast (Figure 2). These islands
have a diverse topography which extends into the intertidal and
subtidal zones surrounding and linking the islands. Other island
groups in the area are Dream Island (9 kilometers northwest), the
Joubin Islands (17 kilometers west), and the Wauwermans Islands
(15 kilometers southeast) near the southern end of Gerlache
Strait and Neumayer Channel (Figures 1 and 2). The area includes
Specially Protected Area No. 17 (Litchfield Island) and Site of
Special Scientific Interest No. 20 (Biscoe Point).

Palmer Station serves as the base for scientific research
and associated logistic operations conducted in the western
Antarctic Peninsula and Palmer Archipelago by the United States
Antarctic Program (USAP) and collaborators from a number of other
Antarctic Treaty Parties. The present station was established in
1968 and consists of two main buildings and several ancillary
structures, including an aquarium, small boat house, workshops,
and storage facilities. A modern laboratory facility is located
in the station. Two large fuel tanks store the station's fuel
supply. The station has approximately 44 berthing spaces and is
operated year-round. It receives scientific and logistic support
from ships operated or chartered by the USAP. Such ships, which
visit the station approximately 15 times per year, can be
accommodated at the dock located at the station. Travel within
three kilometers of the station is accomplished using inflatable,
small boats. Survival caches are maintained on a number of the
small islands in the area.
2

There are three particularly important marine features in 
the Palmer Station Area:

1) Shallow shelves.  These extend from Anvers Island and 
the adjacent island groups to depths of 90 to 140 meters.

2) Bismarck Strait.  Located south of Palmer Station and 
north of the Wauwermans Islands, this strait is 360 to 550 meters
deep.  It is on a generally east-west axis and connects the 
southern end of Gerlache Strait and Neumayer Channel to a deep 
basin south of Palmer Station (Figure 1).

3) "Palmer Basin" (unofficial but common nomenclature).
Palmer Basin is the only deep basin in the area and is located 
22 kilometers southwest of Palmer Station.  It is bordered by the 
Joubin Islands to the north, the Wauwermans Islands to the east, 
and is surrounded by shelves shallower than 165 meters.  It has a 
maximum depth of 1280 meters.  There is a 460 meter deep channel 
connecting the west side of Palmer Basin to the open ocean.  The 
Bismarck Strait enters the basin from the north and connects it 
to Gerlache Strait.

2. Rationale for Area Designation

The SW Anvers Island Area, because of its diverse 
environmental features and scientific history, is and will become 
increasingly important in terms of long-term studies of the 
natural variability in antarctic ecosystems, the impact of humans 
on antarctic communities, and the possible effect of global 
change on the antarctic environment and on the physiology and 
behavior of its plants and animals.  A review of scientific 
research in the Area is presented in the background paper, 
"The Ecological and Scientific Basis for Multiple-Use Management 
of Human Activities in the Palmer Station Area."

The diverse and easily accessible assemblages of marine and 
terrestrial flora and fauna in the SW Anvers Island Area make the 
area particularly valuable for science.  Since the early 1960s, 
ecological features of this area and its accessibility have 
attracted scientists studying a variety of topics, including 
long-term monitoring of seal and bird populations, surveys of 
plants and animals in both the terrestrial and sub-tidal marine 
environments, investigations of the physiology and biochemistry 
of birds, seals, terrestrial invertebrates, and zooplankton, and 
the behavior and ecology of planktonic marine species.  These 
investigator-initiated studies will continue in the future.  
The United States Antarctic Program's commitment to continued 
ecosystem research in the Antarctic Peninsula has been formalized 
as a Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site.
3

Because of its accessibility and biological diversity and the presence of Palmer Station, the SW Anvers Island Area also holds a special attraction to tourists. Between 1984-85 and 1990-91, the number of tour ship visits each season at Palmer Station increased from 4 visits (340 visitors) to 12 visits (1300 visitors). This has interfered with station operations, and while recognizing the commerical and educational value of tourism, the United States has had to limit the number of tourists visiting Palmer Station.

The purposes of this management plan are to minimize mutual interference of ongoing and future scientific, logistic, tourist, and other activities in the Area, to avoid adverse cumulative, environmental impacts, and to safeguard the ecological, scientific, and other values of the Area. The Plan takes into account the life histories and ecological and geographic relationships among the various species and communities in the Area.

3. Possible Impacts of Planned Human Activities

The important ecological features and/or research and other activities being carried out in the Area could be affected adversely by:

1. Ongoing and Future Research

    a. collection or disturbance of soil, rocks, flora and fauna in or near established study areas;

    b. over sampling and/or collection of tagged animals of known history; and

    c. interference with breeding or other vital processes.

2. Ship Operations

    a. destruction/disturbance of benthic communities from anchoring;

    b. pollution of marine areas by pumping of bilges and dumping of waste;

    c. disturbance of feeding/breeding whales, seals, and birds by ship-generated noise;

    d. accidents such as oil spills;

    e. pollution from stacks, volatile chemicals; and

    f. commercial fishing.
5

The Background Paper, "The Ecological and Scientific Basis 
for Multiple-Use Management of Human Activities in the Palmer 
Station Area," lists and indicates the special features of, the 
research that has been conducted in, and the threats to areas and 
sites of particular ecological or scientific value in, the SW 
Anvers Island MPA.  To minimize the potential for cumulative 
environmental impact and mutual interference, the United States 
plans to regulate the activities of its nationals, and requests 
that other Antarctic Treaty Parties regulate activities of their 
nationals in the identified areas according to the general and 
site-specific provisions noted below.

4. Measures to Avoid or Minimize Interference and Cumulative 
Impact

4.1 Ongoing and Future Research

Research conducted within the SW Anvers Island MPA should be 
designed and carried out to minimize environmental impacts and 
impacts on ongoing and possible future research.  Research in 
Specially Protected Areas (SPA), Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI), and other sites herein described (see below) 
within the area must be authorized by a written permit issued by 
the appropriate national authority in accordance with Articles II 
and VIII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Flora and Fauna and any measures adopted by Antarctic Treaty 
Parties.

Research on Litchfield Island (SPA Number 17) is prohibited 
except for compelling scientific purposes which cannot be met 
elsewhere, and which will not jeopardize the natural ecology of 
the Island.  Research on Biscoe Point (SSSI Number 20) shall be 
limited to that specified in, and shall be carried out in 
accordance with, the approved management plan for the site.

Although they have not been designated as SPAs or SSSIs, the 
following areas and sites within the SW Anvers Island MPA have 
special ecological and/or scientific values--

Breaker Island                                Laggard Island
Cape Monaco                                  Limitrophe Island
Christine Island                             Norsel Point
Cormorant Island                             Palmer Basin
Dream Island                                 Short Cut Island
Elephant Rocks                               Short Cut Point
Hermit Island                                Stepping Stones Island
Humble Island                                Torgersen Island
Joubin Islands                               

Research in these areas shall be carried out with particular 
care to avoid or minimize trampling of vegetation and disturbance 
of wildlife.  The appropriate national authority shall maintain a
6

record of research carried out at these sites, as well as at the 
aforementioned SPAs and SSSIs, and shall provide reports of these 
activities as described below.

        Persons entering the SW Anvers Island MPA to conduct 
research (or other activities) are requested to contact the 
National Science Foundation Representative or designee on site at 
Palmer Station before beginning the research to notify him/her as 
to what, where, and when research will be done; and learn whether 
there is other research being conducted in the Area which may 
affect or be affected by the planned research (or other 
activities).  The National Science Foundation Representative or 
designee shall maintain a record of such notifications and, when 
contacted, shall advise researchers of others working in the 
Area.

4.2 Disturbance and Taking of Wildlife

Contracting Parties shall do everything necessary to insure 
that their nationals conducting or supporting research in, or 
visiting, the SW Anvers Island MPA comply with the provisions of 
the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and 
Fauna and such other measures as may be adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties for the conservation of antarctic flora and fauna.  
Except for compelling scientific reasons, taking of birds is 
prohibited in the following sites within the Area:

        Bonaparte Point             Joubin Islands           
        Christine Island            Kristie Cove             
        Cormorant Island            Laggard Island           
        Diana's Island              Limitrophe Island       
        Dream Island                Norsel Point            
        Elephant Rocks              Shortcut Island         
        Hermit Island               Shortcut Point          
        Humble Island               Stepping Stones Island   

In addition, the aforementioned islands shall not be visited 
during the critical seabird breeding season from October 1 to 
March 1, except in connection with scientific activities, 
survival cache replacement, or emergencies.

Researchers shall not take (e.g., disturb or collect) birds 
or mammals that have been marked and/or that are being studied by 
other investigators.  Persons authorized to take birds and 
mammals shall be required to carry a copy of the permit 
authorizing the collections and shall present the permit, upon 
request, to any representative of a Contracting Party seeking to 
insure that collections are being conducted in accordance with 
relevant measures adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  Any 
possible violations of this provision shall be reported to the 
appropriate national contact point, who in turn should report to 
the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
7

4.3 Ship Operations (General)

Ship operations in the vicinity of Palmer Station can be hazardous and lead to accidents which can result in substantial environmental damage, and possibly to the loss of human life. 
Also, routine operations may disturb birds and mammals feeding or breeding in and migrating through the area, and introduce contaminants (e.g., fuel and lubricating fluids) which may affect phytoplankton, zooplankton, fish, birds, and mammals, and compromise the scientific value of the area.  In addition, anchoring of vessels may damage or destroy benthic communities, including sites which have been established to study and monitor such communities.

To minimize the risk of accidents and environmental damage from routine operations, ships operating in or transiting through the SW Anvers Island MPA shall:

a.  exercise maximum caution in light of incomplete charting and incomplete knowledge of hazards to navigation;

b.  avoid transiting or anchoring in areas where hazards to navigation are known or thought to be present; and

c.  refrain from pumping of bilges, discharging of sewage, and dumping of waste within the MPA.

4.4 Aircraft (Helicopter) Operations

Helicopter and other aircraft shall be operated to avoid or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable consistent with safety considerations, impacts on flora, fauna, and research and related support activities in the SW Anvers Island MPA.  In particular:

a.  except in emergencies, aircraft transporting scientists and visitors to Palmer Station shall notify the National Science Foundation Representative or designee as far in advance as possible of expected arrival time, and shall land at preferred landing sites; and

b.  except in emergencies or in connection with authorized research, no aircraft shall land in or fly at altitudes of less than 600 meters over or around land areas when and where birds or seals are or may be present.

There are no maintained landing sites for fixed wing aircraft.
8

4.5 Small Boat Operations

Small boat operations shall be carried out so as to avoid or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable consistent with
safety considerations, pollution of the marine environment and
disturbance of birds and mammals.  In particular--

a.	fuel tanks and motors shall be maintained and operated
to minimize fuel and lubricant leaks;

b.	all waste products (trash) shall be returned to the
parent ship or station for appropriate disposal; and

c.	except for emergencies, or in connection with research,
monitoring or survival cache replacement consistent with
this management plan, small boats shall avoid and not be
operated from October 1 to March 1 within 100 meters of

Christine Island              Kristie Cove
Cormorant Island              Laggard Island
Diana's Island                 Limitrophe Island
Dream Island                  Litchfield Island
Elephant Rocks                Short Cut Island
Hermit Island                 Short Cut Point
Humble Island                 Stepping Stones Island

4.6 Station and Field Camp Operations

Station and field camp operations shall be planned and
carried out so as to avoid or minimize impact to the environment,
and shall comply with the Code of Conduct and such other waste
disposal, marine pollution, and other environmental impact
abatement measures as may be adopted by the Antarctic Treaty
Parties.

4.7 Tourists and Other Visitors

Persons or tour companies wishing to make arrangements to
visit Palmer Station shall contact the U.S. National Science
Foundation's Division of Polar Programs at least six months in
advance of the planned visit to determine whether, when, and
under what circumstances the Station may be able to accommodate
the requested visit.

In addition, the national authority in the country of origin
shall insure that tourists and other visitors are fully aware of,
and comply with, the relevant provisions of this Management Plan
and other relevant measures that have been adopted by the
Antarctic Treaty Parties.  In particular, private expeditions and
tour operators, their staff, and tourists shall be informed of
and, except in emergencies, shall be required to comply with
provisions of the Antarctic Treaty prohibiting:
a. the killing, wounding, capturing, or molesting of any 
native mammal or bird;

b. introduction of non-indigenous species;

c. dumping of waste; and

d. entry into designated protected areas.

To avoid impacting sensitive environments and ongoing 
research, members of private and tourist expeditions shall not be 
permitted to go ashore at the following sites--

Cape Monaco                       Joubin Islands
Christine Island                  Laggard Island
Cormorant Island                  Limitrophe Island
Dream Island                      Norsel Point
Elephant Rocks                    Short Cut Island
Hermit Island                     Short Cut Point
Humble Island                     Stepping Stones Island

Members of private and tourist expeditions shall be directed 
to Torgersen Island.  This Island, with an Adelie penguin rookery 
of approximately 7,500 pairs, has been the site of both 
scientific research and tourist visits during the past decade.  
The size and topography of the island allow the opportunity to 
observe wildlife, while minimizing disturbance and habitat 
degradation/destruction.  Prior to visiting the island, the 
expedition leader shall contact the National Science Foundation 
Representative or designee at Palmer Station to ensure that 
interference with ongoing scientific activities is avoided.

Tourists and other visitors also shall be made aware that 
walking on vegetation can cause irreparable damage and that 
discarded litter (e.g., polystyrene cups and cigarettes) may be 
eaten by and harm wildlife.  Walking on vegetation shall be 
avoided to the maximum extent possible, and the discarding of 
trash (littering) shall be prohibited.

4.8 Commercial Fisheries

Breeding colonies of penguins and other birds on Humble 
Island, Torgersen Island, Cormorant Island, Christine Island, and 
Dream Island are being monitored as part of ongoing, long-term 
population and ecosystem studies.  This research supports the 
goals of the newly established LTER program in the SW Anvers 
Island MPA.  In addition, the Adelie penguin research supports 
the goals of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
(CEMP), which has designated the south coast of Anvers Island as 
a monitoring site.  The principal objectives of these programs are 
to identify the nature and magnitude of natural changes in key
10

population parameters and to detect changes that may be caused by 
harvesting of krill or fish.

Meeting these objectives will require, among other things, 
accurate information on when, where, and how much krill and fish 
are caught each year near the SW Anvers Island MPA.  Commercial 
fishing operations should insure that accurate records of fishing 
operations are maintained and that each year a summary report is 
submitted to the CCAMLR Secretariat indicating when, where, and 
how much krill and finfish (by species and size/age class) were 
taken in the vicinity of the SW Anvers Island MPA during the 
preceding fishing season.

5. Reporting

Parties planning to conduct, support, or authorize research 
or other activities in the SW Anvers Island MPA shall advise 
other Contracting Parties as far in advance as possible of 
activities it plans to conduct, support, or authorize in the Area 
during the forthcoming austral field season, and shall provide to 
the Parties copies of all permits issued to authorize:  (i) the 
taking of native mammals or birds; and/or (ii) the conduct of 
research in designated protected areas.

Parties conducting, supporting, or issuing permits to 
authorize research or other activities in the SW Anvers Island 
MPA shall maintain a record of such activities, and in the annual 
exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty shall provide 
summary descriptions of the activities conducted in the MPA in 
the preceding year.  In addition, at the conclusion of each 
summer field season, Parties shall notify other Parties of (a) 
any activities carried out by its nationals or those of another 
Contracting Party in contravention of the provisions of this 
management plan or other relevant authorities; and (b) steps 
taken to enforce the provisions of this Management Plan.

6. Review

The Management Plan for the SW Anvers Island MPA will be 
reviewed periodically and updated as required.  Proposed 
revisions will be provided to the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research (SCAR) and other relevant components of the 
Antarctic Treaty system for comment, and shall be submitted to 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for adoption in 
accordance with established practice.
Долина Девиса
Долина Девица
East end of Dufek Massif from north
Восточная оконечность Массива Дюфек с севера
Y   verse party, and west end fe' assif
Траверс группы МГГ и западная оконечность Массива Дюфек
Central Dufek Massif from north
Центральная часть Массива Дюфека с севера
Close up west end of Dufek Massif               3a...[?]a?H?? ????????? 
                                              ?? ??????????? Дюфе.
64° 41' 30"                  64° 35'       30'         15'                  64°         45'   63° 40'      64° 41' 30"

                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                              Gosler Islands                                            Cape Monoco                    
                                                                                           Dream Island            
                                                                                                      
                                                                 JOUBIN ISLANDS                                            
                                                                                                 Litchfield Island      Palmer Station
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                
64° 32'
64°
41'
28'             24'             20'             16'             12'             08'             04'             64°             63° 56'
64 
41'
                                                                   GOSSLER ISLANDS

42' -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                   ANVERS
                                                                   Cape Moneco                                                
                                                                                                                                   ISLAND
                                                                   Dream Island
                                                                 W Y L I E   B A Y
44'                                                                                                 Halfway Island
                                                                                                                                   Arthur 
                                                                   Stayaway Skarries                                        Harbor
                                                                                                                           
                                                                   Joubin Islands                                           Palmer Station
                                                                                                                           
46'                                                                                                 Breaker Island         Hero Inlet         
                                                                                                 Humble Island          Bonaparte Point
                                                                                                 Litchfield Island      Krattie Cove
                                                                                                 Torgersen Island       Shortcut Island
                                                                                                 DeLaca Island          Stepping Stone 
                                                                                                 Janus Island           Island
                                                                                                                        Limitrophe Island
                                                                                                 Spume Island           Cormorant Island
48'                                                                                                 Outcast Islands        Laggard Island
                                                                                                                       
                                                                 B I S M A R C K   S T R A I T
                                                                                                                       
50' -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
64°
50'             28'             24'             20'             16'             12'             08'             04'             64°             63° 56'

Figure 2. Sites of ecological or scientific value in the vicinity of Palmer Station.
Adapted from Arthur Harbor, Chart 29123, Defense Mapping Agency of the United States.

                  0             1             2             3             4             5             6             7             8             9             10
                                    SCALE 1:113,600
                                                                 KILOMETERS

Puc. 2. Участки вблизи станции Ta 1epa, имеющие экологнческое значение.
Close up west end of Dufek Massif                                  
                                 Западная оконечность Массива Дюфек
54°       53°       52° 
      
1 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
    82°30’                                  
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
    SRA                                      
    Boundary                                  
                                                
                                                
                                                
                SRA                         
                Boundary                     
                                                
                                                
1 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
    82°45’                                  
      
                10 km                          
                816 • Elevations in meters     
      
                MAP SOURCE: U.S. Geological Survey
                1:250,000 scale                     
                Davis Valley and Cordiner Peaks maps
      
      
Долина Девиса и пики Кординер
Glacier front in Davis Valley                                  
Передняя часть ледника в долине Дэвиса
