ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XVI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩА-


Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 23
8 October 1991
Original: English

Examination of Recommendations
Item 7 (c)
(submitted by China)
Item 7 (c)

Examination of Recommendations

Role played by Recommendations

The AT system over thirty years has made great achievements and shown great vitality 
in effective management of activities in Antarctica in the interests of mankind. The AT 
recommendations, aiming at furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty, have 
played an extremely useful and important role in the overall structure of cooperation 
established by the AT system and have greatly contributed to its strengthening and 
consolidating. AT Recommendations are an integral and indivisible part of the Treaty system.

Purposes of examining Recommendations

Since it has been adopted and approved almost 200 Recommendations, a clear 
statement of the obligations under the Recommendations is important for the 
Contracting Parties to comply with them. For the benefit of the Parties and in 
the light of new developments in Antarctic Treaty system, China considers that 
there might be a need to have an appropriate examination of those 
Recommendations. Key purposes of such an examination would be:

-   To identify with a view to its further resolution the possible overlap either 
    between Recommendations or with other instruments of the Treaty system, in 
    particular the Protocol on environmental protection and its Annexes.

-   To identify whether there are contradictions or conflicts between 
    Recommendations and with other instruments of the Treaty system and, if so, to 
    study the ways and means to avoid them.

-   To identify those Recommendations which might be obsolete.

-   To provide States which consider the possiblity to accede to the Antarctic 
    Treaty with a clear statement of the obligation they should accept and 
    implement.
1 
                                                                      
2 

Discussion of issues

It is found that the Recommendations adopted or approved are greatly varied 
according to their nature, contents, importance or requirements for implementation etc. Some 
Recommendations are employed to convene meetings when it was highly likely that the 
meeting would be over before the Recommendation formerly communicated to and approved 
by contracting Parties; some are used to deal with less formal matters as issuing 
commemorative stamps. There are also cases where more than one Recommendation covers 
the same matter and a large number of Recommendations concerning environmental 
protection might overlap with the Protocol on environmental protection just adopted and 
signed by many contracting Parties. The above mentioned situation may give rise to 
difficulties in implementing the Recommendations and sometimes it may also be not in the 
benefit of concentrating the attention and efforts of contracting Parties on those 
Recommendations which have high priority for their implementation. Thus, an examination 
of the Recommendations with a view to their rationalization might be desirable. Afterwards, 
ATCM may wish to consider whether there is a need to explore the possibility of further 
improvement of this practice.

Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty system is regularly maintained as a current 
compilation of the Recommendations and other actions agreed by ATCMs. Its importance to 
the Antarctic Treaty system is evident, so the outstanding contribution made by Dr John 
Heap, editor of the Handbook, is also obvious. The Handbook would provide an important 
basis for the examination of Recommendations.

Proposal

The result of such preliminary examination would be a list along the following lines :

No      Title       Status
Rec.    …           repealed
Rec.    …           overtaken by Rec.x
Rec.    …           overtaken by the Protocol or Annexes
Rec.    …           subject to further review.
3

Since the examination of Recommendations is a major task and needs concerted efforts of Treaty Parties, the Chinese delegation suggests:

--    ATCM reaffirm the importance of examination of Recommendations and 
      recommend Treaty Parties to continue their efforts in this regard;

--    To start the work with examining the overlap between relevant 
      Recommendations and the Protocol on the environmental protection;

--    To consider the possibility to have a small expert group in assisting the work.
