ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XVI REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVI e RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XVI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

Bonn
07 - 18 October 1991

XVI ATCM/WP 24
08 October 1991
Original: Spanish

OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC SYSTEM:

Review of Recommendations

(submitted by Uruguay)
ANNEX No.1

OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM:
REVIEW OF RECOMMENDATIONS

Right from the time the Antarctic Treaty started to take effect, a large number of 
Recommendations covering a wide variety of subjects were adopted at successive Consultative 
Meetings.

In most cases, the subjects on which Recommendations were adopted have progressively 
evolved and have been expanded on and amended through the adoption of further 
Recommendations.

This has given rise to a situation where there are a number of different 
Recommendations on the same subject. In some cases, these are complementary to one 
another, while in others they represent tacit derogations from one or other earlier versions.

Even so, since such derogations are not expressly specified, they are liable to create 
confusion and doubt as to what rules are actually applicable.

To quote an example that is self-evident and is perhaps most widely known on account 
of its topical relevance, at the same time as the "Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty" was adopted, agreement was reached on the following Annexes thereto:
"Environmental Impact Assessment", "Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora", "Removal 
and Treatment of Waste", and "Prevention of Marine Pollution".

These subjects have already been regulated by previous Recommendations - whether 
or not these are still in force - on which these new Annexes were focused. When the Protocol 
and its Annexes come into force, there will automatically be some Recommendations that will 
have to be subject to derogation, without it being expressly specified, and this could give rise 
to doubts as to interpretation and practical application in respect of matters of vital 
importance.

It is for this reason that the Delegation of Uruguay proposes that specific studies be 
initiated with the aim of identifying those Recommendations which have been wholly or partly 
superseded by subsequent Recommendations and of so stating expressly in the new 
Recommendations adopted by the Consultative Parties at Consultative Meetings.

The aim of this proposal will to be to ensure that an authentic interpretation is handed 
down by the Parties and that unilateral interpretations are thereby precluded, since these
might, in many instances, be contradictory, with all the drawbacks and risks that this could 
entail for the security, reliability and dependability of the System.

The machinery for adopting Recommendations has now grown so complex that it 
would appear advisable, with effect from the present Meeting, for the Parties to start giving 
consideration to studies and proposals aimed at fulfilling that purpose.
OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM:
REVIEW OF RECOMMENDATIONS

The Representatives,
Considering that:

I)      Ever since Consultative Meetings first started being held right up to the present time,
        the successive Recommendations adopted on a variety of subjects have, in many instances,
        been complementary to one another, while in others they have been tacitly amended without
        it being expressly stated that they have been partly or wholly superseded.

II)     This situation creates doubt and confusion regarding the application of such
        Recommendations and may give rise to differing interpretations that are liable to involve
        drawbacks and risks.

III)    It is accordingly necessary to ensure that the Recommendations are sound and reliable,
        so as to facilitate their unanimous application and confer dependability and transparency on
        the System.

IV)     It is incumbent upon the Consultative Meetings and the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty
        to lay down authentic interpretations identifying those Recommendations that are still in
        force and those that have been partly or wholly superseded and to make express statements to
        that effect when specific Recommendations are adopted.

Recommend to their Governments that:

Studies and exchanges be initiated, with a view to enabling coming Consultative
Meetings to address the question of the ranking and systematization of existing
Recommendations by adopting specific Recommendations indicating which of the said
existing Recommendations are still in force and which have been subject to derogation.
