 
 
Preliminary Environmental Evaluation of the APE-GAIA Campaign 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 The acronym APE-GAIA stands for Airborne Polar Experiment- Geophysica Aircraft in 
Antarctica. It identifies a scientific programme having the objective of investigating chemical and 
micro-physical processes in the Antarctic stratosphere. Purpose of the research is a better 
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the ozone depletion in the polar regions. 
 
 This project aims at clarifying some critical aspects of the ozone cycle: 
   -the chemical mechanisms acting on the ozone concentrations in the Antarctic stratosphere; 
   -the interaction between the Antarctic polar vortex and the air masses in middle latitudes; 
   -the processes of formation of the Polar Stratospheric Clouds (PSC) and their role in the       
triggering of heterogeneous chemical reactions, responsible for alterations of the balance of 
stratospheric ozone. 
 This project is a part of a broader programme, the APE Programme which began as an agreement 
of scientific co-operation between Italy and Russia, using the M55 Geophysical aircraft. The M55 is 
a single seat, twin engine stratospheric aircraft, capable of flying at altitudes up to 21 km, carrying 
up to 1500 kg of scientific instrumentation. 
 
 Description of the activity 
 
 The activity consists of a number of stratospheric flights, lasting a total of 30 hours, the general 
area of the Antarctic Peninsula. The average altitude for these flights will be between 18 and 21 
kilometers and the altitude during the flight will be constant. 
 The aircraft will carry a number of remote sensing instruments, of which only two LIDARs are 
active instruments. 
 The flights will start from the Argentinean airport of Ushuaia and a typical flight pattern is an 
isosceles triangle having Ushuaia as a vertex and the opposite side tangent to the polar vortex at the 
southern latitude of about 70°. 
 The fuel is Jet A1 and about 1.2 tons are burned per hour. The total duration of the activity will be 
30 hours. Of the 30 hours only about 20 will be in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The activity should 
take place in the next season from Sept. 15th to Oct. 14th, 1999. 
 In case of emergency, three landing strips are available in the area: Marambio (Argentina), Frey 
(Chile), Rothera (UK). 
 
 Estimation of impact 
 
 Considering the extremely high altitude of the flights the combustion products generated by the 
engines will go into a global atmospheric circulation and will not have impact on Antarctic 
territory. This fact has been discussed at length with meteorological experts and there was 
agreement on this point. 
 The instruments carried do not have emissions apart from some liquid Helium (350 l/hr) used to 
cool some components. 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
2
 
 Conclusions 
 
 On the basis of the foregoing considerations it was concluded that the possible impacts of this 
activity have less than a minor or transitory impact. It was therefore deemed that the activity may 
proceed forthwith. 
 
