Antarctic Treaty                                       XXIII ATCM/ IP73
XXIII Consultative Meeting                            May, 1999
Traité sur l'Antarctique                              Original: English
XXIII Réunion consultative                            
                                                      Agenda Item 7b)
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

                  Deep Borehole 5G1 Current
                  Environmental State and
                  Perspectives (Vostok Station, East
                  Antarctica)

Submitted by
Russia
DEEP BOREHOLE 5G-1

CURRENT ENVIRONMENTAL STATE AND 
PERSPECTIVES 
(VOSTOK STATION, EAST ANTARCTICA)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION..........................................................................................................................................3

1. PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL STATE OF THE AREA 
   OF DEEP BOREHOLE 5G-1....................................................................................................................3
   1.1. Description of the existing environment.......................................................................................3
   1.2. Anthropogenic load on the environment of the area....................................................................5

2. EFFECT OF BOREHOLE 5G-1 ON THE ENVIRONMENT....................................................................5
   2.1. History of the Vostok drilling project and present state of the borehole........................................5
   2.2. Direct environmental impacts and risks of contamination .............................................................6
   2.3. Environmental impacts in the case of the final or 
       temporary borehole closing ................................................................................................................8

3. MEASURES TO MITIGATE THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF 
   BOREHOLE 5G-1...................................................................................................................................9

4. UNAVOIDABLE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS........................................................................................9

5. EFFECT OF BOREHOLE 5G-1 ON THE LOCAL ICE SHEET STUDIES....................................................10

6. PERSPECTIVE USE OF BOREHOLE 5G-1 ................................................................................................10

7. DATA REQUIRED FOR AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF 
   PENETRATION TO LAKE VOSTOK AND GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE ............................................................12

CONCLUSIONS .........................................................................................................................................13

REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................14

LIST OF FIGURES .....................................................................................................................................16

                                                                                                         2
INTRODUCTION

In January 1998, borehole 5G-1 (Vostok station, Antarctica) reached a record depth of
3623 m and was temporarily closed. At present the borehole bottom is located approximately in
130 m from the ice sheet base / subglacial Lake Vostok boundary, i.e. in direct proximity to this
unique water body.

In this respect, the international scientific community faces the problem of the borehole
fate. Two alternatives are proposed: 1) to terminate drilling and decommission the borehole; 2) to
continue using the borehole for accessing the subglacial lake.

The successful geographical location of the borehole, reliable deep drilling technology,
developed infrastructure of the Vostok station and experience of international logistical
cooperation allow us to consider borehole 5G-1 as one of the feasible variants for accessing Lake
Vostok in the near future.

As stipulated by the nature protection principles of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Article 2c) [1], the "activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area
shall be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior assessments
of, and informed judgements about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems and on the value of Antarctica for the conduct of scientific
research".

Based on the requirements of the Protocol and the problem of the fate of the borehole,
this document evaluates the environmental impact of borehole 5G-1 (also in the event of its final
closing) and discusses the perspectives of its further use in the studies of Lake Vostok.

1. PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL STATE OF THE AREA OF DEEP BOREHOLE 5G-1

1.1. Description of the existing environment

The Russian inland station Vostok where borehole 5G-1 was drilled is located in the plain
snow surface of the glacial plateau in East Antarctica (λ=78°28’ S, φ=106°48’ E- Fig. 1a) at an
elevation of 3488 m above sea level.

Being in the climatic area of Central Antarctica, the Vostok station is characterized by
extremely low air temperatures (with a yearly mean=-55.4°C; absolute minimum = -89.2°C;
absolute maximum = -13.6°C), low atmospheric pressure (with a yearly mean of 624.2 mb) and
small relative humidity (with a yearly mean of 71%). The wind regime of the station area is
distinguished by weak catabatic winds with a yearly mean speed of 5.4 m/s and rare storm winds
reaching the maximum speed of 32 m/s. The severe temperature conditions result in the absence
of snow melting here. Atmospheric precipitation in the form of snow and ice crystals (with
accumulation comprising 2.2 g/cm^(2) year) is subjected to drifting snow transport resulting in snow
accumulating behind the obstacles (buildings). The area adjoining the Vostok station presents a
flat snow plateau with small gently sloping blown snow accumulations up to 20 cm in height.
                                                                                                                         3
The thickness of the ice sheet in the vicinity of the Vostok station is around 3750 m. As 
follows from the data of geophysical and glaciological studies, the upper portion of the ice sheet 
at the drilling site of borehole 5G-1 is comprised by a 100- m snow-firn layer overlying 
monolithic ice strata. It is composed of the "interglacial" and "glacial" ice strata differing in the 
grain size and orientation of their crystallographic axes. In the upper portion of the section these 
differences are quite insignificant, however at depths greater than 2700 m (Fig. 2) the 
"interglacial" and "glacial" ice strata differ significantly by their structure and mechanical 
properties (see strata A_(1-4) and B_(1,2) in Fig. 2) [2]. At the 3310-3370 m depth range (see stratum C 
in Fig. 2) there are some indications of tectonic inconsistency in the bedding of strata. At the 
3460-3538 m range, layered ice is observed (see stratum D in Fig. 2) that is characterized by 
alternating layers of fine- and coarse-grained ice. Finally, the basal ice layer (see layer E in Fig. 
2) that observed below the 3538 m mark and traced to the borehole bottom (3623 m) is formed 
by giant-grained ice (ice crystals greater than 1 m in diameter). This ice contains rare scattered 
small inclusions (1-6 mm in diameter) presenting concentrations of clayey particles of morainic 
origin. According to [2], the structure of basal ice indicates its stationary state and a congelation 
origin, i.e. to the ice forming during water (lake?) freezing.

Based on radar sounding, satellite radar altimetry and seismic sounding [2], a vast lake 
(the so-called Lake Vostok - see Fig. 16) with an area greater than 10,000 km^2 is located under 
the glacial strata in the Vostok station area. Recent seismic studies [4, 5] revealed a thick water 
layer directly under the station presenting the southeastern tip of this subglacial lake. The lake 
coastline extends over three kilometers westward, four kilometers eastward and four kilometers 
southward from borehole 5G-1. To the northwest of the borehole the subglacial lake extends over 
more than 230 km.

The water layer thickness in the Vostok area ranges between 490 to 670 m (Fig. 3). 
According to the calculation [3], Lake Vostok is rather a freshwater lake.

Down the section between the lake bottom and the acoustic foundation, an additional 
layer is observed that is considered as bottom sediments with a thickness between 90 to 330 m 
(see Fig. 3).

The ice flow above the lake in the Vostok station area is directed to the southeast. The 
presence of a basal layer of stationary ice in the lower ice section portion (see layer E in Fig. 2) 
suggests that the ice sheet here beds predominantly on the underlying mountain rocks, whereas 
the dissected subglacial bed relief blocks the lower layers of the glacial strata. The maximum 
shear deformations occur within the higher layer D (3460-3540 m). Beginning from these depths 
and higher the ice strata are involved into motion whose rate at the surface of the ice sheet 
comprises about 3 m/year [6].

A large size and the depth of the lake are direct evidence that the total transport of melt 
water entrapped in the basin by the ice cover can be zero or close to constant. At the bottom ice 
sheet surface at the ice-water phase interface the ice melting/growth rate can differ in different 
parts of the lake both in value and sign. This rate at the interface is determined by the local heat 
flux that consists of geothermal and climatic components.

Calculations showed a decrease of 100–150 m in the ice sheet thickness in the lake area 
during past global coolings due to a significantly reduced atmospheric precipitation [7].

At the present time at an average pressure at the ice-water interface estimated as 340 bars 
the freshwater freezing temperature is assumed to be −2.6° C, while the corresponding optimal 
value of the current ice sheet thickness was determined to be 3776±3 m. Based on the seismic 
sounding data the ice thickness at this location is 3750 m. The difference of 26 m is equivalent to
                                                    4
the offset of the lake water freezing point from −2.6° C to −3.1° C, which is less probable.

According to the studies of the ice core from the deep borehole at the Vostok station it is known that the upper 3540-m of the ice sheet lying on the stationary basal ice layer is subjected to intense shear and deformation heating in the contact zone. Based on the vertical temperature distribution measurements in the ice sheet (in the borehole) and climatic reconstructions from isotopic ice composition data, the heat flux, ice sheet thickness and bottom ice melting/growth rate were estimated. They revealed that the calculated and measured temperatures for the current conditions are consistent at the bottom heat flux of 0.036±0.006 W/m2 that produces the average water rate freezing of 1.1±0.6 mm/year [8]. This is in agreement with the results of structural ice core studies where the 220-m basal layer is represented by congelation ice that was formed from water freezing to the bottom ice surface.

1.2. Anthropogenic load on the environment of the area

The Vostok station has been one of the centers of comprehensive scientific studies in Antarctica for several decades since its opening in 1957. During these years, the station has become a serious logistical base that enables accommodation of 25 people during the summer season and 14 people during wintering. Its power supply is provided by five diesel-generators 100 kW each (with an average diesel fuel consumption between 18 to 24 tons) [9]. Obviously a multiyear existence and operation of the station has introduced some changes to the pristine environment of this Antarctic region. These changes affected most of the entire ice sheet relief and structure over the area of 0.4 km2, within which the station buildings are located (Fig. 4). Construction of these buildings and the support of vital expedition activities resulted in the natural snow redistribution (generation of snow accumulations) and its extraction to obtain water. Due to annual snow removal using bulldozers the Vostok station is now located in a basin of artificial origin with a depth of about 3 m.

In connection with operation of the diesel power station, galley, use of transportation vehicles, stay of investigators, domestic waste, etc., the station area has obviously its own microclimate and microbiota. However, due to harsh climatic conditions, their spreading is restricted to living, ancillary and research buildings and the garbage and waste dumping sites.

Deep drilling and ice core retrieval have been carried out at the Vostok station since 1970. During this time five main boreholes were drilled 15-18 cm in diameter and the depth ranging between 500 m to 3623 m. The existing boreholes change the ice structure at the drilling points. For preventing closure of boreholes due to overburden ice pressure, they were filled with a non-freezing drilling fluid consisting of a stable mixture of aviation kerosene TS-1 and Freon in proportion 5:1 (for the last five years, ecologically safe Freon 141b is used). After the end of drilling activity the boreholes were decommissioned but the drilling solution was not extracted. The total volume of the drilling fluid remaining in the boreholes comprises around 140 m3.

2. EFFECT OF BOREHOLE 5G-1 ON THE ENVIRONMENT

2.1. History of the Vostok drilling project and present state of the borehole

Drilling of borehole 5G-1 was initiated by the St. Petersburg State Mining Institute in January 1990 by means of a thermal method. For penetrating the snow-firn zone a thermal drill
5
TELGA-14M was used that drilled 120 m. Drilling was continued by means of another drill TBZS-152 with filling the borehole with the drilling fluid based on the aviation fuel TS1 that allows preventing the borehole closure due to creating counterpressure to the borehole walls. Prior to 1995, Freon 11 was used as a densifier of the drilling fluid. Then the ecologically safer F-141b was used.

In late December 1991, the borehole reached the 2500 m depth, however, during the recovery of the drill, it was stuck in the borehole at a depth of 2250 m. After cutting the cable from the malfunctioning drill a new thermal drill TBZS-132 was assembled that differed from the TBZS-152 in a smaller diameter.

By using this drill, at a depth of 2210 m the hole was deviated and drilling continued. By the middle of the wintering period during the 38th RAE (1993) the borehole depth reached 2755 m and drilling stopped due to the absence of the drilling fluid.

It was planned to resume drilling during the 39th RAE, however, due to financial and other problems the Vostok station was temporarily closed and drilling activities were resumed in a year in the course of the 40th RAE.

During the 39th and 40th RAE the drilling complex at the Vostok station was completely reequipped to continue drilling using a mechanical method. In the upper part of the borehole, a casing was set up consisting of plastic tubes 120 m long for isolating the permeable snow-firn deposit zone. This permitted us to raise the fluid level both at the fill up and during the lowering-extraction operations.

Drilling using a mechanical method in borehole 5G-1 started in late February 1995 from a depth of 2775 m. Prior to continuing drilling the lower part of the borehole was expanded up to 139 mm in diameter beginning from the depth of 2200 m thus reducing the risk of deformation of the borehole walls. In addition, the speed of the descent-retrieval operations in this segment increased more than 2-fold. During wintering of the 40th RAE the borehole reached the 3109 m depth when drilling stopped due to the absence of Freon.

After that the drilling activities were performed only in the season of the 41st, 42nd and 43rd RAE where the borehole successively reached 3350 m, 3523 m and finally 3623 m. This is almost 500 m greater compared to the depths of all previously drilled boreholes in the ice sheets.

A current sketch of borehole 5G-1 (after the last CLOSING at the end of the seasonal activity of the 43rd RAE) is presented in Figure 5. The general volume of the drilling fluid contained now in the borehole is around 60 m3. The drilling fluid level is at a depth of 95 m, its average density comprising 928 kg/m3. The difference between the overburden pressure of the ice strata and the hydrostatic pressure of the drilling fluid is about 0.4 MPa. The closure rate of the borehole near its bottom should not exceed 0.5 mm/year at the existing undercompensated overburden pressure. The top of the borehole is sealed. Up to a depth of 2200 m the borehole is practically vertical, then the borehole axis tilt from the vertical varies between 8 to 6°.

2.2. Direct environmental impacts and risks of contamination

The direct environmental impacts of borehole 5G-1 are as follows:

1) change of the vertical ice structure at the drilling point,
2) effect of the drilling fluid on the atmosphere,
3) effect of the drilling fluid on the ice sheet strata

The contamination risk connected with the borehole includes penetration of the drilling
6
fluid from the borehole to the ice sheet strata or to the subglacial lake.

1) Impact: change of the vertical ice structure at the drilling point.

As can be seen from Fig. 5, drilling and ice core retrieval resulted in the change of the natural vertical ice structure from its surface to the 3623 m depth. Due to the necessary changes of the tilting angle and the displacement of the borehole, the plan contours of the zone impacting the vertical ice structure exceed the direct drilling point by about 100 m.

Given that the ambient ice sheet areas have in principle over tens of kilometers a similar vertical structure of the ice strata as at the drilling point, we can state that the type of environmental impact of borehole 5G-1 under consideration is insignificant by scale. In addition, a significant quantity of the ice cores collected in borehole 5G-1 in the course of drilling was not used and is now in the ice core storage space at the Vostok station. Thus a natural prototype of the ice section at the drilling point is preserved.

2) Impact: effect of the drilling fluid on the atmosphere

The technology of drilling borehole 5G-1 envisages application of the aviation kerosene and Freon as a drilling fluid. They form a stable mixture in the hole, which is hydrophobic and much lighter than water. It influences the atmosphere due to evaporation and the ice walls of the hole at a direct contact. Note that the spills of Freon that is the most volatile and active component of the drilling fluid are most dangerous for the environment.

Freon is delivered to the station in sealed containers and its leaks during transportation and storage are practically excluded. During its use the evaporation of Freon (similer to the aviation fuel) to the atmosphere significantly varies depending on whether some lowering-recovery operations are conducted in the hole or the borehole is closed.

The fluid extracted from the borehole with the cable and in the drill remains in the open containers at the drill site for about an hour. After that at the beginning of the next run it is poured to the hole with the descent of the drill. At first, the fluid has a temperature of about -40 
o
C and then when it is poured to the hole of about −20 
o
C. For 10 hours the fluid density decreases by around 10 kg/m
3
. Obviously with increasing temperature Freon will evaporate more quickly from the fluid. Assuming that Freon evaporates uniformly with time, we obtain that approximately 0.2 kg can evaporate from 80 liters of the drilling fluid.

Some portion of the fluid extracted from the hole is lost with cuttings. After each run the chips extracted from the drill are melted to determine the volume. The fluid is heated up to the above freezing temperature and Freon evaporates from it practically completely. According to measurements made after each run, approximately three liters of the drilling fluid remains.

In spite of the fact that special trays are set up under the deflecting rollers and the cable over its entire length from the borehole to the winch, some portion is irrevocably lost due to splashing. These losses can be estimated as about two liters a run.

The total irrevocable losses of the drilling fluid during a run (lowering-recovery operations) will be about five liters, including 1 kg of Freon. Given the losses due to evaporation from the recovered drilling fluid, we have 1.2 kg of Freon per run.

When terminating the drilling activity in the borehole for a long time it is closed by a tight plug in a plastic casing. This practically excludes the possibility of evaporating of the drilling fluid (including Freon) to the atmosphere. A comparison of the fluid density during the 1998 season with the measurements made in January 1997 before the borehole was decommissioned can serve as evidence. The comparison revealed that no changes occurred

7
during the preceding year thus indicating high stability of the kerosene/Freon mixture and the 
absence of Freon leakages during the borehole standby for a year.

3) Impact: effect of the drilling fluid on the ice sheet strata

The influence of the drilling fluid on the ice strata appears to be restricted with only the 
contact zone between kerosene and Freon and the hole walls. In view of the properties of the 
mixture (hydrophobic and light), this contact should not lead to dissolving the sides. The 
aforementioned comparison of the borehole state before and after a year of standby, as well as a 
repeated recording of stability of the hole diameter in the course of drilling for many years 
confirm the drilling fluid inertia with regard to the borehole ice walls.

Contamination risk: penetration of the drilling fluid from the borehole to the ice sheet 
strata or to the subglacial lake. Penetration of the drilling fluid from borehole 5G-1 to the ice 
strata (to the walls) or downward to the subglacial lake is unlikely to occur in the near future. As 
mentioned above, sufficient pressure of the drilling fluid in the borehole was provided during 
drilling for balancing the overburden ice pressure and preventing the deformation of the borehole 
walls. In this way the probability of unauthorized introduction of a large volume of the drilling 
fluid beyond the borehole was excluded. The borehole with the drilling fluid is separated from 
the lake surface by the ice strata about 130 m thick. Along with the equilibrium pressure state of 
the “ice sheet-drilling fluid-lake” system this fact completely excludes a possible penetration of 
the drilling fluid to Lake Vostok during the next few years.

2.3. Environmental impacts in the case of the final or temporary borehole closing

After completing drilling and other activities (geophysical measurements, etc.), borehole 
5G-1 should be closed. The extraction of the drilling fluid from the borehole does not appear 
advisable in terms of ecology due to the following considerations:

      First, it comprises about 60 t of stable mixture (containing Freon) that is difficult to 
      divide into components for using again.

      Second, transportation of this mixture from the borehole and removal from Vostok 
      station will require shipment to the station and subsequent consumption of a large quantity of 
      fuel being in itself quite complicated and time-consuming.

      Third, the ecologically safe storage of such quantity on the surface in the station area is 
      now practically impossible.

      In this respect, if the borehole is closed, the drilling fluid will not be extracted. In this 
      case the hole will be filled with a mixture of aviation kerosene and Freon up to a depth of 3623 
      m. Below this depth, up to the surface of Lake Vostok there will be ice strata.

      Given that the ice sheet flows we can suggest that the borehole with the drilling fluid it 
      contains will move for a long period of time changing the location of the impact area on the ice 
      strata. Part of the borehole from the surface to a depth of 3500 m (similar to all previous 
      boreholes) will move with the Vostok station southeastward crossing the boundary of the 
      subglacial Lake Vostok approximately in 2000 years. Another part of the borehole entering the 
      stationary basal ice layers will remain at the location for a very long time. Taking into account 
      the current tendency towards bottom ice surface growth in the vicinity of the Vostok station [8] 
      the duration of this period can be estimated as not less than 100 000 years.

8
3. MEASURES TO MITIGATE THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF
BOREHOLE 5G-1

Constant control of the state of the borehole containing the drilling fluid will require,
first, to determine their current parameters (hole depth and diameter and the fluid pressure and
density) with a maximum accuracy and second, to perform repeated monitoring observations of
these parameters at regular intervals.

For these activities the lowering-recovery operations in the borehole and probably a
limited drilling of some segments of the hole or extraction or adding an insignificant quantity of
the drilling fluid will be necessary. As is apparent from Section 2.1, during these operations the
main environmental impact will be produced by the drilling fluid recovered to the surface, in
particular, by Freon.

In the mid-1970s, Sh. Rowland and M. Molina (USA) found that chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs) could destroy the ozone layer in the stratosphere at a distance of 25 km from the Earth/s
surface. In 1986, around 1,13 million tons of CFCs were used in the world. In 1987 in Montreal
and in 1990 in London, the Protocols were adopted according to which the production and use of
CFCs destroying the ozone layer were to be reduced by half in 1995 and completely banned from
2000. From 1995 in accordance with these decisions, Freon 141b that does not affect the Earth's
ozone layer was used at the Vostok station. Most metals and plastic materials do not interact with
Freon 141n. It has extremely low toxicity for a human organism both at respiration and with oral
intake.

As described in Section 2.1, the main source of Freon releases in the process of drilling
and lowering-recovery operations is the drilling fluid remaining in the chips or flowing from the
cable, a drill and the measurement instruments. To reduce these releases it is planned to use a
centrifuge for further drilling activities that will separate the mud and the drilling fluid. At
present such device is used for drilling a deep borehole at Dome C in Antarctica under the
EPICA Project. In this manner more than 90% of the fluid can be separated from the chips. The
remaining kerosene is easily separated at melting the chips, but Freon will go to the atmosphere.
Thus, the Freon release will be decreased up to 0.6 kg a run during subsequent measurements and
monitoring observations in the borehole.

4. UNAVOIDABLE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS

Drilling and ice core collection from borehole 5G-1 changed the vertical ice sheet
structure at the borehole location (within approximately a 100 m area) from the surface to a depth
of 3623 m. In closing the borehole, its impact will be restricted to the drilling fluid impact on the
hole ice walls. The location of the area of this impact will change for a long period of time. Part
of the borehole with the drilling fluid (up to a depth of about 3500 m) will be offset in the
southeastern direction exiting the boundaries of the subglacial Lake Vostok in 2000 years. Part of
the borehole with the drilling fluid (3500-3623 m depths) will probably remain above the lake for
several tens of thousands of years.

The geophysical measurements required for obtaining more accurate data on the borehole
                                                                                             9
will have some influence on the atmosphere that is connected with evaporation of the insignificant quantity of the drilling fluid recovered to the surface. In addition, the logistical support of these activities will impact the area of the Vostok station due to the delivery, stay and activities of several specialists during the summer Antarctic seasons.

5. EFFECTS OF BOREHOLE 5G-1 ON OTHER LOCAL ICE SHEET STUDIES

The presence of borehole 5G-1 that disturbs the natural ice structure will not allow the repeated drilling of the ice strata in order to obtain ice cores or enter Lake Vostok at a distance of 100 m from the borehole top (see Fig. 5).

The ice core extracted from borehole 5G-1 is of unique value for paleoclimatic reconstruction both for the given Antarctic region and on a global scale. In accordance with the existing rules after sampling this ice core is subdivided into several segments that are studied in many laboratories of the world. It is important that some part of the ice core remains for reference in the core storage space at the Vostok station. Thus, future studies of the ice sheet characteristics in the Vostok area will not require a new borehole with core sampling. That is, the influence of the existing borehole 5G-1 on the future glaciological activities in the vicinity of the Vostok station will be practically zero.

The displacement of the station and borehole 5G-1 as a result of the ice flow is very slow and has a known direction (see section 1.1). During the next 50-100 years the total offset of the station and the borehole top will comprise only 150-300 m. For planning some new studies of the ice strata during this time it is possible to calculate the location of the contaminated part of the ice sheet and thus avoid entering again borehole 5G-1 and the contaminated ice layers.

6. PERSPECTIVE USE OF BOREHOLE 5G-1

Current knowledge of Lake Vostok is based on the evidence obtained by the remote sensing methods (airborne and ground radar sounding, seismic sounding, and satellite radar altimetry), as well as on the calculations using full-scale data and the existing models. Continuation of such studies in the near future will obviously yield new data on the lake contours and depths and on the thickness and structure of its bottom sediments. It will also permit additional model constructions concerning the thermodynamical features of the "ice sheet-subglacial lake" system. However, these studies will not give an unambiguous answer to the question of the lake water chemistry, which will significantly reduce their reliability. In addition, these studies will not contradict or confirm the hypothesis of the presence of any life forms in this subglacial water body. Therefore, water sampling from the lake is one of the major goals for achieving progress in the study of nature of this unique water body.

Further use of borehole 5G-1 will help to achieve this goal, and namely, to continue drilling activities and collect water samples from Lake Vostok. As can be seen from Section 1.1, to-date, borehole 5G-1 penetrated that part of the ice sheet that had probably been formed with lake water freezing. Hence, further drilling and ice core retrieval and investigation will yield new information on the origin and past composition of lake water as well as on the possible life existence in the lake.  A very short single penetration to Lake Vostok (presenting a likely no more than minor and transitory impact) and water sampling from its subsurface layer will give us 
10
the correct information on its present state. In addition to being valuable in itself, this 
information will be of utmost importance in developing subsequent technologies for the direct 
studies of the lake and its sediments as well as for specifying the results of modeling and remote 
sensing studies.

The objective of accessing the lake and its study at the ice-water interface can be 
achieved by using the electrical-mechanical drill during the next 2-3 years based on using the 
existing borehole 5G-1. Drilling (including ice core sampling) will be continued from the 
borehole bottom that is now approximately at a distance of 130 m from the ice base and the lake 
surface boundary, up to the contact with the water surface. During drilling in the borehole, the 
overburden pressure undercompensation (the difference between drilling fluid pressure and the 
overburden pressure of the ice strata) is created. At the instant the borehole bottom contacts the 
lake surface the drilling fluid will be displaced upward the hole to an elevation corresponding to 
the overburden pressure undercompensation. The drilling fluid penetration to the lake is 
excluded, as a mixture of kerosene with Freon 141b is hydrophobic and much lighter than water. 
Immediately after the drill reaches the lake surface, the drill is extracted from the borehole.

The lake water rising in the borehole should obviously freeze along the entire penetration 
height. After its freezing this borehole interval is drilled again to retrieve the ice core formed 
from the subsurface water layers of Lake Vostok. When the lake is penetrated for the second time 
the conditions are created for water rising again to a height of 20-30 m and its freezing, which 
will be the end of the proposed activity. Thus, the proposed methods of achieving the objective 
allow us to obtain lake water samples without directly entering the lake.

The continued drilling of borehole 5G-1 and penetration to Lake Vostok for sampling 
will impact environmental compartments in the vicinity of the Vostok station: atmosphere, 
microclimate and surface relief in the area, ice strata and possibly the subglacial lake surface. 
However, this impact will be insignificant and even minimum compared to the other variants of 
addressing the proposed scientific goal.

In particular, the proposed drilling of only 130 m (up to the boundary with the lake) will 
require only a small quantity of the drilling fluid resulting in disturbing the ice sheet structure 
and penetrating the lake at the point where up the section these irreversible changes already exist. 
If the objective of penetrating the lake is achieved using a preliminary drilling of the new 
borehole, the ice structure at the point of drilling and entry to the lake will be changed 
throughout the entire ice strata. Depending on the drilling method, this will require delivering to 
this Antarctic area many tons of kerosene and Freon (mechanical method), ethanol (thermal 
drilling), as well as a large quantity of diesel fuel for energy supply of long-term drilling 
activities.

The aforementioned contamination risks in continued drilling of borehole 5G-1 (a brief 
exit to the lake of equipment or penetration of the drilling fluid) will accompany by all means 
any other variant of accessing the lake by drilling. To exclude the risk of the drilling fluid leak to 
Lake Vostok  is possible only by using the robotic technology (a cryobot and a hydrobot) [12]. 
On the other hand, this technology of penetrating the lake envisages to leave the cryobot and the 
hydrobot in the lake, i.e. there is not even a risk, but a direct non-exclusive and long-term impact 
on the lake ecology.

The logistical operations connected with continued drilling in borehole 5G-1 will become 
only part of the anthropogenic load on the Vostok station area during the seasonal periods of 
activity. Obviously in the case of using borehole 5G-1, the drilling equipment at the station and 
the existing life support conditions, the total environmental impact of the proposed activities will 
11
be incomparably less compared to drilling a new borehole in the area of the station and the subglacial Lake Vostok.

The scales and general duration of the total environmental impact of the proposed activity are determined not only by the specific events planned, but also by the peculiarities of the natural conditions of the Vostok station area. As can be seen from section 1.1, these conditions are distinguished by the absence of water in the liquid phase at the ice surface and in the strata, which significantly reduces the intensity and decreases the area of the influence of man activity on the areas adjoining the station. In fact given the severe conditions and ice flow rates (see section 1.1) the impact made will be restricted for the next hundreds of years by the station area at the surface and the borehole in the ice strata. In addition, the ice flow peculiarities and a tendency for ice growth at the ice sheet bottom surface suggest that the results of the proposed activity (a borehole and a drilling fluid) will not impact the ecology of Lake Vostok. Moreover, the main portion of the borehole with the hole fluid will be displaced beyond the lake boundaries.

7. DATA REQUIRED FOR AN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF PENETRATION TO LAKE VOSTOK AND GAPS IN KNOWLEDGE

For an Environmental Impact Assessment of using borehole 5G-1 to access Lake Vostok and collect water samples the following currently available information blocks should be used:
- Data on the natural conditions in the vicinity of the Russian inland Antarctic station Vostok;
- information on the Vostok station - a logistic research center in the central region of East Antarctica;
- data on the structure, composition, isotopic, geochemical and other ice strata characteristics in the station area, obtained both from studies of ice cores retrieved from borehole 5G-1 and from other glacial-geophysical observations;
- data on the subglacial Lake Vostok obtained from radar sounding, satellite radar altimetry, seismic sounding and mathematical modeling;
- methodology development, technical characteristics and other information on the drilling method, equipment and drilling fluid used in borehole 5G-1 for the last decade;
- information on the main decisions contained in the final documents of the international workshop on the problem of the subglacial Lake Vostok held in March 1998 in St. Petersburg [13].

The main knowledge gaps revealed in preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment include direct instrumental measurement data on the thermodynamical ice conditions in direct proximity (5-10 m) to the "bottom ice surface-Lake Vostok surface" interface, instrumental determination of the composition of the subsurface water layer in Lake Vostok and information on the presence or absence of the organic life forms in this layer. However, these gaps can be eliminated only during the direct studies of the lower ice strata layers at the contact with the surface of Lake Vostok, by accessing the lake and sampling its water, which is the scientific goal.

12
CONCLUSIONS

The following conclusions can be drawn based on this Report:

I.  Borehole 5G-1 is in the operating state that excludes any possibility for penetration of the drilling fluid to the water column of the subglacial lake located beneath the borehole. Maintaining the borehole in this state for continuing drilling (also with the aim of investigating Lake Vostok) is possible at least for several decades on condition of monitoring and regular technical maintenance.

II. The borehole and the required maintenance activity are identified as having not more than a minor impact.

III. In the event of terminating maintenance of the borehole the following options are possible:
    Option 1. Final sealing of the borehole without extracting the drilling fluid.
    Option 2. Arranging for recovery of the drilling fluid from the borehole with its subsequent removal from the Antarctic and final decommissioning of the borehole.
    Both options will require EIA.

13
REFERENCES

1. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. RAE, AARI, 1998

2. Lipenkov V.Ya., Barkov N.I. Internal structure of the Antarctic ice sheet as revealed by deep core drilling at Vostok Station. - Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St.Petersburg. Russia), 1998, 31-35.

3. Kapitsa A.P., Ridley J.R., Robin G. de Q., Siegert M.J., Zotikov I.A. A large deep freshwater lake beneath the ice of central East Antarctica.- Nature, v.381, 1996, p. 684-686.

4. Popkov A.M., Kudryavtsev G.A., Verkulich S.R., Masolov V.N., Lukin V.V. Seismic studies in the vicinity of Vostok Station (Antarctica) . - Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St Petersburg. Russia), 1998, p. 26-27.

5. Popkov A.M., Verkulich S.R., Masolov V.N., Lukin V.V. Seismic section in the vicinity of Vostok Station (Antarctica) - the results of investigations in 1997. - Maretialy glyatsiologicheskikh issledovanii [Data of glaciological studies]. Publ. 86 (in press).

6. Libert I., Leonhardt G. Astronomical observations on purpose to determine glacier cover movement in the Vostok station area. - Informats. byull. Sovetskoy Antarct. Expeditis. [Inform. bull. of the Soviet Antartcic Expedition], Vol. 88, 1974, p. 68-70.

7. Salamatin A.N., Lipenkov V.Ya., Barkov N.I., Jouzel J., Petit J.R., Raynaud D. Ice-core age dating and palaeothermometer calibration based on isotope and temperature profiles from deep boreholes at Vostok Station (East Antarctica) // Journal of Geophysical Research.- 1998.- Vol.103, N D8.- P.8963-8977.

8. Salamatin A.N., Vostretsov R.N., Peti Zh.R., Lipenkov V.Ya., Barkov N.I. Geophysical and paleoclimatic supplement of a constituent temperature profile from a deep borehole on the Vostok station (Antarctica).- Maretialy glyatsiologicheskikh issledovanii [Data of glaciological studies]. Publ. 85, p. 233-240.

14
9. Lukin V.V. Russian antarctic studies at Vostok Station.- Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St.Petersburg. Russia), 1998, p. 9-13.

10. Morev V.A., Savatyugin L.M. Proposals for drilling an ecologically-safe borehole with access to the subglacial Lake Vostok. - Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St.Petersburg. Russia), 1998, p. 85-87.

11. Hancock W., Kuvinen K.S., Kelty J.R., Hansen B.I. Status of hot water access hole drilling and thermal probe technology developed at UNL-PICO/SIRG.- Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St.Petersburg. Russia), 1998, p. 91.

12. Leary W.E. Hardier Breed of Antarctic and Lunar Explorers: Robots.- The New York Times Science, May 13, 1997.

13. Spravochnik geophisika [The geophysical reference book].- Zaporozhets V.M., Editor. Moscow: Nedra. 1983, 591 pp. (in Russian)

14. Verkulich S.R., Pomelov V.N. Features of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) under the program of Lake Vostok studies.- Lake Vostok study: scientific objectives and technological requirements. Abstracts of the International Workshop (March 24-26, 1998, Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, St.Petersburg. Russia), 1998, p. 74-75.

15. Verkulich S.R., Danilov A.I., Kotlyakov V.M., Lukin V.V. Subglacial lake in the area of the Vostok station (Antarctica) as a subject of complex investigations at the end of XX - beginning of XXI centuries: review of the International meeting in St.Petersburg, March 24-26, 1998.- Materialy glyatsiologicheskikh issledovanii [Data of glaciological studies]. Publ. 85, p. 247-250 (in Russian).

 
15
A




                                180







ледниковый
щит
                             
                      ледник
                      активный
                      
                      линия
                      тока
                      
                      
ледораздел                      
                      
                      
нулевая
линия                      
                      
                      
                      
                      станция
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      подледное
озеро




Б













Fig. 1. A - location of the station and subglacial Lake Vostok;
      B - plan contours of Lake Vostok (shaded area)
grain size, F (mm2)
10 
0 10 
1 10 
2 10 
3 10 
4 v (m/s) 3000
5000
2700
2800
A
1
2900
B
1
-20
3000
A
2
3100
B
2
-15
3200
A
3
3300
C
-10
3400
A
4
3500
D
-5
3600
E
ice temperature (°C from melting point)
depth (m)
no-go zone
0
3700
water ?
3800
-475 -450 -425
D (%)
Fig. 2. Internal structure of the Antarctic ice sheet at Vostok Station (2700 - 3623 mbs)
A
1-4 Zones of relatively coarse-grained ice with girdle-type fabric corresponding to uniaxial extension of
ice along flow line;
B
1,2 Zones of relatively fine-grained ice with single-maximum fabric corresponding to shear; zones B
coincide with the ice strata formed under conditions of glacial maxima (high impurity concentration);
C Former zone of ice flow disturbance (?);
D Layered ice stratum interpreted as a sole of the moving section of the ice sheet;
E Basal ultra-coarse-grained silty ice considered as stagnant ice.
Remarkable correlation between the grain size (F, mm2) and the deuterium profile ( D,‰) [Petit et al.,
1998] indicates the link between the internal structure of the ice sheet and climate. Vertical profile of
seismic wave speed (v, m/s) [Popkov et al., in press] exhibits significant decrease in v within stratum D.
C                                   D
           пп5        пп4        пп3        пп2        пп1        пп6        пп10       пп11       пп12       пп13       пп14   
0                                                                                                                         elevation above
                                                                                                                          sea level, m
-1000                                                                                                                     
-2000                                                                                                                     
-3000                                                                                                                     
-4000                                                                                                                     
-5000         0         1         2         3         4         5         6         7         8         9         profile length, km

                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   
                  |:::|   |o  |   |---|   |o o|   |v v|   a   |пп13|   
                  | 1 |   | 2 |   | 3 |   | 4 |   | 5 |   6   |  7  |   

Fig. 3. Seismic section in the Vostok station area
1 - snow-firn strata; 2 - ice; 3 - water; 4 - bottom non-consolidated 
sediments; 5 - crystalline basement; 6 - boundaries: a) clearly delineated; 
b) supposed; 7 - location and numbers of blast points
Fig. 4. Layout of Vostok station (43^(rd) RAE): 1 - mess-room; 2 - radio-communication 
center; 3 - power station; 4 - old station; 5 - meteo-site; 6 - microbiological 
laboratory; 7 - upper-air sounding; 8 - air strip. Location of boreholes are 
designated as 3G, 4G and 5G-1 points.
Hole diameter, mm                  Hole deviation from the vertical, m

       100   120   140   160   180         0         100
0      |     |     |     |     |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |           Ø 165           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |                           |120 M    |         |
       |                           |         |         |
1000   |                           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |           Ø 152           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
2000   |                           |         |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |                           |2200 M   |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |           Ø 139           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |  
3000   |                           |         |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |                           |3100 M   |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |           Ø 138           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |                           |3523 M   |         |
       |                           |         |         |
       |<----------------------->|         |         |
       |           Ø 137           |         |         |
       |                           |3623 M   |         |
       |                           |         |         |
4000   |                           |         |         |
       :                           :         :         :
       :                           :         :         :
       :                           :         :         :
       :                           :         :         :
       :                           :         :         :
       '.......................Lake Vostok..................
       
Fig. 5. Schematic design of borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station
a - change in the hole diameter by depth, mm;
b - hole deviation from the vertical, m
surface
                                  
                                  Ho
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                             H
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            

Fig. 7. Schematic depiction of penetrating Lake Vostok at the drilling site of borehole 
5G-1: Pж – fluid pressure in the hole; Pл – ice strata pressure; Po – water 
pressure near the lake surface; ∆P – difference between the near-bottom 
pressure near-water surface pressure; h – critical ice thickness at penetrating the 
lake
