INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS, TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS  IN THE ARCTIC -         
 ANTARCTIC  RELATIONSHIP 
 
Within a historic perspective it is useful to remember the International Polar years and the their last off-spring: the 
International Geophisical Years (IGY) which originated Polar Commissions tasked with the compilation and 
publication of the respective scientific work. However, the IGY and the establishment of SCAR (The Scientific 
Committee for Antarctic Research) also witnessed the start of independent directions for Arctic and Antarctic 
Affairs. 
 
At the time of the International Congress for Economic Expansion (Mons, Belgium, 19O5) the most distinguished 
figures of polar exploration proposed the creation of an International Association for the Study of Polar Regions 
and the Belgian Government established an organizing committee and eventually an International Polar 
Commission. For the first time, four southern nations participated in this endeavour: Argentina, through the well 
known explorer Jose Maria Sobral and afterwards by Otto Maveroff; Australia, through its Naval Attache in 
London, Muirhead Collins; Chile, through its diplomatic representative in Brussels, Luis Aldunate Errazuriz and 
subsequently by its Naval Attache in London; and New Zealand, represented by its High Commissioner in London. 
 
The International Polar Commission, chaired by Navy Captain Umberto Cagni from Italy had to close its activities 
at the outbreak of World War I. The advent of Worl War II frustrated plans by Norway to host an International 
Congress for the Study of the Polar Regions. 
 
Nowadays, the Arctic-Antarctic dimension is chanelled by a variety of institutions and enriched by both formal and 
informal sets of relations. There is, however, some understanding that major areas for exchange an cooperation are 
the following: 
 
SCIENCE Antarctic (Arctic Scientific Cooperation is mainly channeled through SCAR and its Arctic counterpart 
the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). In addition, it is convenient to remember that within the 
geographical divisions of the global change programme S.T.A.R.T. Antarctica is the responsability for SCAR but 
the closest adyacent region, monitored by the Interamerican Institute for Global Change, starts with the subantarctic 
regions of Chile and Argentina and continues upwards to the Canadian Northern Territories. 
 
ENVIRONMENT our two successful workshops on protected areas, in Tromso, Norway (1998) and Lima, Peru 
(1999) have allowed Arctic and Antarctic scientists and environmentalists to interface and drew attention to the 
Circumpolar Protected Area Network (CPAN) Principles and Guidelines. 
 
LOGISTICS Further cooperation is expected between COMNAP and the voluntary informal "Forum of Arctic 
Research operations". 
 
ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES A pioneering initiative developed by the Nansen Institute in Norway and 
encompassin i. a. academics from Australia, Chile, the USA, the UK, has focused on the specific political, legal and 
social status of circumpolar areas. 
 
As a continuation of the 1st "Poles Apart" Symposium held at Ottawa, Canada, in 1997; a second International 
Symposium on Arctic and Antarctic Issues took place at Punta Arenas, Chile in 1998, under the sponsorship of the 
Regional Authorities, the University of Magallanes, the Embassy of Canada in Chile and the Chilean Antarctic 
Institute. 
Discussions covering aspects of governance in polar regions, environmental protection, polar ecosystems, geology, 
meteorology, oceanography as well as global impacts, Arctic and Antarctic Glaciers, human presence and tourism 
and logistic challenges of operations in the polar regions. 47 lectures were given by experts from Argentina, 
Canada, Chile, Germany, Japan, Norway and the USA. Participants had the opportunity of visiting Antarctic. 
 
The USA offered to host the third Symposium in Texas during the year 2OOO. 
