 
 
ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: 
 
UPDATE ON RESULTS FOLLOWING COMPLETION OF THE 
1998-1999 FIELD SEASON 
 
by 
Ron Naveen, Oceanities , Inc. 
 
 
 
For five austral summer field seasons beginning in November 1994, the Antarctic Site 
Inventory project has collected baseline data on an opportunistic basis at Antarctic 
Peninsula visitor sites. 
 
The objectives of the project are to: (1) determine whether opportunistic visits can be used 
to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical 
features, flora and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-
based tourists; and (2) develop baseline information necessary to be able to detect possible 
changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored. 
 
Site visits are achieved by placing research teams aboard expedition vessels at key census 
times each austral spring and summer (i.e. during the peak of penguin egg-laying for nest 
counts and the peak of chick-creching for quick counts). Site visits and aerial 
photodocumentation also have been undertaken in cooperation with the British Royal Navy 
ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance. 
 
This paper describes results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project to date . The project´s 
methodology and results from previous field seasons in the Antarctic Peninsula are 
described and discussed in the XIX ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 100, XX ATCM/INF 
102, XXI ATCM/INF 114, and XXII ATCM/INF 27, Two documents relating to the 
project were published in 1997: 
 
• Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the 
United States and the United Kingdom (Distributed by and still available through the 
US Department of State and the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office). 
 
• The Oceanities Site Guide to the Antarctic Peninsula (Available by contacting 
Oceanities, Inc. At its e-mail address: oceanities@aol.com) 
 
The Compendium includes site descriptions, data on fauna and flora, orientation maps, and 
photographs of Antarctic Peninsula tourism sites, while the Site Guide provides a summary 
of this information that can be used readily by visitor, Antarctic tour number of 
recommendations to help meet the assessment and monitoring requirements of the Protocol. 
 
 
1 
Data for the Inventory are being collected in accordance with the Commission For the 
Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
("CEMP") Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies (Scientific Committee for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, revised August 1997). This ensures 
that they contribute to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine 
Resources ("CCAMLR") database, and to assessment and monitoring goals under the 
Protocol, including the assessment of potential cumulative impacts of tourism. 
 
 
Data Collection Three broad categories of data are being collected: (1) Basic Site 
Information (2) Variable Site Information and Data; and  (3) Maps and 
Photodocumentation. 
 
Basic Site Information includes: descriptions of key physical characteristics of the sites; the 
latitude and longitude of the site; the locations of floral assemblages, haul-out sites and 
wallow areas of Antarctic seals, discrete groups of breeding penguins and flying birds, 
penguin molting areas, and guano-melt streams; glacial-melt streams; and how the site is 
accessed and exited by human visitors. 
 
Variable Site Information and Data include: current weather and other environmental 
conditions (e.g. sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and 
speed); particular numbers of adults or individual animals, active nests, numbers and ages 
of chicks); and the nature and extent of any visitor impacts that may be observed (e.g. 
footprints or paths through moss beds, cigarettes butts, film canisters, and other litter). 
 
At each site researchers attempt to identify and census prospective control colonies (i.e. 
those that are seldom distributed) and experimental colonies (i.e. those that are frequently 
visited) . The intent is to repeat regular censuses both near and far from landing beaches 
where visitors access a particular location. This will allow comparisons, over time, between 
areas where there are more and less human activity. As standard practice, researchers count 
all seals at the landing beaches of all sites, and the numbers found in all southern elephant 
seal wallows. Over time, by using both the Basic Site Information and the Variable Site 
Information and Data, project researchers expect to develop baselines necessary to be able 
to detect changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna at each site. 
 
As noted above, Variable Site Information and Data are collected according to the methods 
described in the CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies (Scientific Committee for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Live Resources, revised August 1997). They also are 
collected with reference to other pertinent authorities, in particular, The Distribution of 
Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the Scotia Sea (Croxall, J.P. and E.:D. 
Kirkwood, 1979) and The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic 
Penguins (Woehler, E.J., 1993) 
 
To permit reliable interannual comparisons, in accordance with the CEMP Standard 
Methods, it is important that nests censuses are made as near as possible to the peak of egg-
laying, and chick censuses as near as possible to the peak of chick-creching. 
 
2 
However, given that site visits occur opportunistically, this is not always possible. 
Consequently, to ensure that censuses may be used for future determinations of breeding 
success annual survival, and recruitment, correlation studies have begun to establish how 
close censuses occur to the respective peaks of egg-laying and chick-creching respectively. 
It is hoped that these correlations will enable the project to establish accurate breeding 
chronologies at the census sites. 
 
Maps and Photodocumentation portray the major physical features of each site and 
includes: the locations of the principal colonies and assemblages of fauna and flora at each 
site, and vantage points for viewing and photographing particular penguin colonies , seal 
haul-out sites , floral associations , and other features. It is intended that maps will be 
updated and upgraded after each field season. 
 
The project’s aerial photodocumentation results from cooperation with the UK´s ice patrol 
vessel HMS Endurance, which continued in the 1998-99 field season. There has been 
regular coordination with the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Polar Regions 
Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, and the German Umweltbundesamt 
(Federal Environmental Agency) regarding the Inventory’s program of work. 
 
 
Progress and recent results. In the five field seasons between November 1994, and 
February 1999, Inventory researchers have conducted 233 survey visits at 52 sites in the 
Antarctic Peninsula, including the eighteen sites that have been most heavily visited since 
1989. Overall, regarding the 52 sites the Inventory has visited, fifteen have been mapped 
and 29 have been documented with aerial photography. 
 
 
Among the achievements from the 1998-99 field seasons are: 
 
• initial oblique photodocumentation of fifteen sites that had not been photographed in 
previous seasons (Orne Islands, Georges Point on Rongé Island, Neko Harbor, 
Waterboat Point, Cuverville Island, Danco Island, Almirante Brown Station in Paradise 
Bay, Port Lockroy on Wiencke Island, Dorian Bay/Damoy Point, Pléneau Island, 
Petermann Island, Gourdin Island, Heroína Island, Point Lockout on Elephant Island, 
and Point Wild on Elephant Island); 
 
 
• updated oblique photodocumentation of nine previously inventoried sites (Baily Head 
and Whaler’s Bay on Deception Island, Hannah Point on Livingston Island, Penguin 
Island, Turret Point on King George Island, the Aitcho Islands, Paulet Island, Eden 
Rocks, and Brown Bluff on the Tabarin Peninsula); 
 
 
• nest censuses of southern giant petrels at three sites potentially sensitive to disturbance 
(Hannah Point, Penguin Island and the Aitcho Islands); 
 
3 
 
• penguin censuses at sites that the Inventory has visited regularly in previous seasons 
(Baily Head , Orne Islands, Georges Point, Waterboat Point, Petermann  Island, Yankee 
Harbor on Greenwich Island, Hannah Point, Port Lockroy) laying groundwork for the 
correlation studies noted above, which hopefully will enable accurate breeding 
chronologies to be established at each site and allow further analyses of breeding 
success, annual survival, and recruitment; and 
 
• survey information and photodocumentation for updating and revising orientation maps 
at five sites (Penguin Island, Hannah Point, Petermann Island, Heroína Island, Gourdin 
Island). 
 
 
Plans for the 1999-2000 field season. The Inventory’s sixth field season will commence in 
November 1999. The project intends to place one and two-person research teams aboard 
various cooperating expedition ships at appropriate times to collect data on the physical and 
biological parameters selected for monitoring. 
 
The focus will be on : (a) monitoring these variables at heavily visited sites that may be 
particularly sensitive to disturbance and (b) continuing work on correlation studies to 
establish how close Inventory censuses occur to the respective peaks of egg-laying and 
chick-creching. It is hoped that cooperative efforts with HMS Endurance will continue. 
 
Three papers are presently being prepared: 
 
• Distribution of expedition cruise ship visitors in the Antarctic Site Inventory study area, 
1989-1999. This report will update Compendium analyses on the most heavily visited 
sites on a yearly and cumulative basis, how visits are/have been distributed , and will 
note the substantial increase in site visits since the advent  of shorter 3-day Peninsula 
trips in the 1994-95 austral summer season. 
 
• Antarctic Site Inventory Results, 1994-1999. This report will update Compendium 
baseline site descriptions, censuses, maps, and analyses compiled during the initial five 
seasons of field work. During the 1997-98 and 1998-99 field seasons. There was a 
particular focus on heavily visited sites considered prone to potential environmental 
disruption. This report will contain current census information, revised orientation 
maps, and recently obtained aerial photographs. 
 
• First-ever censuses accomplished at Heroína Island and Gourdin Island. The data from 
these sites and significantly to our knowledge of Peninsula penguins (and have never 
been published or made previously available) Heroína has close to 300,000 Adélie 
nests. This increases the number of Adélie nests counted in the northwestern Wedell 
Sea by an order of magnitude. Heroína also has 200+ gentoo nests, the eastern-most 
breeding gentoos in the Peninsula. Other than three sites designated as SSSIs or SPAs 
(to become ASPAs under the Protocol), Goudin is the only known site where all three 
Pygoscelid penguin species breed. 
4 
5 
ountain Trave
ratefu
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The 1998-99 field season was supported by: the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 
The British Royal Navy’s UK ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance; the German 
Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency) on behalf of the German Federal 
Environmental Ministry; the International Association of Antarctica Tours Operators 
(IAATO); Quark Expeditions and the expedition staff, officers, and crew of MV Akademik 
Sergei Vavilov, Abercombie and Kent , Inc. And the expedition staff, officers, and crew of 
MV Explorer; Ocean Cruise Lines, Inc. And the expedition staff, officers, and crew of MV 
Marco Polo, M
l, Inc; Intrav, Inc; and private contributors. 
 
 
Oceanities, Inc, is g
l for this support , and welcomes additional sponsors and 
collaborators. 
 
 
 
