
XXIII ATCM/IP-117
May 1999
Original: English
CEP Agenda Item 5d)







Revision of Management Plans
for Antarctic Protected Areas
originally proposed by the United Kingdom
















Submitted by
United Kingdom
Revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Protected Areas
originally proposed by the United Kingdom

1.0  Introduction
Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, on Area Protection and Management and adopted under ATCM Recommendation XVI-10, has not yet entered into force and is being observed voluntarily by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.  Some have begun revision of management plans for existing Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) to meet the requirements of Annex V.  Resolution 1 (1998) agreed that responsibility for revision of plans would rest with those countries that were originally responsible for proposing these sites. The United Kingdom was responsible for proposing 8 SPAs and 5 SSSIs, of which Byers Peninsula (SSSI No. 6) was proposed jointly with Chile.  Three of these sites (Moe Island, Southern Powell Island and Rothera Point) already have new management plans agreed by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in Annex V format.

2.0 Overview of management plan revision project
Dr C. Harris, an expert in the preparation of management plans for protected areas, was contracted in 1998 to assist in the preparation of revised plans for the remaining sites for which the UK has responsibility.  The project is being carried out in close collaboration with the British Antarctic Survey, and other interested parties are being consulted. The work has focused initially on 8 sites, with work at a ninth – SSSI No. 6 at Byers Peninsula – being undertaken in collaboration with Chile (see Appendix 1).
A second, lower-order, objective of the project is to develop ways to improve the accessibility of information on protected areas, in particular to meet operational needs of the British Antarctic Survey and the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office,  especially in relation to permitting and Environmental Impact Assessment.  This is being approached through development of a pilot site information archive, which will be computer-based and hold summary descriptions of sites, the management plan, maps, a bibliography, historical permit data and references to visit reports, descriptions of any significant changes observed at the site, descriptions of scientific data available, and a photographic record. This will begin with development of a simple information database for SSSI No. 9 Rothera Point, which will be accessible over the World Wide Web.

3.0  Management plan revision procedure
The management plans being developed, as well as complying with the requirements of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and will also take account of:
    • Resolution 9 (1995) adopting a standard structure for the preparation of management plans;
    • Resolution 2 (1998) on the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans - Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (XXII ATCM / WP5, May 1998); and
    • consistency with other plans adopted in Annex V format by past ATCMs, as far as desirable and practicable.

Drafts of each of the revised plans will be subjected to thorough review by scientists familiar with the sites (frequently including those who were responsible for their original proposal), by Antarctic programme management and operations staff, by appropriate government agencies, by SCAR and the CEP before being submitted to the ATCM for consideration for approval. A programme of field visits is proposed for the 1999/2000 season to verify information and address gaps in data, or site issues that can only be resolved through field work.
Initial draft plans have been prepared for two sites (SPA No. 14 – Lynch Island, and SPA No. 19 – Lagotellerie Island), with work starting on a third (SSSI No. 6 – Byers Peninsula). Priorities for the pilot Information Archive have been assessed and the structure of the WWW-based system is now being developed.  Particular attention is being paid to how best to integrate with, and build on, existing systems which hold information on protected areas, such as libraries, document and photographic archives, scientific databases, environmental records, and metadata directories.
It is hoped the first of the plans under revision will be submitted at ATCM XXIV for consideration and approval.
Appendix 1:  List of Management Plans presently under revision by the United Kingdom

Specially Protected Areas
SPA No.
Brief description and reason for designation

Dion Islands 
Adopted at the ATCM IV (Santiago, 1966)

8

A group of small islands in Marguerite Bay of 6 km2, 13 km south of Adelaide Island. Designation on the grounds that:
    • it is the only colony of emperor penguins known to exist on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula; it is the most northerly and smallest emperor penguin colony; one of only two sites where breeding occurs on land.

Green Island 
Adopted at the ATCM IV (Santiago, 1966).

9

A small island of 0.1 km2 situated 150 m north of the largest of the Berthelot Islands, located off the west coast of Graham Land.   Designation on the grounds that:
    • the vegetation is exceptionally rich, with well-developed moss banks;  large blue-eyed shag colony, brown skuas, south polar skuas and skua hybrids are also found.

Lynch Island 
Adopted at the ATCM IV (Santiago, 1966)

14

A small island of 0.1 km2 in Marshall Bay, off the south coast of Coronation Island.  Designation on the grounds that:
    • the island supports extensive and dense stands of Antarctic hair grass; Several species of moss are unusually fertile; the soil contains a rich invertebrate fauna; an outstanding example of a rare natural ecological system.

North Coronation 
Adopted at the ATCM XIII (Brussels, 1985)

18

The 88.5 km2 area lies on the north side of Coronation Island. Designation on the grounds that:
    • coastal ice-free terrain with large seabird colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs and permanent ice, providing an untouched area representative of ecosystems typical of the maritime Antarctic.

Lagotellerie Island 
Adopted at the ATCM XIII (Brussels, 1985).

19

The island of 1.2 km2 lies 3 km off SW Horseshoe Island.   Designation on the grounds that:
    • the island contains a diverse flora and fauna typical of the southern Antarctic Peninsula; Antarctic hair grass and Antarctic pearlwort are abundant only 90 km north of their southern limit and mosses and lichens form well-developed communities; the invertebrate fauna is rich and the island is one of the southernmost sites for the midge Belgica antarctica.

Avian Island
Adopted at the ATCM XVI (Bonn, 1991).

21

The small island 0.8 km2 lies 0.25 km south of the SW tip of Adelaide Island. Designation on the grounds that:
    • it is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula region for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds, including Adélie penguins, blue-eyed shags, southern giant petrels, Dominican gulls, skuas, and Wilson's storm petrels;

Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest
SSSI No.
Brief description and reason for designation

Byers Peninsula
Jointly proposed by Chile and the UK. 
Adopted at the ATCM VIII 
(Oslo, 1975)
Expiry: 31 December 2001.

6

Byers Peninsula is an extensive, largely ice-free area of 65.7 km2 at the western end of Livingston Island. Designation on the grounds that:
    • Important for Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks with fossils vulnerable to removal; lakes contain aquatic mosses and serve as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steinenii, the only native winged insect in the Antarctic; the peninsula is also of exceptional historical interest.

Ablation Point 
Adopted at the ATCM XV (Paris, 1989)
Expiry: 31 December 2000.

29

The 186 km2 site on Alexander Island extends to the George VI Sound coastline. Designation on the grounds that:
    • one of the largest ablation areas in West Antarctica; a wide range of geomorphological features; several freshwater lakes and ponds support a diverse fauna.

Mount Flora 
Adopted at ATCM XV 
(Paris, 1989)
Expiry: 31 December 2000

31

Mount Flora is 1 km south of Hope Bay. The 0.6 km2 site comprises the upper slopes of Mount Flora above 250 m altitude. Designation on the grounds of:
    • Rich fossil flora combined with easy accessibility has made it vulnerable to collectors, and for this reason it merits protection.

