Antarctic Treaty                XXIII ATCM/ IP118
XXIII Consultative Meeting      May 1999
                                English
Traité sur l'Antarctique        Original: Spanish
XXIII Réunión consultative

Tratado Antártico               Agenda Item 1
XXIII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

 
                                 
                     Opening Statement by
                     the Head of the Spanish Delegation


Submitted by
Spain
OPENING STATEMENT
BY THE HEAD OF THE SPANISH DELEGATION


Allow me to begin, Mr. Chairman, by congratulating you on having been elected
to oversee the work of this XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, which marks as
well the fortieth anniversary of the Treaty.

I would also like to thank the Government of Peru for its warm hospitality and
excellent organization of our meeting in this friendly and historic city of Lima.

Spain is honored to be part of the Antarctic Treaty System and reiterates its
commitment to the purposes of the Treaty. We attach priority to observance of the
Madrid Protocol, to the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection, and to
ensuring, in concert with the other countries, effective protection of the Antarctic
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. Accordingly, our country
pledges to fulfill its responsibilities in connection with the Antarctic Treaty System and
all other international legal instruments that Spain has signed in this regard.

Since last year's meeting in Tromsø, Spain has made significant progress in
implementing the ATCM Recommendations that were still pending. Steps have also
been taken to adjust the administrative structure and internal standards in accordance
with the requirements of the Madrid Protocol. In this connection, procedures have been
updated for environmental impact assessments and the issuance of permits to gain access
to and conduct activities in Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, and a national Antarctic
information center has been set up which will foster the exchange of information.

Spain continues to lend support for scientific research in Antarctica as part of its
National Research and Development Plan.

The country's scientific projects are becoming increasingly integrated at the
international level, as are linkages with programs promoted by the Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR).

Spain continues to show a solid interest in promoting initiatives that involve
exchanges with other Parties, with a view to broader cooperation in the field of science
as well as in operations and logistical activities.

We are certain that, under your guidance, headway will be made at this XXIII
Consultative Meeting in some key issues of the Antarctic Treaty System, such as the
preparation of standards and procedures on liability for damage caused by activities that
are carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area and are covered by the Madrid Protocol.

We are also hopeful that the XXIII Consultative Meeting will yield the consensus
required for the establishment of a permanent secretariat for the Treaty. This would
represent a significant contribution towards achieving more effective operation of the
System. In this connection, we reiterate our hope that consensus will be reached on
selecting Buenos Aires as the site of the secretariat.
2

Mr. Chairman, I wish you much success in the work of the XXIII Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting, building on the excellent organizational support provided 
by Peru. I assure you that the Spanish Delegation will contribute in a constructive way to 
ensure that substantial progress is made with the issues placed before this meeting.
