 
Opening Address by Ambassador  
Dr. Jochen Trebesch 
Head of the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany 
 
Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the German delegation let me first of all congratulate you on 
your election to the chair of the XXIIIrd. Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty 
Parties. We are confident that our meeting will be in able hands under your chairmanship 
and are looking forward to working together with you. On behalf of my Delegation I would 
also like to express our deep appreciation to the Government of Peru as well as to the city 
of Lima for hosting this Consultative Meeting, for the hospitality already shown to us and 
for the excellent preparation of this conference.  
 
During this year – on December 1st – we will commemorate the 40th anniversary of the 
signature of the Antarctic Treaty. The provision of its Article 1, that Antarctica shall be 
used for peaceful purposes only, as well as the principles of the freedom of scientific 
activities and the promotion of international cooperation continue to be of greatest 
relevance and are pointing the way ahead. On the occasion of the Informal Ministerial 
Meeting which took place in Antarctica from 24 to 28 January 1999 on the initiative and 
invitation of New Zealand the aforementioned principles as well as the aim of protecting 
the Antarctic environment were again confirmed and underlined.  
 
This XXIIIrd. Consultative Meeting will be the last during this decade and indeed during 
this millennium. This again gives cause for a stock taking and – where necessary – for 
reorientation of our efforts to intensify our cooperation in Antarctica in the interest of all 
nations.  
 
During the last decade we may not have reached all the objectives of our yearly 
consultations which we at hoped for. Nonetheless the balance-sheet of the results of this 
decade is impressive. First of all in this context one has to mention the entering into force 
of the Protocol of Environmental Protection by which the basis of our cooperation has been 
completed and reinforced by a second pillar. Thus our cooperation because of a growing 
intensity of consultations and by means of measures, resolutions and decisions has not only 
made great quantitative but also substantial and important qualitative progress.  
 
One of the important tasks lying ahead of us will be to fill out the frame of the Protocol of 
Environmental Protection and to take the first practical experiences with the Protocol into 
consideration e.g. in the context of embedding the Committee for Environmental 
Protection into the institutional framework of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
1 
 
During the Antarctic summer 1998/99 Germany was confronted with an emergency 
situation which was remedied in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol: The 
"Filchner" summer station floating on an ice-island since October 1998 has been 
dismantled. All wastes, fuel drums and other potentially harmful materials have been 
removed from the Treaty area.  
 
Furthermore I would like to mention that Germany this year in accordance with Article VII 
of the Antarctic Treaty designated an observer who participated in a Joint Inspection with 
the United Kingdom. Between the 12-27 January the Inspection Team carried out 21 
Inspections. These consisted of Inspections of eleven permanent stations, four summer 
stations, two tourist vessels and two Historic Sites and Monuments.  
 
During this XXIIIrd. Consultative Meeting we will have to deal with many important 
points of a comprehensive agenda. One of the points, where Germany is hoping for 
substantial progress, is a draft liability Annex. After the long preparatory work in the 
Group of Legal Experts chaired by Germany the legal key issues have been identified in 
the report of the group adopted in November 1997 in Cape Town and in the Final Report of 
the XXIInd Consultative Meeting. In our view Decision 3 adopted in Tromsö has a special 
importance insofar as it foresees an in depth discussion of risk assessment concentrating on 
facts, data and evaluation with regard to circumstances leading to and types of 
environmental damage, the financial magnitude of potential damages and the probable 
costs of response action in remedial measures under the circumstances of Antarctica. 
 
A thorough analysis of pertinent facts, especially with regard to the question of insurance 
insurability, is not only of eminent importance but indispensable. The practical experiences 
and necessities in Antarctica must be the basis of our discussions on the Liability Annex. 
This aim should not be lost out of sight in Working Group 1. In his opening address for last 
years Consultative Meeting the Head of Delegation of Uruguay has moulded the 
remarkable principle, that "Antarctica is an area where reality takes precedence over 
theory". It is indeed essential to achieve consensus on a Liability Annex which will take 
such reality into consideration. 
 
In addition to the liability issue due consideration should be given to the discussion of 
organisational and support questions. One of these questions and indeed the most important 
one is the establishment of a secretariat to assist the work of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
The German position with regard to this question is well known. 
 
 
2 
3 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
The Agenda before us offers the opportunity to put a dynamic and future oriented Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative mechanism to work. We are convinced, that under your able 
chairmanship this XXIIIrd. Consultative Meeting will further advance our common efforts 
aimed at the improvement of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
 
 
