GOOD PRACTICE IN IMPLEMENTING LEGlSLATION 
 
lntroduction 
 
ASOC believes that one of the most important mechanisms to ensure that the objectives of the Protocol are met is 
through the promulgation of enabling legislalion establishing domestic procedures for its implementation. Domestic 
legislation should ensure not only that the provisions of the Protocol are followed but also their integration with 
existing legislation. The need for complementary legislation - laws, decrees, regulations, etc. - is recognised in Art. 
13 (1) of the Protocol, while Art. 17 (2) calls for this legislation to be made public. While the Protocol sets 
minimum standards of environmental protection, implementing legislation gives states the means of establishing 
higher operational standards. 
 
A review of some European legislation implementing the Protocol reveals examples of good practice. By good 
practice ASOC refers to legislation faithful to lhe spirit, objectives and principles of the Protocol, or that espouses 
even higher environmental standards; that can be implemented in a practical manner; and that allows for further 
improvement of implementation procedures. The result of good practice in Antarctic Trealy Parlies (ATCPs) 
implemenling legislalion should be evidence of increased protection of the Antarctic environment. This mighl be 
indicated by effective EIA process; adequate waste managemenl at each Antarctic site; contingency plalls for each 
vessel operating in Antarctica; routine implementation of protected areas management plans and procedures for lhe 
proteclion of flora and fauna, etc. 
 
This brief description is only intended to be illustrative. ASoC hopes that this overview is sufficient to encourage 
those drafting implementing legislation (including contracting Parties such as Canada which have yet to ratify the 
Protocol) to ensure that the highest level of environmental protection is afforded to Antarctica and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems. 
 
General provisions 
 
The domestic standards of environmental protection are established in several ways, and extend and/or reinforce 
those of the Protocol. In Netherlands' Protectioll of A/ltco ctica Act ( 199~) there is a statement that activities should 
not be carried out in a manner that is in conflict with the principles laid down in Art.3 of the Protocol. This 
establishes a broad guide to standards for any activity in Anlarctica including silualions lhat are not explicitly 
addressed in the Protocol or Annexes. Norway s legislation (a Royal Decree, Reglllatiolls Relating to Protec~ioll of 
tJ~e Ellvirc~lll)lellt i Alllu/-ctic~l - 1995), rather thall attempling to avoid "...significant adverse effects" etc. as in 
Art. 3.2.a and b. of the Protocol, aims to avoid "...all effects on t/le elll~irolll)lellt~' (our emphasis), effectively 
establishing higher standards. 
 
Some states (e.g. Sweden, Netherlands) have legislation which emphasises the protection of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems as a responsibility for anyone who visits or is engaged in 
activities in Antarctica. This highlights the role of individual responsibility in environmental protection, 
complementary to the role of institutions in protection of the Antarc~ic environment. 
 
This docum~nl is hascd on ~he te~ (lranslalions in mos~ cascs) of various implemenling Icgislation. Asoc ~vould 
~el~o~ comll1~nls on lh~ inlerprelalion or implemcntin.~ Ie~islation presented in tllis documcllt. 
Prohibitory provisions 
 
Some European states (e.g. Finland, Netherlands) specifically prohibit particular harmful activities, including 
nuclear dumping or testing, discharge of noxious substances in the ocean, open burning, introduction of particular 
substances, destruction or removal of historic monuments, tal;ing or harmfully interfering with fauna and llora, etc., 
thus reinforcing the prohibitory provisions in the Protocol. often, permits are required for all other activities. 
Importantly, several states include an indefinite prohibition on exploration or e~;ploitation of mineral resources 
(e.g. Germany, Netherlands). With some exceptions related to scientific research and the construclion or 
maintenance of slructures, the United Kingdom's Alltarctica Act explicitly bans "doing anything" for the purpose of 
identifying specific mineral resources. 
 
Further, some states impose fines or jail terms for environmental damage caused with intent or negligence 
(Germany, Norway, Sweden) and even may mal;e attempts at violating the legislation an orfence (Germany). 
 
Environment~l Imp;~ct Assessment 
 
Various states require that EIA documents be submitted with permit applications (e.g. Finland, Germany, Russia~, 
Sweden) and may require IEE as the minimum level of EIA for all activities (Norway). 
 
EIA standards are established in various ways, usually with a listing of the issues that the EIA must address, 
reinforcing or supplementing Protocol requirements. For instance, the proponent may need to identify potential 
cumulative effects (Germany), assess the existing environmental state and identify gaps in knowledge (Germany, 
Finland); include the data and methodology used to write the EIA document and address contingency planning 
(Finland). 
 
Regulations concerning EIA may include time limits to ensure proper process of review by implementing authority 
or (for CEEs) by the ATCM. Thus, for Norway, the implementing authority should be notified of a proposed 
activity with an EIA no less than one year in advance. Decisions on CEEs cannot be made until the ATCM has had 
opportunity to review them (Germany, Finland.t) effectively setting lead times for activities that might require 
CEEs. 
 
An important feature of some legislation is the requirement for transparency of the EIA process. Germany's 
implementing authority has to submit the EIA for comments to other relevant authorities, and publish a description 
of the proposal (and lil;ely impacts) in the Federal Gazette. In addition, all CEEs (German or otherwise) are open 
for public review for no less than three weeks. Finland's Minister of the Environment must display ElAs publicly. 
 
2 The Russi.ln Federalion ha~i issued a (temporar)) decree lo reinlorce lhe ralilicalion or lhe Prolocol. 
 
~' Unless no ATCM lal;CS pi;lCe wilhin rilleen monlhs of lhe reporl. 
Permits 
 
Along with ElAs, permitting systems for proposed Antarctic activities are core mechanisms established by the 
Protocol to address environmental damage. As noted above, domestic legislation in several countries establishes a 
permitting system tied to EIA (e.g. Germany, Russia, Sweden). Under German law (the La~v ~ pl~ g ~ Prc)toc~l 
oll Em~ ollnl~ ul I~I'o~'Ctioll lo 1~ Alllurclic Treatv - 19~)4) most activities require a permit, and the authorities must 
still be informed by the organiser of the few activities thal are exempted (such as crossing Antarctic waters without 
lallding). British law prohibits British-registered vessels and aircraft from entering Antarctica without a permit (or 
written authorisation from another Party~), and prohibits any person on a British e~pedition or at a station from 
entering or remaining in Antarctica without a permit (or authoriscltioll from another ATCP). 
 
Permits are usually specific and in cases can limit the duration of the activity (e.g. Sweden. Netherlands) or have 
other conditions or obligations attached (e.g. Germany). Further, permits can be revol;ed if the activity causes 
unforeseen damage (Sweden), if the activity has or threatens to h.lve impermissible adverse effects on the Antarctic 
environment (Netherlands), or if assessment of the activity proves erroneous (Finland). In Netherlands' legislation 
ally person may request the permit is withdrawn in the cases described above. 
 
In other cases, the implementing authority can order an activity to be changed, postponed or can completely 
prohibit it, if it is, will or may result in impacls on Antarctic and dependent alld associated ecosystems that are 
contrary to the plll.pos.~ of the implementing legis.lation. This applies both at the proposal stage and ~ ll if 1~ 
activil.~. is UIICI~l'WCly (Norway, Finland). 
 
The power of implementillg authorities is usually quite broad but not above the precautionary spirit of law. German 
legislation states that the authority responsible for issuing permits is unable to issue pemlits for activities that will 
have detrimental effects on the environment or dependent and associaIed ecosystems or to issue permits if the 
activity will violate general guidelines of the law. Finland's implementing legislation (Acl on Ille Elll~irollltl~lllal 
l'l ol~clioll of Alllarclica - 199~ and Ac.t o/l tll~ A~ cln~ t of tlte P~ltal Codc~ - 1998) copies the text of Art. 3 
(2)(b)(i-vi) of the Protocol in order to clarify the activities for which it will not issue permits. It denies permits for 
activities causing col~tparable effects on the environment to those described in Art. 3. 
 
The complex relation between activities and impacts is recognised in Netherlands law, by which the authority 
deciding on permit applications should consider cumulative effects resulting from the proposed activity in 
combination with other activities, as well as the effect of an activity on other activities. Doubts that serious adverse 
effects on the Antarctic environment can be prevented may be grounds to refuse a permit. 
 
Tied to the assessments that may require modifying, suspending or cancelling an activity, unconditional permits 
may not be issued. Authorities may have discretionary power to grant the permit as requested, to grant it subject to 
specific conditions (e.g. to take precautionary measures), or to deny it. This is the case in German law for activities 
having minor or transitory impacts and autllorities are required by the law to explain why they reached a given 
decision. 
 
q As in Ihc Pro~ocol Ihis prevision does nol appl)~ for a vessel enlerill~, An~arcliea lor the solc purpose ol. Iishing lor pr(~ . or klr a vc~;el 
or aircrall Iravcllin~.~, lo an immediale deslinalion oulside Anlarclica. 
 
3 
Protection of flora and t:auna 
 
The protection of Antarctic flora and fauna requires the control of alien soil, plant and animal material coming into 
Antarctica, and the tal;ing of flora and fauna in or from Antarctica. Germany's law has a provision additional to the 
Protocol requiring a higher authority thall the implementing body (a Cabinet Minister) to monitor the shipment of 
prohibited soil, plants and animals to Antarctica, and authorising the Minister to stop such shipments. German law 
also prohibits the entry of dogs into the Antarctic Treaty Area. In Norwegian law, the implementing authority 
can/~ot issue a permit to introduce a dog into Antarctica. Apart from control mechanisms, Netherlands law requires 
the use of precautionary measures to prevent the introduction of alien flora and fauna, in addition to those laid down 
in appendix C, Annex 11. 
 
In terms of the removal of flora and fauna from Antarctica, Netherlands legislation explicitly states that the removal 
of living resources should be prevented as far as possible. This approach does not prohibit the ta~;ing of flora and 
fauna for scientific purposes but calls for restraint. 
 
Waste management 
 
A recognition that the removal of all waste is necessary to preserve Antarctica as the largest pristine wilderness is 
explicitly stated in Norwegian law, which prohibits leaving waste in Antarctica includillg sewage' and allows the 
implementing authority to set a time limit for the operators to clean up. German law expresses its intent to eliminate 
waste production and disposal in Antarctica (albeit "as far as practicable"), and bans the disposal of waste generated 
outside the Antarctic (e.g. this could apply to waste generated on board ships). In line with Protocol requirements, 
German law requires a waste logbook, regular inspections of waste reduction measures, and accounting of waste 
generated would contribute to this end. German law also has a provision to clean up existing waste disposal sites 
and abandoned worl; sites, effectively establishing higher standards than those of the Protocol. 
 
Addressing the upper end of the waste stream (and in implicit recognition of the need to avoid "end of pipe" 
solutions), Netherlands law aims to prevent or limit the generation of waste and the reusing of materials. 
 
In terms of the destination of waste, various domestic laws establish that waste must be disposed of in the country 
of origin (Germany, Netherlands) or as far as possible from Antarctica where arrangements have been made for 
proper disposal (Netherlands). These provisions ensure the removal of waste from Antarctica and the more general 
responsibility of Antarctic operators for proper waste disposal. 
 
Prevention of marine pollution 
 
Most domestic legislation in this review reinforces the provisions of the Protocol regarding preventioll of marine 
pollution by merely restating them. The locations of introductions and 
 
-
 
 
5 Re rellahly. inciner;llion is allowed. However. German legislation e~;plicilly bans open humin~. 
 
4 
disch.lrges of waste and sewage are to be logged under German law, even when such discharges are a consequence 
of emergencies. In addition, the implementing authority has to seel; expert maritime advice before issuing permits 
for the use of a ship in Antarctica (Germany), in order to assess the safety of the operation. Under Finnish law, the 
discharge of noxious liquids is prohibited both in quantitative and qualitative terms, when this is harmful to the 
marine environment. 
 
Protected areas 
 
Ttle law expects visitors to Antarctica to be aware of designated Protected Areas and follow the rules (l~orway). 
Under German law, the implementing authority can authorise permits under Annex V only if the activity meets the 
requirements of an official Management Plan, and if this does not exist only if the activity has a compelling 
scientific purpose that cannot be served elsewllere. on what is a practical approclch to ensure compliance with the 
law, permit holders inside an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) must l;eep the permit on his/her person at 
all times (e.g. Norway Germany). 
 
Emergency response action 
 
While implelllenting legislation may not apply in case of emergency, Netherlands law requires that reporIs of 
emergencies should include details of the nature and gravity of effects on the cnvirollment and measures that could 
be tal;en to prevent recurrence of the incident. 
 
Monitoring and review 
 
German implementing legislatioll requires the implementing agency to monitor CC~ p/i~ CC IVit/l ~ v and the permits 
issued at regular intervals, as well as the impacts of permitted activities on the Antarctic environmellt, and consider 
the extent to which these impacts are consistent with the Protocol. 
 
Concluding rem;ilrks 
 
The examples presented above illustrate how the principles of the Protocol are reinforced. complemented or 
supplemented under various implementing laws. Many of these exampies are a clear recognition of Antarctica as a 
continent that deserves special status. Importantly, the Iegislatioll clarifies the process of implementing the Protocol 
by establishing clear guidelines. 
 
ASoC hopes that, as with the Protocol itself, what is written into law is effectively carried out in the field. The 
ultimate result of the implementation of the Protocol and enabling legislation sllould be an enhanced protection of 
the Antarctic environment. 
