RUSSIAN ACTIVITY 
IN THE FIELD 
OF RENEWABLE 
ENERGY SOURCES 
UTILIZATION  
IN ANTARCTICA 
The <Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection> (signed in Madrid in 1991) makes 
provision of effective measures for environmental protection at the Antarctic polar stations 
implementation. Among them are measures directed to the reduction of harmful pollution caused by fossil 
fuel utilization. These measures are based predominantly on advanced energy-saving technologies and 
renewable energy sources (RES) using [solar and wind energy, low-potential heat of ocean]. 
Nowadays the first stage (R&D work) of the program aimed at using of effective energy-saving 
technologies at the Russian Antarctic stations is being carried out by the Institute for High Temperatures 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IVTAN) jointly with the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) under 
the auspices of the Ministry of Science and Technologies of Russian Federation and the Russian State 
Committee on Hydrometeorology (Rosgidromet). 
The goals are to conduct theoretical and experimental investigations for reliable power and heating 
installations on the basis of RES creation which will be used under extreme environmental conditions, 
preparing recommendations to the manufacturing firms which will implement ecologically benign 
installations for power and heat production at the Russian Antarctic stations. 
In the frame of the program mathematical models of various type of installation based on RES and design 
methods for solar and wind energy resources evaluation are developed, feasibility study of RES utilization 
for the conditions of various climatic zones of Antarctica is carried out. The experimental investigations 
include design, manufacturing and testing of pilot solar, wind as well as hybrid installations and effective 
energy storage systems for extreme environmental conditions. 
The feasibility study has shown that the use of alternative energy installations on the basis of RES at the 
Russian stations located at some coastal and inland regions of Antarctica is economically proven and lead 
to significant reduction of the harmful pollution level. Among the prospective types of installations with 
RES are hybrid installations consisting of wind turbines, photovoltaic modules and back-up system. 
Calculations has shown that for the conditions of Vostok; station the use of the hybrid power installation 
(the back-up system is diesel generator) could allow to save up to 60% of costly diesel fuel as compared to 
the existing diesel power generators. More than 10% of the fuel economy could be obtained if solar 
heating systems based on relatively simple and cheap solar collectors will be used at the Russian inland 
stations. 
Our evaluations have shown that additional significant amount of the fuel could be saved if thermal 
insulation of the existing buildings will be improved (nowadays for space heating is used approximately 
50% of electricitv produced by diesel generators). 
As a result of the experimental investigations pilot solar and wind installations have been developed and 
tested at Molodyozhnaya and Novolazarevskaya stations. To study the peculiarities of solar heating 
systems (SHS) utilization under conditions of Antarctica a pilot solar facility consisting of flat-plate 
collectors with selective coatings has been designed, developed and tested at Molodyozhnaya. Analysis of 
the obtained experimental data has shown that in summer months relatively cheap SHS can be used in the 
coastal zone of the East Antarctica for low-potential heat production. There have been tested a pilot PV 
facility and wind turbines under climatic conditions of Novolazarevskaya station. Experimental 
current-voltage characteristics of the PV facility with monocrystalline silicon modules, manufactured by 
Russian firms, and their average efficiency for conditions of the inland station located at the East 
Antarctica have been obtained. It is planned to develop a 5 kW PV system and test it under extreme 
conditions of Vostok station. The testing of the wind turbines manufactured by the Russian firms have 
shown that special design of wind turbine for using under extreme environmental conditions is needed. 
 
The problem of RES utilization under extreme environmental conditions of high Antarctic plateau is in the 
focus of above mentioned program. In this connection R&D works aimed at using solar energy for potable 
water production at Vostok station are being carried out. A concept of new type solar thermal installation 
for snow melting is being developed. A pilot solar snow melting facility is based on the use of space 
technologies. The facility consists of specially designed portable lightweight solar energy concentrator 
with film facets (peak power -  l KW) and looped heat pipe (thermal conduction - O,OI K/W, transferable 
power - up to 10 KW) which serves for solar heat transfer into snow bulk. It is proposed to test the facility 
and hlvestigate the characteristics of its main parts under conditions of Vostok station. 
Another very important part of the program is energy audit of the existing stations of RAE and 
development of appropriate energy-saving measures to reduce fuel consumption by the existing buildings. 
This work will be done jointly with the Russian Union of Architects and the firms which deal with 
advanced energy-saving technologies for building and construction industry. The preliminary work 
including feasibility study of the existing and alternative power and heating system of the RAE stations 
and the architectural concept of energy-saving buildings is in progress. 
