 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
According to Art. 16 of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the 
Parties undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from 
activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
 
The attached paper provides a summary of a report which describes and analyses historical and 
current developments in the law of international liability to protect the environment. 
The report was prepared by the Max-Planck-Institute for Comparative Public Law and 
International Law (Heidelberg, Germany) for the German Federal Environment Agency. 
 
 
The summary is submitted for information and as a contribution to the deliberations about an 
annex on annexes on liability. 
1 
ENGLISH SUMMARY 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION THROUGH THE LAW OF 
INTERNATIONAL LIABILITY 
 
A REPORT PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL ENVIRONMENT AGENCY 
 
 
Part 1. Introduction 
 
The report describes and analyzes historical and current developments in the law of international liability 
to protect the environment. The main focus is international treaty law, but rules of customary international 
law as well as developments at the European level are also explored. Finally, the rules of national law 
relevant to environmental liability in both Germany and the United States are discussed, as are 
developments in international private law. 
 
The scope of international environmental treaty law is continuously expanding, accompanied by a 
strengthening of the material legal duties addressed not only to States but also to natural and legal persons. 
At the same time international institutions are coordinating and overseeing more responsibilities. 
However, enforcement mechanisms are not keeping pace with these developments. Non-compliance 
procedures are being developed only very cautiously in isolated areas with related functions for 
international bodies, especially for areas outside of State jurisdiction. one example is environmental 
protection related to seabed mining, where the International Seabed Authority has assumed almost all 
relevant competencies. 
 
Absent such bodies, it is left to the States to enforce international environmental standards. However, the 
range of enforcement mechanisms available to them is limited. The introduction of liability instruments 
may help to close this enforcement gap. Liability provisions are found, for example, in the UN 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, the Protocol for Protection of the Antarctic Environment and the Basel 
Convention on the Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. Less far-reaching 
liability rules are found in the convention for the protection of the marine environment from oil pollution. 
These instruments begin to draw upon liability mechanisms that have existed much longer in national law, 
both in German law and the much more effective rules of US environmental liability laws. 
 
Liability rules serve different functions depending upon the environment they are intended to protect. For 
State-free areas, liability can serve three functions: compensation for damage to person and property, 
compensation for environmental damage and the enforcement of environmental standards.  
2 
 
 
These last two functions are closely related and the more important of the three. For areas subject to 
national sovereignty, liability serves more complex ends. Here, the realization of an international liability 
regime must be more closely integrated with national liability systems. The international rules may serve 
to develop national law further, in effect contributing the pressure on States to enforce international 
liability standards. The rules also serve a preventive function by offering incentives for environmentally 
favorable behavior. 
 
International environmental liability law is in the early stages of development. This report evaluates the 
content and scope of various approaches within the international liability regime. It looks as well at the 
more developed national environmental liability laws, focusing on the US system as a possible model for 
the development of effective international rules. 
 
 
Part 2. International Public Law 
 
2.I. International Treaties and Conventions 
 
The appeals to the international community in the 1972 Stockholm and the 1992 Rio Declarations to 
develop common standards for environmental liability have met with only limited response to date. A 
mere handful of relevant treaties are actually in force, for oil pollution, nuclear damage and space objects: 
the Brussels International Conventions on Civil Liability for oil Pollution Damage (1969) and on the 
Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for oil Pollution Damage (1971); the 196O 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy with the 1963 Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage; and the 1972 Convention on Liability for Damage 
Caused by Space objects. The last is unique in that it establishes State liability while the others construct a 
civil liability system for the party causing harm. All of the treaties share the minimum goal of 
compensating for damages from environmental risks related to a specific activity. As a rule, they require 
an environmental impact causing injury to a. legally protected good from which injury the damages arise. 
Civil liability is generally not only tied to the conduct of an activity that is potentially dangerous for the 
environment but also channeled to the party who engages in it. 
3 
 
 
The polluter pays principle on which the conventions are based has at its core the concept that the party 
who is both the beneficiary of the activity and the source of the damages should be liable. Liability does 
not depend on the legality of the activity or the fault of the actor but simply on the causal relationship 
between the environmental impact, the injury to the legally protected good and the resulting damages. 
Transboundary damage is a condition for the applicability of several civil liability conventions and 
proposed drafts1 whereas other treaties, such as the Council of Europe Convention on Civil Liability for 
Damages arising from Activities Dangerous to the Environment (Council of Europe Convention) or the 
Convention on Liability for Damages caused by the Transport of Hazardous and Noxious Substances at 
Sea (the HNS Convention) also address damage within national boundaries2. 
 
 
State or Private Liability? 
 
It bears repeating that the primary goal of the agreements reviewed is full compensation for damages 
arising from environmental impact and that, generally, liability is an appropriate tool to achieve this goal. 
The ILC Draft on International Liability for Injurious Consequences Arising out of Acts not Prohibited by 
International Law deviates from this model in aiming for State negotiations which need not necessarily 
lead to full compensation. By contrast, the civil liability conventions build on the fact that a legally 
protected object has been injured. They assume that the resulting damages must be made good, even if the 
activity giving rise to the damage is legal. Thus, the ability to impose liability is determined independently 
of the substantive provisions of environmental law. This reflects the character of civil liability generally, 
which only arises when a legally protected good has been injured. Release from liability does not depend 
on the existence of a public license for the activity in question. The risk of the dangerous activity is placed 
squarely on the operator of the dangerous facility. 
 
 
 
 
1  
 E.g. the Convention on Civil Liability for Damage Caused during Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road, 
Rail and Inland Navigation Vessels, 1989 ("CRTD Convention", discussed in Part 2.I.4.4 of the Report); the 
Draft Protocol on Liability and Compensation for Damage Resulting from the Transboundary Movements 
of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (“Draft Basel Protocol”, see Report, Part 2.I.5.1.); the ILC Draft on 
International Liability for Injurious Consequences Arising out of Acts not Prohibited by International Law, 
see Report, Part 2.II. 
 
2  
 For the Council of Europe convention see Part 2.I.4.1. of the Report; the HNS Convention is discussed at 
Part 2.I.2.1.2. See also the 196O Paris and 1963 Vienna nuclear liability conventions (Report, Part 2.I.6.1. 
and 2.I.6.2., respectively) and the 1969 Brussels oil pollution damage convention mentioned in the 
preceding paragraph, discussed at Part 2.I.2.1.1.1. of the Report. 
4 
How or whether States which permit dangerous activities will be made liable is regulated with great 
variety in the conventions examined, from systems of pure civil liability3 to those where the States - rather 
than the individual party - pay certain amounts into funds which are drawn upon to pay liability claims.4 
other systems make States liable only when the private actor has failed to fulfill its duty to provide 
compensation for environmental damage.5 The Brussels supplemental agreement to the Paris convention 
on third party liability for nuclear damage goes even further: up to a certain amount the actor is liable; 
beyond that amount the State on whose territory the nuclear facility is located provides the means to pay 
damages. The 1997 Vienna Convention on Nuclear Liability gives the State where the facility is located 
the option of limiting the operator's liability, provided that the State guarantee the availability of public 
funds to cover liability up to that limit. In a third category, all States party to the convention provide the 
means to pay damages, based on a distribution formula. However, other than the Space objects convention 
mentioned above, none of the systems examined establishes original State liability for the damages. The 
circumstances giving rise to liability are based upon the strict liability of the party engaging in the 
damage-causing activity. Accordingly, the State's duty to stand in the place of the liable party depends on 
whether the conditions for civil liability exists. Also to be distinguished from these systems are those 
which provide for a "true" State liability. Under the latter, the State is liable when it can be proven that it 
failed in its duty to oversee the operator and that this inadequate supervision resulted in damage6.  
 
 
Defining Damage and the Scope of Compensation 
 
Giving shape to the concept of damage raises special difficulties in the context of environmental liability. 
Damage as such is understood to include injury to legally protected objects - such as bodily integrity, 
economic worth, the environment it self - which injury is the result of a harmful environmental impact. 
 
 
3 
The 196O Paris nuclear liability convention, a.a.o., the 1969 Brussels oil pollution damage convention, a.a.O. 
the Convention on Civil Liability for oil Pollution Damage through Research and Exploitation of Marine 
Mineral Resources (Part 2.I.2.2.1.), the CRTD convention (Fn. I) and the Council of Europe convention 
 
(Fn.2). 
4 
The 1971 oil Pollution Damage Fund convention (See Report, Part 2.I.2.1.1.1.), the HNS Convention, a.a.o. 
Before it can be made so liable, a State must have issued a statement to this effect when ratifying the 
convention.  
5 
The 1963 Vienna convention on nuclear liability (Fn.2) and the Convention on Civil Liability for the owners of 
Nuclear Vessels (Report, Part 2.1.6.4.). 
6 
See the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA) and the Eighth 
offering for a liability annex to the Antarctic Treaty Environmental Protocol, Parts 2.1.7.1 and 2.1.7.2., 
respectively, in the Report. 
 
5 
The legal consequence of injuring a legally protected object is the duty to make good the resulting 
damage. The international law of civil liability contains no provisions for the assessment of damage to the 
environment. Only the national laws to be applied by national courts provide guidance, which means no 
practical uniformity exists for this essential aspect of the international environmental liability system. 
 
Assessing bodily damage poses no special problems. In determining economic damage, a distinction must 
be made between damages that result directly from a bodily or property injury - i.e. lost of ability to work 
- and pure economic damages which arise from the injurious incident - i.e. lost profits of a hotelier or 
restaurateur due to a decline in tourism following an oil spill. The International Fund for Compensation of 
oil Pollution Damage (established by the Brussels 1971 Fund convention) covers such damage to a limited 
degree, as do newer treaties and drafts. However, these contain strict causation requirements between the 
economic damage and the environmental incident. 
 
Environmental damage goes beyond injury to life, health or economic interests. All of the treaties 
examined impose liability for environmental damage, although the current nuclear conventions are 
somewhat unclear on this point7. Under German law, property damage can encompass environmental 
damage when private land is contaminated or a forest there is destroyed. Only the Council of Europe 
Convention defines the environment as a legally protected good8. A similar definition is found in the Final 
Report of the UNEP Working Group of Experts on Liability and Compensation for Environmental 
Damage arising from Military Activities9. Drawing in part on Iraq's actions in the Gulf War, IO this report 
makes the distinction - unique in international law - between environmental damage and “the destruction 
of natural resources which occur in their natural States ... and which have a primarily commercial use or 
commercial value ..." Examples of such damages are the depletion of natural oil reserves or destruction of 
fish stocks to the extent they serve primarily economic ends.  
 
 
 
7 
The proposed amendments to the Vienna nuclear convention opened for signature in 1997 change 
this situation considerably with a wide-reaching definition of environmental damage. See Part 
2.I.6.2.2. of the Report. 
8 
Art. 3(1O): "Environment includes natural resources both abiotic and biotic, such as air, water, soil, 
fauna and flora and the interaction between the same factors, property which forms part of the 
cultural heritage and the characteristic aspects of the landscape." 
9 
UNEP/Env. Law/3/lnf.1., 15 October 1996 (,,UNEP Report"), discussed in Part 2.1V. 
IO 
This distinction is based on UN Security Council Resolution 687/1991 making Iraq liable for 
depletion/damage of natural resources. 
6 
The conventions examined do not make this distinction, but this does not mean that environmental 
damage is precluded just because commercial interests are also affected. Such reasoning would allow 
uncontrolled exploitation of natural resources without consequences of liability. 
 
The existing treaties allow compensation of costs for reasonable and proportionate measures necessary to 
restore the damaged environment. That only the Eighth offering for a liability annex to the Antarctic 
Treaty environmental protocol11 defines reasonableness is regrettable, given that the content of the duty to 
restore is so directly affected by the definition of reasonableness. Questions are raised, for example, as to 
whether it is desirable to restore the environment to its exact previous condition, if natural restoration 
should be allowed to take its course, or if artificial measures should be allowed to interfere with the 
natural regeneration. Here the UNEP Working Group proposes that "the basic aim should be to reinstate 
the ecologically significant functions of injured resources and the associated public uses and amenities 
supported by such functions''12. A closely related question, for which the answer remains unclear, is the 
extent to which restoration encompasses the duty to bring components of equal worth to the damaged area 
if the original components are irreparably damaged.13 
 
International practice imposes liability in the amount of costs necessary to remove the environmental 
harm and restore the damage. Several newer proposals call for monetary damages which go beyond 
restoration costs.14 The category of irreparable damage includes permanent damage as well as damage 
arising between the time of the incident and final restoration. The Eighth offering provides that the 
damaging party propose an estimate of the damages to be paid and that the consultative parties decide if 
the proposal is reasonable. 
 
The conventions impose liability on the ship owner, the transporter of a dangerous good or the one 
engaging in a dangerous activity. The treaties' respective definitions of damage and causation then 
determine who is able to bring actions against these liable parties. Who is entitled to carry out restoration 
measures and subsequently to make good for damages claims is generally determined by national law. 
This leaves the question open for areas such as Antarctica or the high seas where no national law applies. 
 
 
11 
Fn. 6, above. 
12 
UNEP Report (Fn. 9), Rdnr. 66 
13 
he Council of Europe Convention (Fn. 2), ECE Guidelines on Responsibility and Liability Regarding 
Transboundary Water Pollution (Report, Part 2.I.3.3.) and the Vienna Convention on Nuclear Liability 1997 
(Fn. 7) lean toward requiring this 
14 
E.g. the Eighth offering (Fn. 6), the Draft Basel Protocol (Fn. 1), CRAMRA (Fn. 6), UNEP Report (Fn. IO). 
7 
 
The Eighth offering foresees liability for restoration costs by third parties and spells out requirements for 
persons undertaking restoration measures. 
 
 
 
Problems of causation 
 
To relieve the difficulties often associated with proving causation when more than one actor is involved in 
environmental damage, the conventions examined provide for joint and several liability of all polluters. It 
is left to the individual polluter to prove the degree of injury that can be traced to him. Only the Council of 
Europe Convention contains a procedural rule to ease the burden of proof. Article 10 of the convention 
requires, imprecisely, that when evaluating the causal link between the incident and the damage, the judge 
"take due account" of the "increased danger of causing such damage inherent in the dangerous activity." 
 
Special problems arise in connection with long-range and cumulative damage such as involved in acid 
rain and similar phenomena. As discussed under German law, below, the sheer number of pollution 
sources spread over a broad geographic area make it next to impossible to determine causation. This raises 
the fundamental question of whether liability is an appropriate mechanism for such environmental harms. 
The conventions examined do not address the question directly. Indeed, the early liability conventions 
were not concerned with long-range and cumulative damage but with responding to individual, 
identifiable incidents such as oil spills and nuclear accidents. 
 
 
 
Mitigating Factors/Statutes of Limitation 
 
All conventions reviewed provide a limited number of exceptions to liability when the injury is caused by 
an act of God, an act of war, acts or omissions of third parties or negligence of the injured party. Some 
conventions exclude liability when a party acts according to law or regulation and/or takes the interests of 
the injured party into consideration.15 Others exclude liability when the owner or transporter could not or 
should not have known of the dangerous character of the goods handled and was not so informed.l6 
Statutes of limitation vary with each convention. 
 
 
 
15 
Council of Europe Convention (Fn. 2), arts. 8(c) and (e); Draft sasel Protocol, a.a.o., art.4(4)(d). 
16  
HNS Convention (Fn.2), art.7; but cf. CRTD Convention, (Fn.1) Art.5(3)(c). 
8 
 
Limitation of Liability, Proof of Financial Responsibility, Funds 
 
Only the Council of Europe Convention, the Draft Protocol for the Basel Convention and the Draft 
Mining Code for the Law of Sea Convention envision unlimited liability. Other treaties limit liability 
usually based on the size of the vessel or facility in question. All of the treaties examined require the 
private operator of a dangerous facility or vessel to maintain evidence of its ability to pay for any potential 
liability under the treaty in question. 
 
The only currently operating international indemnification fund is the International Fund for 
Compensation of oil Pollution Damage, established in the Brussels 1971 Fund convention. Payments into 
the fund complement the liability of the ship owner under the Brussels 1969 Convention on Civil Liability 
for oil Pollution Damage and are limited according to the size of the vessel. The Fund becomes liable only 
when the protection afforded under the 1969 civil liability convention is insufficient to cover all damages, 
for example when a ship owner cannot be made liable because a natural disaster or the act of a third party 
caused the environmental impact.l7 
 
 
Access to Information/ Environmental Groups 
 
Access to information and the right of environmental interest groups to bring claims are not specifically 
regulated by any of the international liability treaties except the Council of Europe Convention and, in a 
very limited fashion, in the ILC draft. The Council of Europe Convention incorporates almost entirely EC 
Directive 9O/313/EWG on Free Access to Environmental Informationl8 according to which every person 
has the right to free access to environmental information without having to show a special interest. The 
Council of Europe Convention creates a special right of initiative for environmental groups to seek the 
prohibition of activities that are illegal and highly dangerous to the environment. 
 
 
Jurisdiction/ Enforcement 
With few exceptionst19, the liability conventions grant jurisdiction to the national courts. The oil Pollution 
and HNS conventions grant exclusive jurisdiction for 
 
17 The HNS Convention, a.a.o., which is not yet in force, provides specifically for a Fund, whereas CRAMRA (Fn. 
6) and the Draft Basel Protocol (Fn. 1) merely require the parries to enter agreements with the eventual goal-of 
establishing a fund. 
18 OJ EC 1990/L/158, S.56. 
19 The Convention on Liability for activities in outer Space (Report, Part 2.1.8.1.) provides for diplomatic channels; 
the LOS Draft Mining Code (Part 2.I.2.4.) gives jurisdiction to the International Seabed Authority established 
by the LOS or an international tribunal established for that purpose; and the Antarctic Eighth offering (Fn. 6) 
provides that conflicts are to be brought before an international tribunal unless no agreement can be reached on 
judges, in which case the national court where the polluter has his usual seat of business is given jurisdiction. 
9 
claims against the party causing damage to the national courts in whose territory or territorial waters the 
damage occurs. By contrast, the nuclear liability conventions grant such jurisdiction to the national courts 
where the emitting facility is located or where the nuclear accident takes place. The Council of Europe 
and CRTD conventions as well as the Draft Protocol for the Basel hazardous waste convention allow a 
choice of venue between the States where the damage occurs, where the incident originates or where the 
damaging party resides. All conventions that establish jurisdiction for national courts require them to 
guarantee certain legal protections such as the same access to the courts for citizens of other States party 
to the treaty as is afforded its own citizens. Many of the conventions provide for mutual recognition and 
enforcement of judgements? Unless the decision is the result of fraud or a faulty judicial process. Some of 
the conventions preclude the recognition or enforcement of a foreign court's decision when it would con-
flict with an existing domestic decision or rule of law. 
 
 
Part 2.II. State Responsibility and Environmental Liability under 
Customary International Public Law 
 
The general rules of customary public international law apply only to relations between subjects of 
international law and then only when the affected States have no treaty between them to address the 
problem at hand. The possibility of competing environmental claims under civil liability treaties and 
under the customary law of liability is especially problematic. For example, when an injured State seeks 
reimbursement under a treaty for costs of restoring the injured environment in a civil process against the 
polluter, it is debatable whether the injured State can rely on general rules of State responsibility. These 
first require the defendant State to have violated a duty under international public law. Competing claims 
under international public law and civil law could also arise if an injured private party sought damages in 
civil law (either against a private or State polluter) and the State sought damages for his injuries under 
international public law. Arguably, satisfaction of the private claim in such a case extinguishes any claims 
the State had, since the State was affected only to the extent the private party suffered. 
 
The customary rule of State responsibility differs from some civil liability treaties in that it requires 
transboundary environmental impact.  
 
 
10 
No one treaty governs all forms of such impact and no general definition of it exists; rather separate 
conventions govern individual problems such as marine or air pollution. Even more problematic is the 
treatment of environmental impact in Stateless areas such as the High Seas or Antarctica, where the 
imposition of international responsibility cannot be based upon territorial integrity. For the international 
community to be entitled to make good on claims for environmental impact in such areas, a violation of an 
erga omnes norm would have to occur or a universally accepted treaty would have to govern the injury, 
just as the Law of the Sea Convention envisions for the High Seas. 
 
States' treaty practice and other behavior reflect their considerable hesitancy to accept a rule in public 
international law of responsibility for transboundary environmental impact. This reluctance does not, 
however, allow the blanket conclusion that such responsibility has not been recognized. Since the 1927 
Chorzow factory decision2O it is not disputed that a State which violates a rule of public international law 
and thereby causes injury to another State is obligated to repair the damaged property to its earlier 
condition or to pay damages. This rule is strengthened in light of the numerous treaties since then which 
address transboundary environmental impact, by the customary principle that a State is obligated to 
prevent significant transboundary environmental impact, and by the growing State practice o£ objecting to 
such impacts. In spite of resistance in individual cases, the international community can be said to 
acknowledge that a violation of an obligation of international environmental law based on treaty or 
customary law constitutes an act that is contrary to public international law giving rise to State 
responsibility. The environmental impact must arise from violation of a duty; the simple fact that such 
impact has occurred is insufficient to give rise to responsibility, even in the case of ultra-hazardous 
activities. This assumption forms the basis for the work of the ILC regarding liability for damages arising 
from activities, which do not violate international law. However, the existence of strict liability in 
customary public international law for environmental damage cannot be supported given the lack of 
uniformity in treaty practice. 
 
A due diligence standard is applied to determine if a duty has been violated. States are not liable for every 
activity within their jurisdiction, but the actions of private parties play a special role in international 
environmental law. The fact that transboundary environmental impact is often caused by private actors is 
evidenced by the general approach of civil liability conventions to include private owners and operators in 
the duties spelled out by the agreements.  
 
 
 
20 PCIJ Ser.A.,Nr.7,1927,S.3O. 
11 
Thus, a State fulfills its duty if it acts with due diligence, e.g. in relationship to private parties. States are 
also obligated to avoid activities that threaten to impact the environment in other States, such as the 
discharge of hazardous substances into rivers or the atmosphere. 
 
State responsibility does not arise if the activity in question is taken in the context of a reprisal, a sanction 
under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, emergency, legal self defense, an act of God, and the like. 
 
The legal consequences of State responsibility for transboundary environmental impact include the 
obligation to make good the damage, either through restoration to the earlier condition (restitutio in integrum) 
or, when that is not possible, through payment of damages. In addition to making good the material 
damage, immaterial damages such as damage to the honor or reputation of a State shall also be 
compensated. These consequences are generally enforced through dispute resolution mechanisms. 
 
Part 3. Environmental Liability in the Law of the European Community 
 
The polluter pays principle in art. 130r of the EC Treaty is a constitutional foundation of European 
Community environmental policy. However, it is far from being realized in the form of binding 
community-wide rules on civil liability for environmental damage. Individual non-environment specific 
provisions on liability appear only in a handful of documents, such as the directive on product liability21. 
Several initiatives for media-specific and comprehensive environmental liability legislation have failed to 
advance beyond the drafting stage. 
 
The product liability directive of 1985 contained the first EC norm to indirectly protect the environment 
through introduction of strict liability. While a 1984 directive on the shipment of hazardous waste had 
called for the Council to come up with conditions for applying civil liability to damages arising from such 
shipment by October 1988, this deadline was removed when the directive was repealed and incorporated 
in substance in Council Regulation 259/93 on control of transboundary movement of hazardous waste into 
and out of the European Community. Now the regulation requires only that a system of insurance or 
comparable financial guarantees be created. 
 
The Commission's Fourth Action Program for. the Environment (1987) built upon the polluter pays 
principle of art. 13Or by calling on the Commission to examine the possibility of civil liability for 
environmental damage. 
 
 
 
21 
oJ EC Nr. L, 21O/1985, S. 29. 
12 
The resulting1989 proposal for a Directive on civil liability for damage caused by waste, amended 1991, 
has still not been adopted.22 Its goal is to eliminate the differences in the liability provisions of the 
Member States. That some States require facility operators to pay for environmental damage and others do 
not could lead to the general public having to bear certain environmental costs. This in turn could cause 
both investment and waste to flow artificially into those Member States where liability provisions are 
most beneficial to the operators. Different national rules on liability could also lead to differing levels of 
protection for human health and the environment. 
 
The draft waste directive channels liability to the waste producer, defined as each person who produces 
waste in connection with a commercial or industrial activity or who so treats waste as to change its nature 
and composition. Liability is joint, strict and several and operators must provide evidence of financial 
capacity. The draft extends protection to damages for death, personal and property injury, and to 
environmental impacts, defined as any significant physical, chemical or biological degradation of the 
environment. Member States would determine who is entitled to bring actions for damages, which would 
cover measures to restore the environment as well as preventive measures. Irreparable damage is not 
covered. Environmental protection groups are entitled to participate in specified legal actions. 
 
A 1991 proposal for a Directive on waste facilities called for strict liability for environmental damages 
and impacts caused by the waste and would have established a fund for cleanup of inactive sites financed 
by fees from the site operators. The 1997 update to the proposal eliminated these provisions.23 The Fifth 
Action Program for the Environment (1993) proposed a catalog of measures to protect the environment, 
including enactment of a general Directive on civil liability for environmental darnage.24 The Program 
contemplated adoption of the waste liability directive by 1993 and a general environmental liability 
regulation by 1995, but neither goal was reached. 
 
In isolated instances the Commission has met some of the liability goals of the Fifth Action Program.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 See, e.g. Proposed Directive on civil liability for damage caused by waste, OJ Nr. 
 
C/251/1989, S. 3, amended by OJ Nr. C 192/1991, S. 6, first introduced in 1989. 
 
Draft Directive of the Council of the European Community on Civil Liability for 
 
Damage Caused by Waste, COM (89) 282 final SYN 217 of 15 September 1989, p. 
 
1. . 
23 Proposed Directive on Waste Sites, 5 March, 1997, COM(97), lO5 final, 97/OO85 
 
(S~. 
24 (93/C 139/O1), OJ Nr. C 138 of 17 May 1993, p.- 1, 57, point 5.7. 
13 
For example, the 1993 Communication regarding a common policy in the area of marine traffic safety25 
recommended that the Member States’ make it a priority to ratify the 1992 Protocol to the International 
Convention on Civil Liability for oil Pollution Damage and the related Fund convention. The Commission 
is currently preparing a communication on civil liability for environmental damage that will also address 
development of a system of criminal penalties.26 
 
The Commission had hoped that its 1993 Green Paper on remedying damage27 would revitalize 
discussions on establishing an environmental liability system. The European Parliament responded by 
calling on the Commission to propose a directive on liability for environmental damage. In 1994 the 
Commission undertook a study of the Member States' liability systems for environmental damage and of 
the economic effects of liability systems. And the Commission is also currently working on a 
Communication regarding the introduction of a Community framework for civil liability for 
environmental damage.28 The Green Paper itself indicates that an environmental liability directive should 
include a definition of environmental damage, liability limits, restoration duties, causation provisions, and 
specification of who is entitled to bring a complaint. The channelling of liability is identified as an 
efficient and fair means to internalize environmental costs, and a duty to provide insurance is viewed 
favorably. As of late 1997, however, no such general directive has been proposed. 
 
Part 4. Environmental Liability in German Law 
 
Environmental liability in Germany is a question of both private and public law. Under German civil law, 
liability is three-pronged: (i) fault based or "tort" liability under 823 BGB; (ii) strict liability of 
neighboring parties under 9O6 (2) BGB and 14 BImSchG, known as "Aufopferungshaftung" and 
irnprecisely translated as "beneficial impairment liability"; and (iii) liability under specific laws governing 
particular media or sources, the latter of which are regulated either as conduct- or facility-based sources.29 
Liability for damage to air, soil and water are covered not only by the laws specific to each media, rather 
provisions are also spread throughout a patchwork of other laws. 
 
 
25 24 February 1993, CoM (93) 66 final. 
26 A.a o, S. 23 point 2. 
27 Communication of the Commission of 14 May 1993 to the Council and European 
 
Parliament and the Economic and social committees: Green Paper on Remedying 
 
Environmental Damage, CoM (93) 47 final. 
28 ,,Fur eine dauerhafte und umweltgerechte Entwicklung", CoM (95)624, p.117. 
29 Examples of media based liability are  22 WHG (Water Law),  32 ff. GenTG 
 
(Genetic Technology Law),  25 ff. AtG (Atomic Energy Law), das Olschadensgesetz  
 
(Marine oil Pollution Law) vom 3O.O9.1988 BGBI. 1988 I, S. 177O ff. Source based liability is found in  
 
the Umwelthaftungsgesetz (UHG) (general Environmental Liability Law 
14 
 
 
For German liability law generally, fault based liability is the prevailing norm and strict liability is the 
exception. In environment-specific German law this is changing. As compensation for society accepting 
increased environmental risk, the party who engages in the high risk activity is made subject to liability. 
The public law standards help only to reduce the risk; they do not remove the operator's liability. 
 
Environmental Liability in Private Law 
 
Section 823 of the Civil Code (BGB or Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) covers liability for tortious actions 
generally and requires injury to a right that is enforceable against everyone. Environmental damage is 
included only to the extent it is caused by tortious human actions. 
 
Strict liability for environmental damage can also arise under one of several laws dealing with specific 
media (e.g. air) or areas of law (e.g. product liability), beginning with the general Environmental Liability 
Law (UHG or Umwelthaftungsgesetz), in force since 1991. The UHG does not protect the environment as 
such but regulates settlement of civil law compensation claims for material injury to person and property 
arising from environmental impacts to air, water or soil. The party causing the environmental impact that 
leads to injury is strictly liable for damages. The law lists facilities covered, notably those which require a 
permit to operate. Liability, which is limited to 32O million DM, can arise for normal operation of the 
facility as well as accidents. The default presumption that the facility caused the injury if it was factually 
in a position to do so does not apply if the operator can show the facility was run in accordance with all 
applicable standards. The UHG is criticized for including so few potentially liable parties and regulated 
facilities. 
 
The Water Resources Law (WHG) establishes joint and several, non-fault based liability for damage to 
surface and ground waters, S 
22 (1), and for damage arising from certain facilities, S
 22 (2). Prevailing 
opinion is that illegal behavior is still required before liability arises, placing in question whether it is truly 
"strict". Any party who, through discharge of a substance into the protected waters, negatively changes the 
physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the waters is liable for damages to property. Restoration 
is not explicitly mentioned. 
  
.
 
 
15 
Liability does not depend upon the violation of a duty or the forseeability of the damage, rather on the 
creation of a special danger for the waters. The WHG contains no liability limits; these can only be 
determined through general civil code provisions. Facilities listed under the UHG are nevertheless subject 
to the unlimited liability of the WHG. 
 
The Genetic Technology Law (GenTG or Gentechnikgesetz) imposes strict liability for damages arising 
from death or injury to body or health that are based upon genetic modification. Liability for operation of 
a facility is not specified but is encompassed in the imposition of behavior-based liability. Distinguishing 
between traditional biotechnology and the genetic technology covered by the law remains problematic. 
Restitution for damage to natural resources is covered in part by indicating that S  251 (2) BGB applies 
(allowing money damages when restoration is impossible or insufficient to make good a loss). 
 
The Nuclear Material Law (AtG) enforces the international Paris and Brussels Conventions on nuclear 
liability and contains its own liability rules for incidents not so covered to create a specialized regime that 
contrasts with the general rules of environmental liability in Germany.3O The AtG domestic norms impose 
a modified strict liability. The owner of the radioactive material that caused the injury may be exonerated 
if he shows the incident could not be avoided in spite of due care and that it was not caused by a defect in 
the protective devices or their installation. The AtG provides for maximum liability and requires evidence 
of financial security as part of the permitting process. The federal government is liable for up to 1 billion 
DM in damages caused abroad by a domestic nuclear accident when the injured parties have no other 
recourse. 
 
Beneficial impairment liability (Aufopferungshaftung) 
 
Beneficial impairment liability (Aufopferungshaftung) is governed by S  9O6 BGB, which regulates the 
relative interests of neighboring parties. Section 9O6 applies when a legal or administratively approved 
activity which benefits third parties or the public also impacts relations between private parties. S  9O6 (2) 
BC;B establishes a claim for beneficial impairment liability when a piece of property is impacted by a 
discharge (omission) typical for the neighborhood from another piece of property and cannot be prevented 
by economically feasible measures. Air pollution, noise and vibrations are among the environmentally 
relevant discharges covered. 
 
 
 
30 This can be said as well of the oil Pollution Law (olSG) and the Brussels 1969 International Convention on Civil 
Liability for oil Pollution Damage (Fn. 3) and its related 19?1 Fund convention (Fn. 4). 
16 
 
17 
 
Independently of S  9O6 BGB, four other German laws provide for a duty to tolerate certain public 
encroachments on private interests: the laws on Air Discharges (BImSchG), Air Traffic (LuftVG), 
Nuclear Energy (AtG), and Genetic Technology (GenTG). These involve a more limited concept of 
compensation, which is a substitute for judicial consideration under S  9O6 BGB of what discharges are 
typical for a neighborhood. 
 
Environmental Liability in Public Law and the Law of Public order 
 
German public law claims for environmental damage compensation can be based upon official liability as 
well as expropriation and similar encroachments, S
 75 VwVfG (Administrative Procedure 
Act/Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz) or upon appropriate application of S
 14 BImSchG. Expropriation 
related damages claims are based upon violation of the lawmaker's duty to protect the constitutional rights 
of citizens, for example by failing to improve environmental protection laws or by promulgating 
environmentally harmful laws. Further, compensation claims for expropriation are appropriate if the 
damaged party, as a member of the public, is required to tolerate a legally permitted discharge when that 
discharge has an expropriating effect. 
 
The German law of public order (Ordnungsrecht) relevant to the environment is found primarily in special 
laws such as those governing liability for hazardous waste or water pollution.3l If no specific law applies, 
the terms of each Land's public order laws take over. 
 
Compensation for Injury to the Environment 
 
Neither the UHG nor the GenTG refers to direct environmental damage but under both laws it could be 
included as part of a general damages claim. Both laws adopt the basic provision of S  249 BGB, that when 
an object is injured the impairing party is liable for restoration. Under S  251 BGB, if restoration is 
impossible or only feasible with disproportionate cost or effort, money damages must be paid. When 
direct environmental damage accompanies injuries to non-environmental goods, the danger exists that the 
"disproportionality" test will be applied only to the market value of the non-environmental goods. 
However here both 1G UHG and S  32 (7) GenTG are responsive, providing that in applying S  251 BGB, 
costs for restoration to the previously existing condition shall not be considered disproportionate just 
because they exceed the value of the injured objects. 
 
 
31 
Cf. S  36(2) KIW-/AbfG and S  3(1), 3(2), 26(2), 34(2) WHG. 
18 
This does not, however, lead to unlimited liability for restoration since a balance must be struck between 
the financial burden placed on the injuring party and the interest in restoration. 
 
Acting without mandate (“Geschaftsfuhrung ohne Auftrag” or GoA) by public authorities is another 
possible route to obtain environmental damages. The German Federal High Court applies this doctrine in 
cases where the public administration takes measures to protect the public safety against threats and then 
seeks reimbursement for costs of the measures.32 
 
Proposed Liability Laws 
 
Liability for environmental damages are central to two proposals for a comprehensive environmental law: 
the UGB (Umweltgesetzbuch)-Allgemeiner Teil, known as the Professors' Draft33 and the more recent 
Sendler Commission Draft.34 In contrast to the existing law on environmental liability, which simply lists 
dangerous facilities potentially subject to liability (S  1 UHG), the Professors' Draft presumes liability for 
all environmentally dangerous facilities, for all activities dangerous to water and soil and for the transport 
of hazardous substances. The Sendler draft also expands the scope of application of S  1 UHG. Both drafts 
combine the approaches of facility-based and substance or media-based liability. 
 
General Characteristics of German Environmental Liability Law 
 
In Germany, liability for environmental damage has developed from the beneficial impairment model to 
the more recent strict liability approach, which is regarded as better suited to influence behavior toward 
higher standards of care and prevention of harm.35 It also recognizes at least partially the costs of using 
"free" natural resources by discouraging, for example, the operator of a sewage treatment plant from 
discharging a toxic substance into the water stream even though he may do so under his permit. Strict 
liability raises the question of how to insure for damages arising from the fully legal operation of a facility 
that nonetheless causes harm, as is possible under the UHG or WHG.  
 
 
 
 
 
32 See, e.g. the F~nkenflug case, BGHZ, 4O, 28. 
33 Begrundung zum Gesetzentwurf, UBA, 7/9O, S. 424 
34 Kloepfer/Durner, Der Umweltgesetzbuch-Entwurf der Sachverstandigenkommission, 
 
DVBI. 1997, S. IO83. 
35 Wagner, Handbuch des Umweltrechts, Bd. 1, 2. AuQ. 1994, Haftung, column 955. 
19 
Newer proposals on causation differ from the approach in S  6 UHG whereby the presumption of damage 
does not apply if the facility is operated according to law. Reform proposals tend to favor the plaintiff in 
cases of a legally operated facility, requiring him to show just a preponderant possibility of causation. 
 
The concept of compensation for injury to the environment as such poses problems because damage to 
nature and landscape does not necessarily damage individuals' ownership interests. This raises the 
question of whether civil liability, which is based on the framework of a two-way relationship between the 
injured and impairing parties, can be effectively applied to compensation for environmental damage. The 
current German discussion favors public law solutions that impose liability somewhat independent of this 
two-way relationship, but no such comprehensive instrument is yet in place. 
 
Part 5. Environmental Liability Legislation in the United States 
 
In the United States, strict liability for environmental damage is well established in five major statutes and 
finds support in decisions of the federal courts. The media protected by these laws include navigable 
waters, soil and groundwater; air pollution is notably absent. This report focuses on the Clean Water Act 
(CWA), the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), the 
Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (APAA), the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act 
(MPRSA) and the oil Pollution Act (OPA), each of which establishes liability for harm to the 
environment. Federal judicial decisions relevant to the statutes are examined as well but space limitations 
preclude discussion of the body of non-statutory liability law in the United States. An examination of the 
many individual States statutes on environmental liability, hazardous waste cleanup or oil pollution is 
beyond the scope of the report. 
 
United States legislation provides an advanced model for timely response to environmental damage, for 
assessing and placing a value on harm caused to the environment and for determining appropriate 
measures for clean-up and/or restoration. Identifying which parties are liable for the costs of each of these 
steps is central to the statutory liability scheme and builds on the polluter pays principle. Potentially 
responsible parties are defined more broadly in laws, which govern harm coming from a specific source - 
e.g. an oil tanker, pipeline or hazardous waste site. CERCLA, which governs the cleanup of hazardous 
waste sites, casts the net most widely: almost every party ever having had contact with the contaminated 
site is potentially liable for cleanup and restoration costs, including any party who generated, transported, 
treated or owned the waste or who owned, managed, rented or used the property where the waste was 
stored. 
20 
The CWA, OPA and TAPAA channel liability to the owner or operator of the ship or facility from which 
the oil escapes; notably the owner of the oil is not directly subject to liability. TAPAA also places liability 
on the holder of the pipeline right of way for damage in the vicinity of the pipeline. The Marine 
Sanctuaries Act, which governs harm to the marine environment from any source, channels liability 
directly to the party actually causing the harm. 
 
Generally the courts have interpreted the statutory standard of liability to be strict, that is, independent of 
fault, as well as joint and several. Specific causation plays a minimal role; for example with multiple 
defendants CERCLA does not require the government to prove that a specific harm was caused by a 
specific party. To recover or impose cleanup costs, the government need only show that the party falls 
under the category of potentially responsible parties, that the facility in question qualifies as a facility 
under the law, that a hazardous substance was released at the site and that the government incurred 
response costs in connection with the release. If the response measures were not taken in accordance with 
the National Contingency Plan, which sets out standards for response measures, the potentially responsible 
party may escape liability. Several of the statutes provide that parties made liable under the law can sue 
other potentially responsible parties for contribution to the cleanup and damage liability of the plaintiff 
 
Although liability is independent of fault, it is limited based on the size or the type of facility or vessel 
from which the oil or hazardous substance escapes. For example, CERCLA liability cannot exceed 50 
Million $US for any storage site unless one of the factors canceling the limitation apply. Liability 
becomes unlimited when the hazardous substance is released through willful misconduct or willful 
negligence, in violation of applicable standards, or the party fails or refuses to provide reasonable 
cooperation and assistance requested by the authorities in connection with the release. These factors are 
typical of those applied by the other liability acts to remove limitations and impose liability for full 
response costs and damages. On the other hand, liability does not arise if the event giving rise to harm was 
caused by an act of God, an act of war or an act or omission of a third party. The MPRSA differs here as 
well, in that its liability is unlimited. 
 
Pooled funds and evidence of financial responsibility are central to these laws. The Superfund, the oil 
Liability Trust Fund and-the TAPAA Fund are financed in part by Congressional appropriation and 
contributions from potential polluters, and variously by, e.g., taxes on chemical feedstocks (CERCLA), a 
volume based tax on oil (OPA/TAPAA) or amounts paid by liable parties for damages and cleanup costs. 
21 
Amounts payable out of the funds vary with each law but cover such expenses as cleanup and response 
measures, including overhead and equipment costs for cleanup preparedness measures, limited natural 
resource damages, research, administrative costs, and implementation measures. Evidence of financial 
responsibility to cover potential liability under the laws is required of every owner or operator of a ship or 
facility before it can operate in US waters. 
 
The statutes expand the definition of harm to the environment, introduce the concept of natural resource 
damages, and establish the institution of the natural resources trustee. Damages for harm to the 
environment are expanded beyond the US. Common law definition to include damage to non-ownership 
use and economic interests in the environment. Liability is imposed for damage to natural resources, 
including natural resource services. Natural resource trustees are empowered as public officials with the 
task of identifying and assessing damage to the environment, preparing plans for restoration of damaged 
areas and bringing actions to recover damages for harm to the environment. Only the trustees may bring 
such actions in the public interest. Administrative regulations for CERCLA and OPA spell out in great 
detail how the trustees are to evaluate damage to the environment and to determine whether and how 
restoration should take place. Damage may be valued using any number of valuation methodologies, 
including such controversial survey/hypothetical models as contingent market valuation, provided that the 
model provides reliable results appropriate to the specific environmental incident. Restoration must be 
reasonable in cost and feasibility. When restoration is not possible, money damages must be paid. 
 
The laws may be broadly characterized as imposing significant negative incentives to prevent 
environmental harm, in the form of very high potential liability. Prevention is also accomplished in part 
through supplementary measures such as the TAPAA requirement for sophisticated tanker traffic 
monitoring systems. Criticisms of the statutes vary; CERCLA being most consistently the subject of re-
form initiatives. 
 
Part 6. Private International Law 
 
Private international law is a necessary partner to treaties and customary rules of public international law 
governing liability for transboundary environmental harm. Only through civil claims in national courts can 
individual private parties exercise legal rights or be made subject to liability in connection with 
environmental impacts that give rise to damages abroad. The environmental context raises special issues 
in addition to the usual questions of international jurisdiction of courts, the choice of applicable law and 
the recognition and enforcement of decisions. 
22 
For example, because States or State enterprises often operate the facilities, which produce harmful 
emissions, the limits of State jurisdiction and immunity must be addressed. Another question is whether 
and how to consider the fact that such facilities are lawfully operated under licenses granted by the foreign 
State. 
 
The State immunity issue is covered in this chapter's first section, which covers "Gerichtsbarkeit" or the 
authority of a State to decide questions of law within its own territory. This exclusive authority, on which 
State immunity rests, is rooted in State sovereignty and limited only by general rules of public 
international law and relevant treaties. of course treaties bind only their parties, but can be important for 
specific media. For example, the 196O Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear 
Energy prevents a State from invoking immunity to avoid suit for State-caused emissions damage. 
Customary public international law, on the other hand, grants foreign States immunity, but only to the 
extent they are not acting as private parties and participating in private economic activity. This 
determination as to capacity is made according to the law of the Forum State, since no general rule of 
public international law exists.36 
 
The chapter focuses much more on "Internationale Zustandigkeit" or international jurisdiction: the 
determination in each case whether a domestic court is called upon to decide that specific international 
legal dispute. For complaints involving transboundary environmental impact jurisdiction is determined 
either by the German ZPO (ZivilprozeBordnung or civil procedure law) provisions on choice of forum, or 
by treaties, which take precedence. The ZPO terms are comparable to those contained in the European 
Convention on Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial Matters from 1972 
(the "European Convention") and the so-called parallel "Lugano Convention" of 1988.37 
 
The European Convention is by far the most important treaty for general jurisdictional questions. 
However, as described in part 2 of this English Summary, special treaties dealing with individual types of 
impact contain their own rules on jurisdiction. For example, the Paris nuclear treaty establishes exclusive 
jurisdiction for the courts of the States party where the nuclear incident originated. Jurisdiction provisions 
are also found in bilateral treaties, such as the agreement between Germany and Switzerland regarding 
liability to third parties for nuclear incidents. This treaty grants exclusive jurisdiction to the court where 
the incident originated. 
 
 36 German law looks to the goal of the State activity if the action is one for factfinding but for enforcement actions  
 
considers the nature of the activity determinative. 
37  See Part 6.III.1 of the Report. 
23 
The fact that these problem-specific treaties give the plaintiff no choice of forum can work to his 
disadvantage when, for example, the complaint must be brought in the court where the polluting company 
has its headquarters. The European Convention takes a markedly different approach by giving the plaintiff 
a greater choice of fora. 
 
The European Convention contains three categories of international jurisdiction: general, exclusive and 
concurrent. The default general jurisdiction (art. 2) of the defendant's residence or headquarters is valid 
only to the extent exclusive jurisdiction does not apply: Exclusive jurisdiction (art. 16.1) applies only for 
damage to immovable property and is exercised where the damaged real estate is located. Concurrent 
jurisdiction (art. 5.3) applies for tort claims to all kinds of property and is exercised where the damage 
occurs, a location for which the Convention offers two alternatives, which parallel the options available in 
German law under the ZPO. The plaintiff can chose between the place of origin and the place of impact 
(where the legally protected good was injured). In cases of transboundary impact these two options by 
definition mean two different loci between which the plaintiff should be allowed to choose. The European 
Court of Justice reiterated this "ubiquity principle (Ubiquitatsprinzip)" in the Rhine nitrates pollution 
case.38 The decisive reason for allowing choice is to guarantee the plaintiff a judicial proceeding 
appropriate to the incident. The court nearest the incident is not necessarily always in the best position to 
handle evidence and problems of proof. Thus the convention sets no firm hierarchy for choice of court but 
leaves the decision to the plaintiff The ubiquity principle makes it much easier for the plaintiff to pursue 
legal remedies and thereby benefits the victims, which are most often the same party as the plaintiff For 
reasons of convenience, familiarity and cost, access to the courts of one's home State encourages the 
plaintiff to pursue a legal remedy in the first place. 
 
The ubiquity principle for choice of forum has a parallel for choice of laws in the "Gunstigkeitsprinzip" 
(principle of the most favorable law) for cases involving tort-based claims for environmental damage. 
Private international tort law operates on the basic premise of lex loci delicti commissi. However many 
countries also adopt a rule recognized as well by German courts, that the court is to apply the law most 
favorable to the plaintiff, choosing between the law of the State where the incident arose and that where 
the damage occurred. 
 
Choice of law problems are raised by the German distinction between environmental claims based on tort 
law and those based on the law of relations between neighboring property owners. 
 
 
38 
ECJ, 3O. November 1976, Bier/Mines des Potasse d'Alsace S.A., 1976, 1735. 
24 
25 
 Within this last category German law distinguishes further-between claims for tort based damage by a 
neighbor and claims for injunctive relief. German courts apply the principle of private international 
property law lex rei sitae - the law of the State where the damaged property is located - to neighbors' 
injunctive claims but not to their tort-based claims. Reformers call for a uniform tort-based classification 
which allows a choice between the laws of the State where the incident arose and where the damage 
occurred for all claims between neighboring property owners. one argument for uniformity is that purely 
domestic incidents would ~e treated the same as those involving transboundary environmental impact. 
 
Choice of laws also affects the significant role of public licensing of facilities that cause transboundary 
environmental damage. German opinion is largely unanimous that when the law of the (non-German) 
State of origin applies the court must observe the preclusive effect of a valid public law permit to operate. 
Less clear is the preclusive effect of a foreign permit when the law of the State where the damage occurred 
is applied. 
 
Part 6 closes with a survey of treaty practice on recognition and enforcement of foreign judgements. 
Generally the treaties call for mutual recognition and enforcement unless this would violate principles of 
the domestic legal order. 
