 
SCAR-COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
 
Report to XXIII ATCM 
 
Information Paper submitted by SCAR and COMNAP  
under Agenda Item 15 
 
 
Twelve countries participated in the second meeting of the Joint Committee on 
Antarctic Data Management (JCADM-2: 20-24 July, 1998, Concepción, Chile); Australia, 
Chile, China, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom, 
United States of America and Uruguay.  
 
Representatives of the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) Host and the Committee 
on Earth Observation Satellites International Directory Network (CEOS IDN) - Global 
Change Master Directory (GCMD) were also present. 
 
The key issue at JCADM-2 centered around the implementation of XXII ATCM 
Resolution 4 (1998).  This resolution provides a strong framework within which to place 
the activities and recommendations of JCADM.  The resolution can be summarised: 
 
* 
Recruitment of National Antarctic Data Centres (NADCs); 
* 
Encourage scientists to supply metadata to their NADCs; 
* 
National approaches to addressing freedom of access to scientific 
information. 
 
JCADM endorses a comprehensive response of Treaty Parties to XXII Resolution 4 
(1998) at XXIII ATCM in Lima. 
 
Operational National Antarctic Data Centres are defined as those that that have been 
designated to either SCAR, COMNAP and that have facilities to support the generation of 
metadata records.  Operational NADCs as at March 1999 are Australia, Canada, Chile, 
China, Germany, the Netherlands, New 
Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.  Spain nominated its 
NADC on 10 March 1999 and expects to be operational this year. 
 
JCADM is addressing NADC recruitment by developing a communications network 
and the running of regional 'capacity-building' workshops.  A European workshop was held 
in Bremerhaven with representatives from Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and the 
Ukraine.  A second>workshop is scheduled for Santiago in April 1999 for South American 
NADCs.  JCADM re-iterates the recommendation from JCADM-1 (1997) that its members 
should be NADC managers, or where a Data Centre had not been established, a person 
instrumental in establishing such a centre. 
 
 
 
1 
2 
 
A key issue has been the development of a set of tools to support the generation, 
indexing and distribution of metadata.  JCADM-2 supported the use of the tools developed 
by the Global Change Master Directory, the supporters of the Directory Interchange Format 
(DIF) metadata standard. Input from the Antarctic community to the DIF metadata standard 
and associated tools would be by way of JCADM through the International Centre for 
Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR). ICAIR would support the tools on NADC 
systems. 
 
A formal JCADM web site has been established at 
 
 
http://www.jcadm.scar.org 
 
and contains meeting reports, work plans, NADC status and contacts, guidelines for 
NADCs, national data management strategies and a suite of other associated papers and 
links. 
 
In the light of Article (III)(1)(c) of the Antarctic Treaty, JCADM-2 concluded: 
 
• 
That countries include the generation of metadata records as key 
components of their science programmes, and that metadata records are 
created as soon as is feasible after the collection of data. 
 
• 
That SCAR and COMNAP recognise that the creation of metadatarecords 
requires encouragement and support for science projects as  well as NADCs. 
 
To minimise duplication and maximise the value of resources, a joint meeting of 
JCADM and the Arctic counterpart, the Arctic Data Directory has been planned for June 
1999 in Ottawa. 
 
Lee Belbin 
Chief Officer 
SCAR / COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
 
 
List of Acronyms 
 
AMD  
Antarctic Master Directory 
ATCM 
 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
CEOS IDN 
Committee on Earth Observation Satellites International Directory Network 
COMNAP 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
DIF 
 
Directory Interchange Format 
GCMD 
 
Global Change Master Directory 
ICAIR  
International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research 
JCADM 
 
Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
NADC  
National Antarctic Data Centre 
SCAR  
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
