ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY 
 
IUCN and ASOC appreciate the COMNAP report presenting an assessment of environmental emergencies arising 
from activities in Antarctica. It illustrates some aspects of the problem of environmental harm and allows additional 
inferences to be drawn. But, because it is restricted to a consideration of environmental emergencies only, it does 
not purport to address the full range of environmental impacts that may result from human activities in Antarctica. 
Article 16 of the Protocol requires, in our judgment, that liability attach to a wider range of impacts than those 
ensuing from emergencies alone. We present this information sheet, based on the comments made by various 
delegations on May 24 and on a study of the COMNAP report, in order to indicate questions and issues that are 
raised by the report. 
 
1. Scope of the report 
 
The report limits itself to emergencies arising from fire, fuel spills, and transport, excluding other types of incidents, 
such as those involving sewage, waste disposal, or chemicals. 
 
The report limits itself to accidents and does not consider systemic, chronic, secondary, and cumulative impacts. 
 
COMNAP reports that 17 of its 29 members replied to the inquiries it made. This represents 5~% of those 
contacted. It also means that more than 40% of the members did not reply. If the reported incidents (117 among the 
replying members) are extrapolated to the total membership, this means it is likely that an additional 85 incidents 
are likely to have occurred among member activities during the period in question. Since it is possible that 
respondees were more likely to be those who had experienced fewer incidents or were more confident about their 
responses to incidents, the figure could be higher. 
 
The report does not survey private activities during the period in question and it is not known whether the rate of 
incidents is similar to that of national programs. 
 
Members reported differently on the same issue, some including all incidents that created measurable harm, while 
others reported only on more serious incidents. 
Some members did not report on fires. 
 
The report is based on self-reporting and has no independent verification of the number of incidents. 
 
In sum, the number of actual incidents potentially affecting the environment in Antarctica may be considerably 
higher than the number of incidents described in this report. 
 
2.. Environmental impacts 
 
COMNAP reports primarily on harm to “flora and fauna” or “wildlife” (pp. 2, 4), a term not synonymous with the 
concept of the Antarctic environment used in the Protocol. The report does not consider impacts on water, ice, soil, 
air, life-support systems or ecological processes. In fact, the report suggests in paras. 11 and 11 that unless 
contamination of soil or ice results in harm to wildlife, there is no adverse impact. The focus on flora and fauna 
probably underestimates the scope of harm from incidents because flora and fauna generally are less likely to be 
found in close proximity to the stations where many of the incidents will occur. Further, the report says that "it is 
believed" that the incremental increase of air pollution from fire is insignificant in part due to the nature of the 
substances burned (structural materials or fuel), but no scientific evidence is presented to support this. 
 
Long term accumulation of hydrocarbons and other polluting substances from land based incidents is not studied. 
on average, some 7O~o of all marine pollution in the world is land-based in origin and the risks of accumulation 
from individual incidents is considerable. The cumulative impact is particularly important when full cleanup of 
contamination is not possible (p. 3 in respect of diesel fuels). 
 
Halons, referred to on page 3 of the COMNAP report as a consequence of fire incidents, is a regulated 
ozone-depleting substance. The potential consequences of this are not assessed, although we would expect concern 
with this topic given the significance of Antarctica in revealing ozone depletion. 
 
3. Costs 
 
The costs of the major incident reported are not included and it is thus not possible to know the potential scope of 
the costs for a serious incident. 
 
The costs of response and remediation are not broken down. It would be important to know the details and perhaps 
COMNAP could further investigate and report on this topic. 
 
Finally, we would like to suggest that the purpose of a liability regime is not only to pay for the costs of recovery 
and remediation (..polluter pays..). It is part of a preventive system that aims to stimulate greater care on the part of 
operators to avoid environmental harm and adverse impact on the other values recognized as important by the 
Antarctic Treaty System, including its value for scientific research, by indicating the duties of operators and the 
consequences to them of environmental harm resulting from their operations. 
