oPENlNGADDRESSBYEXTRAoRDlNARYAND 
PLENIPoTENTlARY AMBASSADoR V.BoGoMAZoV,HEAD 
oFTHEDELEGATloNoFTHE RUSSIAN FEDERATIoN 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
on behalf of the delegation of the Russian Federation let me congratulate 
you on your election to the high post of Chairman of the XXII~ Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting and through you express our gratitude to the Government of Peru for 
the opportunity given to all of us to meet in the beautiful city of Lima and discuss the 
issues of operations and cooperation in the Antarctic. 
Entering the coming 21st century mankind does not only have to review 
some current fundamental principles of the international community, but also make efforts 
to preserve the existing traditions, standards and rules which, for many years, have 
guaranteed peaceful coexistence, effective cooperation and fruitful mutual understanding. 
one of the fundamental features of such international cooperation, which is entering a new 
millennium with dignity, is the Antarctic Treaty, whose 4Oth anniversary we are 
celebrating at the XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in the hospitable 
country of Peru. 
The Antarctic Treaty is not only a symbol of unity of scientists and logistic 
personnel of the states representing all the nations of the planet. Dynamic 
development of the Antarctic Treaty System enabled it to quickly adapt to global processes 
involving the interests of the whole of man~ind, and still preserve its major principles: 
priority of research, peace and cooperation, demilitarized and nuclear-free zone, free 
exchange of information, regulation and management of operations and environmental 
protection. 
The Russian Federation consistently complies with the basic principles of the Antarctic 
Treaty. In spite of certain economic difficulties, Russia continues its operations in the 
Antarctic and performs them in accordance with the current requirements. Russian 
specialists continue to maintain high professional standards. The results of some Russian 
scientific projects are duly appreciated by the international community. It refers, in the first 
place, to the deep ice drilling project at the "Vostok" station and studies of subglacial lake 
Vostok. The latter project is of a particular interest as it allows to combine the traditional 
interests of Earth sciences and outer space studies. 
The last years of the current century have been characterized for the Antarctic Treaty 
System by the growing significance of environmental issues; the Protocol on the 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which came into force in 1998 provided 
the main guidelines and principles for those operations. In compliance with the Protocol, 
environmental assessment of the proposed operations is made in accordance with the 
appropriate national procedures. on December 11, 1998 the Governrnent of the Russian 
Federation 
approved a decision providing for the Procedures for Consideration and Issue of Permits to 
Legal Entities and Individuals to Conduct Activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Thus our 
country has legally adopted the rules of procedure relating to the operations of its nationals 
in the Antarctic and consequently supported its commitment to strict compliance with the 
rules and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. 
on the eve of the new millennium the Russian Federation expresses its deep conviction of 
the invariability of the fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty which ensure the 
stability of operations of its system, maintenance of peace and mutual understanding 
among nations and solution of global scientific problems in the interests of mankind; we 
are sure that these principles will make the basis for the discussion of the problems we are 
faced with. 
Russia continually stands in favour of the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat 
which will undoubtedly provide more coordinated actions of the Antarctic Treaty Parties 
on various operational aspects (primarily, on the operation of structures envisaged by the 
Protocol), a better awareness of the international community of measures implemented for 
~e conservation of the unique Antarctic ecosystem, and facilitate the exchange of 
information between the Parties. 
The delegation of Russia realizes the importance of developing a document on liability for 
the violation of the Madrid Protocol, but nevertheless believes that the document under 
consideration should have a balanced character and should not contain provisions 
unnecessarily limiting the operations of major international programs. 
We are pleased to say that the consensus prin~:iple in taking decisions on all the issues 
debated within the Antarctic Treaty System continues to play an active and constructive 
role in the activities of the international Antarctic Community. The Delegation of Russia is 
sure that in its decisions the Consultative Meeting will formulate the joint will of the 
Consultative Parties on the future of the Antarctic Treaty System and, if necessary, the 
Parties will be ready to demonstrate good will in reaching a compromise. 
The Russian Federation as the successor to the USSR - one of the 12 founding states of the 
Antarctic Treaty - remains deeply committed to its principles and is sure that under your 
leadership this Consultative Meeting will take steps in further developing the Antarctic 
Treaty System and achieving progress in the relations among the Parties. 
Thank you, ~. Chairrnan. 
