XXIII ANTARCTIC TREATY CoNSULTATlVE MEETING 
 
OPENlNG ADDRESS oF DR.A.E MUTHUNAYAGAM, SECRETARY, 
DEPARTMENT oF oCEAN DEVELOPMENT, GoVERNMENT oF INDIA 
AND HEAD oF THE DELEGATloN 
 
Mr. Chairman, ladies & Gentlemen, 
 
I deem it a great pleasure and privilege to take part in the 23rd ATCM, at Lima, Peru, the 
country, which is famous for its archeological wealth, particularly INCA civilisation. 
 
1998 was a memorable year for India as far as Antarctic Research is concerned. For the first 
time after she became a member of the Antarctic Treaty System, India successfully hosted the 
Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management [WG-EMM -1998] of the 
Commission on Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources [CCAMLR] at Kochi during 1 
O-21 August 1998. The Working Group meeting was attended by the CCAMLR Member 
countries including India. The first Joint Technical Meeting on cooperation between India and 
Peru in Antarctic Research was held at Lima, Peru during 3rd4th August 1998. The two sides have 
identified Joint Antarctic Research on geology, krill biology, upper atmospheric science, etc. 
India launched the 18th Indian Expedition to Antarctica with 40 scientists and 20 logistic 
personnel for pursuing research in Polar Science in December 1998. It had on board an Iranian 
scientist under a bilateral cooperation within the InterGovernmental oceanographic Commission 
Regional Committee for the Central Indian ocean (loClNDlo) framework. This expedition has 
undertaken several new experiments on biodiversity of anaerobes, eutrophication analysis of 
lakes, ambient sea noise processes and its effects on Antarctic mammals and utilisation of fuel 
cells as a source of clean energy. In view of the importance of Antarctic in controlling global 
weather phenomenon, ozone and trace gas contents are also being measured at the Indian 
permanent station, by instaling Brewer's Spectrophotometer. 
 
India has established a National Antarctic Data Centre at the National Centre for Antarctic and 
ocean Research (NCAoR) at Goa, which will soon be linked with 
Antarctic Master Directory. The NCAoR which has been established in 1998 as a national 
endeavor to develop expertise and excellence in polar sciences and logistic activities, will plan, 
co~rdinate and execute the entire scientific and logistic activities of Indian Antarctic programme 
besides encouraging cooperative/joint research projects both on national and international level 
particularly in the field of global change. 
 
I would like to place on records our gratitude and thanks to the Antarctic programmes of USA, 
South Africa, Germany and New Zealand in extending all support for evacuating an ailing 
member of the Indian Expedition for medical attention, which is in true spirits of the Antarctic 
Treaty System. 
 
I am glad to inform the ATCM members that India would be hosting the next CoMNAP/SCALoP 
meetings in Goa during September 1999. A Workshop on EIA will also be convened by AEoN 
then. l extend a warm welcome to all the members of CoMNAP/SCALOP and the Executive 
Committee of SCAR to take part in the deliberations of these meetings besides enjoying the 
scenic beauty of the serene Goa. 
 
During the current session of the ATCM various issues including issues relating to 
environmental protection and liability regime are proposed to be discussed further. I am hopeful 
that these deliberations would be fruifful for evolving the strategy and programmes for 
conservation and preservation of Antarctica and upholding the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty 
System. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate our commitments to Antarctic Treaty System and its other 
conventions/protocol and assure that India would play a constructive role in preserving the 
pristine nature of this continent which controls intricate global processes of the earth. 
 
Thank you. 
