SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN THE ANTARCTIC 
Information Paper submitted by SCAR to XXIII ATCM 
Agenda Item 15 
 
Scientific research carried out in the Antarctic under the auspices of SCAR covers a wide spectrum of 
disciplines. For convenience, the research highlights identified by the SCAR Working Groups are reported here for 
convenience under the three headings of Earth, Life and Atmopsheric sciences. Global change studies, a priority 
field for SCAR, the subject of a separate information paper. 
 
Earth Sciences 
 
The wide range of studies reported here include those from the Working Groups on Geology, Solid-Earth 
Geophysics, Glaciology and Geodesy and Geographic Information. These Working Groups, e~ccept Glaciology, 
met at XXV SCAR in July 1998 and held a joint meeting to consider a topic of common interest the unique nature 
of the Antarctic continent. 
 
The Antarctic continent 
 
Iies at the centre of a lithospheric plate that, unlike any other, is almost entirely surrounded by spreading ridges and, 
further,nore, has been in an essentially polar position for the last 100 million years. appears to lack the intra-plate 
seismicity that characterizes all other continents. 
 
includes at least one intra-plate rift system, stretching from the Ross Sea to the Weddell Sea, that has unique 
characteristics including possible implications for the stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. 
 
is covered by the only extant continent-scale ice sheet which applies unusual stresses to the crust. 
 
The lacl; of intra-plate seismicity, coupled with abundant evidence suggesting rapid deformation, presents an 
unusual geodynamic parado:c. 
 
over the past several years a number of permanent geodetic technique obsen~atories have been established in 
Antarctica including seven Absolute Gra~ity sites, 13 Global Positioning (GPS) sites, two Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry (VLBI) sites, four earth tide observations and 1~ tide gauge installations. These provide records of 
contemporary horizontal and vertical baseline motions, measured with accuracies of cm/year, for comparison with 
long term tectonics. At least 12 long-term seismic stations are operating as part of the world-wide seismic nenvork 
and these provide important information for assessing lithospheric structure. 
 
New technolog~ developments are rapidly achieving greater precision and accuracy, and lower detection limits. 
These advances make possible new studies in geodynamics and neotectonics, place Antarctica more precisely in the 
global framework, and provide an unusual opportunity for earth scientists. However, the results obtained from the 
present deplo~ment of instruments are diminished by the absence of the co-ordination required to achieve the 
greatest scientific returns. 
 
The three Working Groups proposed to the SCAR Delegates that a Group of Specialists should be established to 
develop a science plan and achieve the required level of co-ordination. Delegates approved a formal 
recommendation from the Working Groups and established a new Groups of Specialists on Antarctic Neotectonics 
under the leadership of Dr T J Wilson. This group has already held a first informal meeting. 
 
A database comprising a catalogue of geoscience maps is being prepared and is e~cpected to be available on the 
World Wide Web during 1999. The Working Group on Geology re-affirmed its recommendation that management 
plans of protected areas in Antarctica should, where 
possible, include a geological map that should show surficial deposits as ~ell as the bedrock geology. 
 
The Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomal~ Map (ADMAP) was launched in 1995 as a joint initiative between SCAR 
and the Intemational Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomv (IAGA) to compile and integrate into a digital 
database all e,~cisting near-surface and satellite magnetic anomaly data collected in Antarctica and surrounding 
oceans south of 6OoS. Until now, magnetic suney data of all kinds, ie marine, airborne, satellite, and ground data, 
e~ist as single databases or are a~ailable in the form of anomaly maps of limited a~al e~tend. Combining these 
into a regional or continental magnetic synthesis enhances greatly their geological and tectonic utility. 
 
At the 2nd ADMAP workshop, held in autumn 1997, the progress on the development of a digital magnetic 
database was reviewed and methods of merging the different data sets were discussed. The ADMAP group is 
currently working on the integration of all available survey data into regional compilations for the Weddell Sea, 
East Antarctica, and the Ross Sea sectors. The production and analysis of these three regional compilations will be 
subject of the 3rd ADMAP workshop scheduled for Spring 1999. 
 
The Antarctic offshore Stratigraph~ (ANToSTRAT) Subcommittee will focus on co-ordinating new broad science 
initiati~es related to coring and drilling, to assist Antarctic geoscience studies. ANToSTRAT is currently in~ol~ed 
with the following projects: 
 
ocean Dril~'ing: Promoting and co-ordinating a major circum-Antarctic drilling effort with the ocean Drilling 
Program to decipher Cenozoic Antarctic glacial history. The first ANToSTRAT-proposed leg was drilled last year 
along the Antarctic Peninsula. The second leg is scheduled for January 2OOO in Prydz Bay region. And, proposals 
for oDP drilling in the offshore Will;es Land and Ross Sea areas are currently under consideration. 
 
Cape Roberts Dnlling: Assisting as needed the international drilling effort from the fast ice in McMurdo Sound 
(Ross Sea) to study glacial history and structural e~.olution of the Transantarctic Mountains. 
 
Pala~vclimate Models for Anlarctica: Holding a workshop in Wellington, Ne~ 7P~land in July 1999 to organize 
and co-ordinate an intemational effort to acquire and use geologic samples from offshore coring and drilling 
augmented by seismic sur..eys to de~elop and ~erif~ a suite of palaeoclimate model simulations for Antarctica. The 
models ~ill depict the ~aried climatic conditions at critical times during the past lOO million years, to better 
understand the climatic e~olution during Recent times. 
 
Anfarc~zc Seismic Data Library (SDLS): Continuing SDLS acti~ities. The SDLS, in e~istence since 1991 
(ATCM Recommendation XVI-12), has 1'' branches in lO countries and pro~ides open access to Antarctic 
multi-channel seismic data. The library system will be assessed at a SDLS workshop in Wellington, New Zealand in 
July 1999, to suggest policy and technology changes (e.g., data access via the World Wide Web) that will impro~e 
the utility of the SDLS to the research community. 
 
The Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information (WG-GGI) deals with the mapping of Antarctica in 
its ~videst sense. This includes geodes~, topographic and thematic mapping, and the application of geographic 
information systems (GIS). WG-GGI released t~o ke~ products in 1998: 
 
SCAR Composite Gazetteer of Antarctica (CGA) is a comprehensi~e t~o ~olume alphabetical listing of ~1,55~ 
appro~ed names for 16,563 geographical features located south of latitude 6OCS, sourced from national authorities. 
This 6-year project has been led by Italy. National Antarctic geographic naming authorities are encouraged to use 
the CGA, to ensure that new names are not added to features that ha~e already been named by another countr~ and, 
to contribute to CGA maintenance and e~ctension. The CGA is also available on the Internet at 
 
http:/l~ spnra.it/SCAR_GAZE 
Antarctic Digital Datal~,e (ADD) is a UK-led project that provides an accurate and up-to-date topographic GIS 
database for Antarctica at a scale of 1:25O,OOO. The ADD includes data on the coastline, rock outcrops, altimetry 
and bathymetr~ from all a~ailable sources. The ADD is now undergoing its third revision, with Version 2.O being 
released in 1998 on the Internet at 
http://www.nbs.ac.uk/public/magic/add_main.html 
 
The Geodesy component of the Working Group has made major impro~ements to the geodetic infrastructure of 
Antarctica over the last decade. Highlights of the previous t vo years include: 
 
There are now 6 permanent GPS observation sites established, collecting and down-linking data by satellite to the 
international geodesy community. There have been 3 more absolute gravity sites established in the McMurdo 
region. Site details and information on the fi~e different types of permanent observatories (GPS, Absolute Gravit~, 
DoRIS, VLBI and Tide Gauges) are now a~ailable at 
http://www.scar-ggi.org.au/geodesy/perm_ob/sites.htm 
 
Epoch campaigns have been very successful in densifying the geodetic nenvork established from permanent 
obsenatories. These include links to individual networks and tide gauges, and the computation of surface movement 
vectors within a common Antarctic reference frame. 
 
. The first Antarctic Geodesy Symposium (AGS) for SCAR and non-SCAR geodesists was successfully conducted 
in Santiago, Chile, from 15-17 July 1998 ~ith 4O 45 participants and 18 papers presented. The second AGS is 
planned for 14-16 July 1999 in Warsaw, Poland. 
 
The Antarctic Geographic Data Integration project is a new initiative of WG-GGI, involving the standardisation and 
integration of fundamental datasets used by many scientists, particularly those involYed in global change research. 
The objective is to facilitate availability of integrated GIS datasets of surface elevation, bedrock elevation, 
bath~metry, coastline, names and features over Antarctica, through liaison and co-ordination with other programs 
and international agencies. More information about the project can be found at 
http://www.scarggi.org.au/geog_data/agdi/intro.htm 
 
The Internet address for WG-GGI contacts and programs is: http://www.scar-ggi.org.au 
 
The Seventh Intemational SyTnposiurn on Antarctic Earth Sciences will be held in Wellington, New Zealand, 
 
The programme on Ice-Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS) that was originally developed under the 
Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic (GLoCHANT) is now being co-ordinated under the 
Working Group on Glaciology. This is more appropriate to the focus of the current research but those data gathered 
under the programme that are relevant to global change studies will continue to be passed to the global change 
programme. SCAR is supporting a workshop being held in June 1999 under the BEDMAP project. This project 
aims to provide accurate maps of the bedrock topography of Antarctica beneath the ice sheet. Such data, when 
combined with continuing mapping of the surface altitude of the ice sheet, ~.ill enable improved estimates of the ice 
sheet volume, and changes in the volume, to be made. 
 
Life Sciences 
 
At present there appear to be no provisions in the Antarctic Treaty to deal ~ith the exploitation of biological 
resources in the Antarctic, with the exception of fisheries. There have already been collections of micro-organisms 
for pharmaceutical purposes and a biological prospecting interest in the Antarctic is developing rapidly. The 
implications of biological prospecting, and the patenting of biological products, for biological research and 
consen~ation is of concem to the Worlcing Group on ~3iolog~ and the meeting agreed that these issues should be 
raised with SCAR and with CCAMLR. 
The Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-ice Zone (EASIZ) Programme conducted the second EASIZ cruise to the Weddell 
Sea on RV Polarste.~n in~ol~ing a wide range of nationalities and disciplines. Workshops have included a 
technical meeting on macro-algal ta~conomy and biology, t~o workshops on Antarctic Fishes, and a major 
s~mposium on eYolutionary connections bet~een the marine faunas of the Magellan and Antarctic regions. A 
synthesis volume on the ecology of the coastal marine ecosystem of Admiralty Bay has been produced by Polish 
scientists. 
 
The Subcommittee on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic organisms held a workshop on "status and trends" in 
Curitiba, Brazil, in May 1999 that covered a wide ~ariety of topics in preparation for developing a plan for a 
science programme. 
 
The Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) Programme has been in the field since 1996, with major efforts occurring in 
1997/98, 1998199, and planned for 1999/?OOO. Data collection protocols ha~e been agreed so that data from the 
various national programmes ~ill be comparable when analysis workshops begin. The first data management 
~.orkshop is planned to be held during 1999. 
 
Under the Con~ention for the Conser~ation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), the Group of Specialists on Seals is 
responsible for tabulating and reporting on the number of seals killed or remo~ed from the con~ention area. It was 
noted that, at least in terms of the reports recei~ed o~er the past two ~ears by the Group, reporting b~ nations 
continues to be incomplete. However, the Group also noted that there is no evidence that the number of Antarctic 
seals that ha~e been "killed and captured", if any, is at anything but a negligible le~el. 
 
The Group of Specialists on Seals re~ie~ed recent information on the status and population trends of all species of 
Antarctic pinnipeds. Although the Group had prepared a ~year update of Antarctic pinniped status and trends for 
CCAMLR at its last meeting, these tables have been further updated with a~ailable information. The ne~ct formal 
~year update of pinniped status and trends will be prepared in time for submission to CCAMLR' s meeting in 
october 20OO. 
 
The Bird Biology Subcommittee continues to compile data on the breeding distributions and abundances of 
Antarctic and subantarctic seabird populations. Penguin (post 1993 update), giant petrels, Antarctic petrel and Snow 
petrel accounts are published or in press. Compilations on larids, cape petrel, Antarctic fulmar, cor,-norants and t~o 
species of storm petrels and one prion that breed on the Antarctic continent ha~e commenced. 
 
In response to a request from CCAMLR, the Bird Biolog~ Subcommittee ~vill con~ene a workshop in Montana, 
USA, in May 1999 to assess critically the a~ailable population data, including trends, for all Southern ocean 
seabirds. 
 
The Bird Biology Subcommittee has commenced a joint study ~vith BirdLife Intemational to determine and 
describe Important Bird Areas (IBAs) of the Antarctic continent. Seabird populations ~ithin e~isting Antarctic 
Protected Areas will be re~iewed in order to assess whether their boundaries are well-placed. 
 
The Biological In~estigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIoTAS) Programme held a successful intemational 
field expedition (BIoTEX 1) hosted by the Italian Antarctic ~'rogramme at Terra No~a station in 199~97. A 
collaborati~e inte national research programme in~olving 18 terrestrial ecologists and physiologists from The 
Netherlands, Germany and UK ~vas undertaken b~ British Antarctic Survey at Rothera station in 19g/-98. 
Although not officially organised as a BIoTAS initiati~e, it fulfilled most of the criteria and objecti~es of the 
BIoTAS Programme. Two BloTAS Workshops (Alga Ta~onomy co-ordinated by G Mataloni, and 
Ecophysiological Instrumentation co-ordinated by B Schroeter) were held after the VII SCAR Biology Symposium, 
Christchurch, in September 1998. 
 
The BIoTAS Steering Committee agreed that the BloTAS Programme should be forrnally terminated and that a ne~ 
integrated programme on terrestrial biology, addressing research issues raised under GLoCAIA~'T, should be 
established. The new Programme, currently being de~eloped, will focus on critical aspects of how terrestrial and 
aquatic organisms, processes and systems respond to changing climatic and other en~ironmental criteria 
The international interest in Lake Vostok has generated much publicit)s Ice-core drillincr had been tern~inated 
appro~cimately 1OO m abo~e the lake and the hole capped. A technical meeting addressing wa~s to pre~ent 
introduction of micro-or~anisms and carbon products during drilling was held during XXV SCAR with 
participation by scientists from National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA) and especially the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). F J Carsey (NASA, JPL) presented an o~.enriew of the approach proposed to 
investigate Lake Vostok using robotic technology. 
 
A workshop on T ~ke Vostok was held in the United States during No~ember 1998 and a further workshop 
w~ill be held in Cambridge, United Kingdom, during September 1999 to de~elop a science plan for the 
investigation of subglacial lakes in the Antarctic, with specific reference to Lake Vostok. 
 
Atmospheric Sciences 
 
Measurements of total ozone at Faraday (65oS), by a ~isible spectrometer obsen~ing sunlight scattered from the 
overhead sky at twilight, show a winter maximum. Most previous measurement techniques could not operate in 
mid~vinter. This new obser~ation is consistent with the well-known descent of the Antarctic ozone layer in winter 
(causing an increase in total ozone), together with depletion by reacti~e chlorine from CFCs, starting in midwinter 
(causing a reduction in ozone). Chemical depletion is suggested by existing satellite obsenations of enhanced Clo at 
6SS in midwinter, and is confirmed by new calculations with the Cambridge Uni~ersity 3D chemical model. 
 
Despite the pro~isions of the Montreal Protocol, depletion near the edge of Antarctica may well increase in the 
ne~ct century, because increased greenhouse gases act to cool the ozone layer, thereby increasing the cloudiness 
which causes the acti~ation of chlorine from CFCs. By contrast, abo~e the Pole the clouds in the ozone layer in 
~vinter are already ubiquitous, because of the colder temperatures there. 
 
The ozone-poor air around the edge of Antarctica frequently passes o~er populated areas of southern South 
America later in the spring, when the mid-day sun is high enough to cause UV damage. The chemical model shows 
that ozone depletion is not mi~ed from the edge of Antarctica to the Pole in winter. If this mixing remains wealc 
until late in the spring, then UV damage in southern South America may well increase in the ne~t centurv, despite 
the pro~isions of the Montreal Protocol. 
 
The Antarctic Geophysical obser~atory Network (AGoNET) of the Wor~;ing Group on SolarTerrestrial and 
Astrophysical Research has a central data base, de~eloped and managed in Italy by M. Candidi and co-workers. 
During the past two years it has become increasingly apparent that the technology of the Internet and the World 
Wide Web has changed the nature of the community needs for access to data. Data which could pre~iously only be 
accessed in the central data base is now a~ailable on the home pages of the host institution. It has become clear that 
the time is now ripe for substantial impro~ement of the access to data using the most modern tools. 
 
Most participating nations now ha~e straightfonvard access to the World Wide Web and it is e~pected that access 
will be near universal by the time of XXVI SCAR in Tok~o during ''OOO. Those users who do not yet ha~e easy 
access ~ill need support in the ne~t few years in order to achie~e the easy access which is now a uni~ersal 
e~pectation. The Working Group has charged M Candidi and V Papitash~ ith the tasl; of setting up a system which 
pro~ides links to all the data from AGoNET as well as other related data and to report back in two years with the 
ne~ system. In the meantime the e cisting central data base will be maintained. At the end of the transition period it 
will be replaced by the distributed system on the web and its tools ~vill thereafter be used for specific e~ents only 
when required. 
 
The Wor~;ing Group is planning further workshops during XXVI SCAR to capitalise on the enhanced ability to 
combine a variety of data from all parts of Antarctica. It also recognises the global importance of Antarctica in 
Solar-Terrestrial Physics, noting the ne~;t solar ma~imum will occur in the ~ear ''OOO. These workshops will 
include: 
Inter-hemispheric Conjugacy in SolarTerrestrial Data. 
 
First results from the solar ma~imum. 
 
Long-term trends in the Upper Atmosphere. 
 
Antarctic Astrophysical Workshop 
 
o~en.iew and co-ordination of National plans and acti~ities in Antarctic STP. 
 
Finally, the Working Group noted with satisfaction that following the recommendation on the importance of HF 
radars, adopted at XXIV SCAR, the South African radar SHARE and the second Japanese radar ha~e become 
operational, while the Australian radar TIGER and the French/Italian radar planned for Iles Kerguelen ha~e 
recei~ed funding and that construction is well-ad~anced. 
 
