Opening Address by Ambassador XU Guangjian, Head of the Chinese 
Delegation at the XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I would like to extend to you my sincere congratulations on your election as 
Chairman of the Twenty-third Session of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I am confident that, under 
your wise leadership, this meeting will be constructive and fruitful. At the same time, I would also like to express 
my gratitude to the Government of Peru and the city of Lima for hosting the Meeting and for the warm hospitality 
which has been shown to us and for the excellent preparatory work. 
 
It is pleased to note that this year, 1999, the 4O'h anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, will be 
remembered and celebrated in history for the Antarctic Treaty system. Since its signing in Washington D. C. in 
1959, the Antarctic Treaty has been the core of the Antarctic Treaty System. over the past forty years, a series of 
treaties on Antarctica have been signed and the regime of management of the Antarctic affairs has been set up and 
operated successfully. Last year, the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty and establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection accordingly are welcome as the new inputs 
and development to the system. We hope that the Antarctic Treaty system will continue to work well and make 
progress so as to meet new challenges in the next century. 
 
Elaboration of an annex or annexes relating to liability for environmental damage is an important task for the 
two-week meeting. This delegation attaches importance to the work for providing a mechanism that would help to 
ensure the protection of the unique fragile Antarctic environment. At the same time, we should also ensure that such 
a regime dose not become an impediment to the conduct of scientific activities 
and international co-operation allowed and encouraged by the Antarctic Treaty and aimed at better understanding of 
the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. We would like to work closely with other 
delegations to seek solutions on the issues remained before us as soon as possible. 
 
As for the work of the Committee of Environmental Protection, we are of the view that effective operation of the 
CEP would make a greater contribution to the protection of the Antarctic environment. May I take this opportunity 
to wish the work of the CEP successful. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
As a consultative party, China has been doing her best to fulfil her responsibility as enshrined in the Treaties. In 
1999, a series of activities are conducted in China in commemoration of the l5th anniversary of Chinese Antarctic 
Expedition and for promoting the public appreciation of the Antarctic expedition and scientific activities and for 
enhancing the awareness of the importance of Antarctica as well. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I will assure you of my delegation's commitment and cooperation to the work of the 
Meeting under your able guidance. 
 
I thank you, Sir. 
