XXIII ATCM/ IP64 
May, 1999 
Original: English/Spanish 
 
Agenda Item 5b) 
 
Report 
of 
the 
CCAMLR 
Observer to ATCM XXIII 
 
 
Submitted by   
CCAMLR
 
REPORT OF THE CCAMLR OBSERVER TO ATCM XXIII 
1. 
 As part of a regular overview of the Antarctic Treaty System conducted in accordance 
with Recommendation XIII-2 of ATCM, CCAMLR is pleased to report on various 
developments in areas of its competence which have taken place since ATCM-XXII. 
 
 
MEMBERSHIP 
 
2. 
Since ATCM-XXII there have been no changes in CCAMLR Membership. 
 
 
FISHERIES IN 1997/98 AND 1998/99  
 
3. 
Fisheries in the CCAMLR Convention Area during 1997/98 (1 July 1997 to 30 June 
1998) targeted Patagonian and Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni), 
mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), krill (Euphausia superba) and squid (Martialia 
hyadesi).  There was no fishing for crabs in the Convention Area during 1997/98. 
 
4. 
The reported catch of finfish was 11 419 tonnes. Patagonian toothfish accounted for 
11 168 tonnes, and was taken by Chile, South Africa and the UK in the Southwest Atlantic 
(Subarea 48.3), and in the Western Indian Ocean by France and Ukraine (Division 58.5.1), 
Australia (Division 58.5.2), and France and South Africa (Subareas 58.6 and 58.7).  Antarctic 
toothfish was taken by New Zealand in the Southwest Pacific (Subarea 88.1), and mackerel 
icefish by Chile and Australia in the Southwest Atlantic (Subarea 48.3) and Western Indian 
Ocean (Division 58.5.2) respectively. 
 
5. 
The reported catch of krill was 80 802 tonnes, similar to the catch of 82 508 tonnes 
taken in the previous year.  All fisheries for krill took place in the South Atlantic (Area 48) 
and were conducted by Japan, Poland, the Republic of Korea and UK. 
 
6. 
CCAMLR-XVII endorsed new and exploratory fisheries by Australia, France, New 
Zealand, South Africa, Spain and Uruguay in 1998/99.  New and exploratory fisheries for 
toothfish will be undertaken in Subareas 48.6, 58.6 and 88.1 and in Divisions 58.4.1, 58.4.3 
and 58.4.4. 
 
 
1
 
7. 
The Commission adopted conservation measures for each of the fisheries 1998/99, as 
well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting fisheries information 
within the Convention Area.  These are published in the Schedule of Conservation Measures 
in Force 1998/99. 
 
 
ILLEGAL, UNREPORTED AND UNREGULATED FISHING 
IN THE CONVENTION AREA  
 
8. 
Once again, one of the major issues discussed at the CCAMLR meetings in 1998 was 
the illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus 
eleginoides) in the CCAMLR Convention Area.  
 
9. 
Illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing continued in the Convention Area during 
1997/98.  Forty-five sightings of fishing vessels were reported by Members.  Flags of only 
four vessels were identified.  These were from the following non-Contracting Parties:  Belize, 
Faroe Islands, Seychelles and Vanuatu.  The total unreported catch of toothfish in 1997/98 
was estimated at 22 415 tonnes. 
 
10. 
These activities continue to threaten stocks of toothfish and populations of seabirds.  
CCAMLR reacted strongly to these threats by strengthening measures introduced in 1997 to 
combat poachers, and introducing a number of new measures.  Members have further 
extended their collaborative surveillance and enforcement programs. 
 
11. 
CCAMLR-XVII adopted the following new and amended measures: 
 
• 
Scheme to Promote Compliance by Non-Contracting Party Vessels with CCAMLR 
Conservation Measures (Conservation Measure 118/XVII); 
 
• 
Licensing and Inspection Obligations of Contracting Parties with regard to their Flag 
Vessels Operating in the Convention Area (Conservation Measure 119/XVII); 
 
• 
Marking of Fishing Vessels and Fishing Gear (Conservation Measure 146/XVII); 
 
• 
Cooperation between Contracting Parties to Ensure Compliance with CCAMLR 
Conservation Measures with regard to their Vessels (Conservation Measure 147/XVII); 
and 
• 
Automated Satellite-Linked Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS) (Conservation 
2 
Measure 148/XVII). 
 
 
12. 
Bearing in mind Articles 19 to 23 of the 1995 UN Straddling Stock Agreement 
(UNIA), the Commission had previously decided that a system should be established by 
Members to exchange information on all vessels known to have fished in contravention of 
conservation measures (CCAMLR-XVI, paragraph 8.12).  The CCAMLR Vessel Register, 
work on which has already started, will enable the required exchange of information between 
Members. 
 
13. 
In addition, CCAMLR-XVII encouraged Members to ratify and promote the entry into 
force of such international instruments as UNIA, FAO Compliance Agreement and the Code 
of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, noting that this would contribute to the reduction of 
illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing in the Convention Area (CCAMLR-XVII, 
paragraphs 6.32 and 12.9). 
 
14. 
On invitation from CCAMLR, government representatives from Mauritius and 
Namibia participated as observers at the Seventeenth Meeting of the Commission.  The 
Commission encouraged these States to accede to the Convention and also to cease providing 
port or landing facilities to vessels which carried out unregulated fishing in the Convention 
Area. 
 
15. 
At its 1998 meeting, CCAMLR reiterated its request to all international and regional 
fisheries organisations, especially those organisations with jurisdiction over waters adjacent 
to the Convention Area, to join in the exchange of information on illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing on the high seas and to cooperate in combating these activities.  In 
particular, CCAMLR seeks cooperation towards the implementation of Conservation Measure 
118/XVII relating to the refusal of landings and transhipment of fish caught in violation of 
CCAMLR conservation measures and other requirements under the Convention. 
 
16. 
Further work is being undertaken during the 1999 intersessional period on developing 
a comprehensive action policy for the elimination of illegal, unregulated and unreported 
fishing for toothfish in the Convention Area; examining approaches that could be adopted, 
consistent with the objectives of the Convention and international law, for areas adjacent to 
the Convention Area; and developing cooperation with non-Contracting Parties. 
 
17. 
Within a framework of a future comprehensive action policy, a catch documentation 
scheme for toothfish was drafted for discussion at CCAMLR-XVII.  This is an important 
3 
step in the development of regulatory and trade-based measures to monitor the origin of 
toothfish catches and trade. 
 
18. 
Further development of this draft scheme was undertaken by CCAMLR Members 
during an ad hoc consultation in Brussels, Belgium, in April 1999.  The original draft was 
revised taking into account new proposals received from Members.  Work on some remaining 
aspects of the draft will continue intersessionally.  The revised draft will be submitted to 
CCAMLR-XVIII for consideration. 
 
 
SYSTEM OF INSPECTION 
19. 
As in previous years, inspections of fishing vessels were carried out in 1997/98 in 
accordance with the System of Inspection.  CCAMLR-designated inspectors reported overall 
compliance with fisheries regulations.  However, certain provisions of Conservation 
Measures 63/XV (the use of plastic packaging bands) and 29/XVI (in particular, line 
weighting and offal discharge requirements) had not been fully complied with by the vessels 
inspected.  Appropriate actions have been taken by Flag States to improve this situation. 
 
 
SCHEME OF INTERNATIONAL 
SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION 
 
20. 
As in the past several years, scientific observers provided 100% coverage of all 
longline fisheries undertaken in 1997/98, including the new fisheries.  This level of coverage 
continues in 1998/99.  
 
21. 
CCAMLR-XVII considered the feasibility of international scientific observers 
collecting information on vessels fishing illegally in the Convention Area.  It was decided that 
scientific observers be requested to include  in their reports factual data on sightings of 
fishing vessels in the Convention Area.  The effectiveness of, and the need to continue, this 
activity will be reviewed after a two-year trial period (CCAMLR-XVII, paragraphs 8.16 and 
8.17).  
 
 
4 
ECOSYSTEM MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT 
22. 
In 1997/98, work continued under the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
(CEMP) on a conceptual model of ecosystem monitoring and management.  In particular, 
methods for combining environmental and biological indices collected under CEMP into 
composite standardised indices have been further developed.  Composite indices offer a new 
approach to analysing the Antarctic marine ecosystem.  Other work included the development 
of new standard methods for calculating the extent of sea-ice and sea-surface temperatures in 
the Convention Area, revision of krill–fishery–predator interactions, and further development 
of the methods used to assess the status of the ecosystem. 
 
23. 
Last year, CCAMLR reported to the ATCM that it planned to undertake a synoptic 
survey of krill in the South Atlantic sector of the Convention Area (Area 48).  The survey’s 
primary objective is to improve estimates of the pre-exploitation biomass of krill which is 
used in models to estimate sustainable yield in that area.  A planning meeting for the survey 
took place in Cambridge, UK in March 1999.  Plans have been developed for this survey and 
it will be conducted in January 2000.  Japan, UK and USA have each committed a vessel to 
the survey.  Brazil, Republic of Korea, Russia and Ukraine have also expressed interest in 
participating in the survey. 
 
 
PREVENTION OF INCIDENTAL MORTALITY OF  
SEABIRDS DURING FISHING OPERATIONS 
 
24. 
Analysis of 1998 data on seabird by-catch in CCAMLR longline fisheries in the 
Southwest Atlantic (Subarea 48.3) and in the Western Indian Ocean in Subarea 58.6 (outside 
France’s EEZ) showed that, overall, there was a substantial reduction in seabird by-catch in 
the regulated fisheries in the Convention Area in 1997/98 (CCAMLR-XVII, paragraph 6.19). 
This was attributable partly to a greater compliance with CCAMLR’s mitigation measures 
and partly to the fact that in most areas in 1997/98 the fishing season opened later than in the 
preceding year (1 April instead of 1 March). 
 
25. 
Incidental mortality of seabirds during illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing in 
the Convention Area in 1997/98 was, however, estimated to be between 50 000 and 89 000 
seabirds.  This estimate was similar to the estimate for 1996/97.  Current levels of by-catch in 
unregulated fisheries are about two orders of magnitude greater than those in regulated 
fisheries.  These are unsustainable for albatross, giant petrel and white-chinned petrel 
5 
populations concerned. 
 
26. 
Methods for mitigating seabird by-catch in longline fisheries were reviewed.  
CCAMLR-XVII agreed that vessels discharging offal during the haul on the same side as the 
line-hauling site should not be allowed to fish in the Convention Area.  Members were 
requested to develop more efficient methods of weighting lines and to conduct research into 
the effects of line sink rates.  Research on line-setting devices and artificial bait, gear colour 
and bait-taking behaviour of seabirds was also encouraged (CCAMLR-XVII, paragraph 6.24). 
 
27. 
CCAMLR has continued the exchange of information on incidental mortality with a 
number of international fisheries and conservation organisations. 
 
28. 
As in previous years, work on the reduction of incidental mortality proceeds 
intersessionally, steered by the ad hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality of Seabirds 
Arising from Longline Fisheries (WG-IMALF).  
 
 
MONITORING OF MARINE DEBRIS  
AND ITS  IMPACT ON MARINE ANIMALS 
 
29. 
A detailed description of CCAMLR initiatives aimed at preventing and assessing the 
level of marine debris in Antarctic waters and its impact on marine biota was presented at 
ATCM-XXII.  
 
30. 
This important work continues.  CCAMLR reviews the topic of marine debris 
pollution annually.   
 
31. 
In 1998, an educational poster on the environmental impact of marine debris pollution 
and a placard describing ways of dealing with waste generated by fishing and other vessels 
operating in Antarctic waters were published and widely distributed by Members to fishing, 
research, re-supply and tourist vessels working in the Antarctic.  
 
32. 
Noting the considerable progress made in the collection and evaluation of scientific 
data on marine debris, the Commission has requested the Scientific Committee to include 
annual reviews of this topic on its agenda for future meetings. 
 
33. 
In particular, the Commission has expressed concern at the evidence of continued 
6 
accumulation of plastic packaging bands in marine debris in the Convention Area in 1998.  A 
significant number of such bands are believed to be discarded by vessels engaged in 
unregulated fishing.  There is also growing concern over the potential impact of fishing gear 
lost from vessels.  This lost gear may have an impact both on fish stocks (ghost fishing) and 
on seabird and marine mammal populations (entanglement, ingestion).  This problem is likely 
to be more acute in unregulated fisheries where whole longlines are known to be abandoned 
by vessels taking evasive action.  CCAMLR will keep these aspects under review. 
 
 
ISSUES OF COOPERATION WITH ELEMENTS  
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM 
 
34. 
At its 1998 meeting, CCAMLR welcomed the Republic of Bulgaria becoming a 
Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty and, in particular, Bulgaria’s notification to 
ATCM-XXII that it intends to accept the conservation measures in force under CCAMLR and 
to apply for membership of CCAMLR, should it resume harvesting activity in the Convention 
Area.  The Commission recalled that CCAMLR is not only an international fisheries 
organisation, but is part of the Antarctic Treaty System, and suggested that Bulgaria should be 
invited to become a Member of the Commission.  The CCAMLR Chairman extended such an 
invitation to Bulgaria in December 1998. 
 
35. 
The complementary nature of the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties and those of CCAMLR in protecting the marine environment was enhanced by the 
coming into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the 
establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).  CCAMLR agreed that 
the link between CCAMLR and the ATCM, particularly in terms of the Protocol for 
Environmental Protection, has established a unique environment protection system for 
Antarctica. 
 
36. 
CCAMLR has taken note of the list of nine Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) 
with marine areas, which was prepared at ATCM-XXII.  It was understood that, in 
accordance with Annex V, Article 6(2) of the Protocol, the draft Management Plans for these 
areas will be submitted to CCAMLR for approval in due course. 
 
37. 
Following the establishment of CEP, CCAMLR has agreed that the Chairman of its 
Scientific Committee will participate as an observer in the work of CEP, including its meeting 
this year.  Also this year, CCAMLR was represented at the second ATCM Antarctic Protected 
7 
8 
Area Workshop which was held immediately preceding ATCM-XXIII. 
 
38. 
Following the established cooperation with SCAR, observers from CCAMLR continue 
to participate at meetings of its various bodies and CCAMLR receives information of SCAR 
programs of relevance to CCAMLR’s objectives.  As in the past, SCAR will continue to be 
invited to send its observers to annual meetings of CCAMLR.  This year, in particular, the 
SCAR Subcommittee on Bird Biology and the Group of Specialists on Seals are preparing 
reports to CCAMLR on the status and trends in populations of Antarctic marine birds and 
seals which will be considered at CCAMLR-XVIII. 
 
39. 
With regard to operational issues discussed at ATCM-XXII, particularly in respect of 
improving the system of annual exchange of information, CCAMLR is also continually 
looking to improve its system.  One result is the CCAMLR website which was created in 
1998, and is now substantially updated.  The CCAMLR website address is www.ccamlr.org.  
It is intended that, in addition to providing information to the general public, it will also 
provide CCAMLR Members with a tool for exchanging information.  The website is still 
under development.  Other means of improving the exchange of information are also under 
consideration and will be discussed at CCAMLR-XVIII. 
  
