XXIII ATCM/ IP40 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 4 
 
 
 
 
 
Pending Issues after the entry 
into force of the Environmental 
Protocol 
 
Submitted by 
Italy 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 PENDING ISSUES AFTER THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
 
PROTOCOL 
 
Francesco Francioni 
 
(Member of the Italian Delegation to the ATCM) 
 
I.WHY AN ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT? 
 
1.Introduction 
 
2.Institutional Elements in the ATS 
 
3.Shortcomings of the present system. 
 
4.The formal recognition of the need for a secretariat 
 
 
II.LEGAL QUESTIONS INVOLVED IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECRETARIAT 
 
5.What legal instrument for its constitution? 
 
6.Legal Status of the Secretariat 
 
7.Privileges and Immunities 
 
8.Other Issues 
 
 
 
 
2
I. WHY AN ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT? 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
As is known, the Washington Treaty of 1959 (the Antarctic Treaty) makes no provision for 
permanent institutions, for fixed headquarters of treaty organs or for an administrative infrastructure 
with secretariat functions. As originally conceived, the Antarctic Treaty was meant primarily to be a 
security arrangement designed to guarantee stability and co-operation in an area marked by 
competing territorial claims and superpowers rivalry. In this context, there was hardly any place for 
the setting up of international institutions. Thus, rather than establishing a form of international 
administration, the treaty envisaged a forum of inter-governmental consultation and cooperation to 
guarantee continuous and peaceful access to the Antarctic continent. This original intent is also 
reflected in the rather limited number of the original contracting Parties, consisting of the seven 
claimants (Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Norway, United Kingdom), the two "quasi-
claimants" (the US and the USSR asserting an inchoate title), and three non claimants (Belgium, 
Japan and South Africa), as well as in the type of solution given to the difficult question of territorial 
claims. Rather than tiding a position with regard to the well-foundedness of such claims in 
international law, the treaty preserved the status quo and foreclosed the assertion of new claims 
while the Treaty was in force (art. IV). 
 
Consistently with this political matrix, the evolution of the Antarctic Treaty System over a 
period of almost forty years has confirmed the minimalist approach toward institutional 
development, thus differing from the general trend that has characterized the great majority of treaty 
regimes in contemporary international law1. The resulting institutional "deficit" reflects the 
continuing reluctance with which the Consultative Parties, or at least a substantial number of them, 
have looked at the prospect of transforming the Antarctic Treaty into some sort of international 
organization2. 
2                     
    1Most multilateral environmental treaties concluded in the past 25 years make provisions for an 
independent secretariat or for a secretariat to be provided by an international organization to which the 
treaty is attached. See for example: 
 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, Washington, 
1973, art. XII, 12 I.L.M. 1085 (1973) at 1092. See also <http://www. wcmc.org.uk/CITES>. 
 
Vienna Convention for Protection of the Ozone Layer, Vienna, 1985, art. VII, 26 I.L.M. 1516 
(1987) at 1532, and Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, Montreal, 1987, art. XII, 
26 I.L.M. 1541 (1987) at 1558. See also <http://www.unep.chlozone>. 
 
Basel Convention on the Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Waste, art.XVI, Basel, 1989, 28 
I.L.M. 657 (1987) at 671. See also <http://www.unep.ch/baseL/index.html>. 
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, art. VIII, New York, 1992, 31 I.L.M. 
849 (1992) at 862. See also <http://www.unfccc.de>. 
 
    2What distinguishes the Antarctic Treaty system from an 
"international organization" is, not only the obvious fact that 
 
 
3
 
 
At present there seems to be no sign of a general interest in a repositioning of the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties on this matter. On the contrary, there is ample evidence that the establishment of 
international institutions within the Antarctic Treaty is still largely looked upon with suspicion as a 
step leading toward further internationalization of the continent and eventual erosion of the 
individual countries positions on the question of exclusive territorial claims. Furthermore, the 
process of institutionalization of an international treaty would normally entail the development of a 
collective will of the entity through majority decision making. However, this would not be 
consistent with the "golden" rule of consensus, which has been another pillar of the Antarctic Treaty 
since its origin. Finally, financial concerns with regard to the inevitable costa of maintaining an 
international bureaucracy have played a non secondary role in keeping alive the affection for the 
present an-organic structure of the Antarctic Treaty system. 
 
2. Institutional Elements in the ATS 
 
 
In spite of this background, it would be naive to think that the Antarctic Treaty System 
(ATS) has remained entirely free from the seeds of institutional development in the almost forty 
years of its evolution. The regular convening of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting has led 
to the consolidation of a plenary body which meets and works on the basis of a precise agenda, of 
rules of procedure, and in a location chosen in accordance with a pre-ordained principle of rotation 
among Consultative Parties in their alphabetical order in the English language3. Some basic 
secretarial functions are provided in a decentralized form by the host country of the ATCM. In 
particular, this country has the responsibility for 1) the preparation of the Meeting, 2) the circulation 
of documents prior to the meeting, 3) the provision of administrative and secretarial services at the 
Meeting, 4) the preparation and timely publication of the Final Report, the provision of the authentic 
test of Recommendation adopted at the meeting it hosted, as well as 5) the provision of certified 
copies of the Final Report to the Contracting Parties as well as to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations4. 
 
Such decentralized mechanism has improved through the years owing to the establishment 
of the national "contact points", pursuant to Recommendation  
                                                                  
the Antarctic Treaty does not constitute an international subject 
endowed with international "personality", but also the absence of 
an independent legal entity capable of representing the corporate 
will of the Antarctic Treaty participants even in domestic law. 
For the practical ramifications of this "deficit" see below 
sections 6 & 7 
    3Recommendation I-XIV, Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System , part I (7th ed. 1990), p. 
1102. See also Bush, W.M., Antarctica and International Law: a Collection of inter-state and international 
documents, vol. 1 (1982), pp. 
128-29. 
    4Recommendation XII-6, Handbook (cited above note 3), p.1201. 
 
 
 
 
4
XIII-15, and by the introduction, pursuant to Recommendation XIII-26, of the practice of presenting 
reports by other components of the Antarctic Treaty system at each Consultative meeting. This has 
greatly facilitated communication among Treaty Parties and exchange of information among the 
various components of the Antarctic Treaty system. 
 
Besides the host country, the depository Government of the Antarctic Treaty, the United 
States, has also provided secretarial functions in a variety of instances which include 1) the 
preparation of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System , published by the Dept. of State in 
19947, and 2) the undertaking of a study on the public availability of documents and information 
about the Antarctic Treaty system8 and 3) the creation of an Antarctic Treaty web page on Internet 
by Norway on the occasion of the XXII ATCM. In some exceptional circumstances, administrative 
functions have been provided on an ad hoc basis by individual Governments delegated to perform 
specific institutional activities. This was the case of the "convenor" of Treaty Parties dealing with 
the Antarctica question at the United Nations in the mid nineteen-eighties and early nineties9. 
 
In addition to these surrogate forms of institutional infrastructure, a true secretariat was 
contemplated in two instruments that were developed as part of the Antarctic Treaty system. These 
are: 1) the 1980 Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living resources 
(CCAMLR)10, and 2) the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities 
(CRAMRA)11. Indeed, a secretary was actually established at the headquarters of the CCAMLR  
4                     
    5Recommendation XIII - 1, Handbook (cited above note 3), pp. 1202-3. See also Bush, 
Antarctica and International Law, binder 1, booklet AT 2 (February 1991), pp. 46-47. 
    6Recommendation XIII - 2, Handbook (cited above note 3), p. 1203. See also Bush, Antarctica 
and International Law (cited above note 5), pp. 47-48. 
    7Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System, 8th ed. (U.S. Dept. of State, 
1994). 
    8Recommendation XII-6, para. 5, Handbook (cited above note 3), p. 1201. See also Bush, Antarctica 
and International Law, binder 1, booklet AT 1 (February 1991), pp. 61-63. 
    9Australia began the coordinating work as the “convenor”. The 
role was later performed on a rotating basis by host states of the 
A.T.C.M. 
    10Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources, Canberra, 1980, art. XVII, Handbook, part 4 (cited above note 3), pp. 
4214. See also <http://www.icair.iac.org.nz/treaty/treaty/marine.html>. Article XVII provides that the 
Executive Secretary and its staff shall be appointed by the Commission, the plenary organ established under 
Article VII and endowed with legal personality pursuant to Article VIII. 
    11Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource 
Activities, Wellington, 1988, art. 33, Handbook, part 4 (cited above note 3), pp. 
4322. See also <http://www.icair.iac.org.nz/treaty/treaty/mineral.html>. As in CCAMLR, also in this 
Convention, the establishment of the Secretariat would have been the responsibility if the Commission 
provided for under Article 18. 
 
 
 
5
Commission in Tasmania12
. With regard to CRAMRA, the establishment of a secretariat, as 
contemplated by Art. 33, has remained a dead letter as a consequence of the Consultative Parties' 
decision to adopt a mineral ban for a period of fifty years13. 
 
3. Shortcomings of the present system. 
 
 
Although the present system of decentralized performance of secretarial function by 
individual State Parties, has served reasonably well until now, one cannot ignore that it presents 
certain disadvantages. One is the lack of centralized archives of the Antarctic Treaty. Until recently, 
this lacuna might have appeared tolerable in view of the rather small number of treaty Parties and 
the limited scope of Antarctic activities. Today, however, with the growing number of Parties and 
the expansion of the system, especially with regard to environmental protection, the need for a 
centralized system of Antarctic Treaty records is becoming more and more urgent. To give a simple 
example, today, a State intending to proceed with the approval of a large number of past Antarctic 
Treaty Recommendations, does not have the possibility of obtaining certified copies of such 
Recommendation from one source. Through diplomatic channels, it must address every country 
which has hosted the Consultative Meeting at which the relevant Recommendations were adopted. 
The Handbook does not contain certified texts; it contains occasional errors and presents certain 
gaps. In any case, it is not complete and up-to-date. 
 
Another disadvantage of the present system is the necessity at every Consultative Meeting 
of starting from scratch with the organization of administrative and secretarial support. It is true that 
in this process every host country has the opportunity of going through a learning experience. But 
this comes at a high cost. In fact, certain Consultative Parties have even decided to forego the 
opportunity of hosting the meeting14 basically because of the financial burden involved in its 
organization. 
 
The adoption in 1991 of the Antarctic Protocol on environmental protection and its entry 
into force in 1998 has brought new arguments in favor of the establishment of a centralized 
secretariat. Indeed, the Protocol has increased the complexity and scope of Antarctic regulation and 
management. It has led to the establishment of a new permanent institution, the Committee on 
Environmental Protection. It has introduced new requirements of communication and circulation of 
documents, especially with regard to environmental impact assessment and, in the future, these 
requirements may be extended to liability for environmental harm15. This new situation requires 
5                     
    12Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, art. XVII, Handbook , part 4 
(cited above note 3), p. 4214. 
    13Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Madrid, 1991, art. 7 & 25, reprinted 
in Antarctica and International Law, binder 1, booklet AT 91C (Nov. 1992), pp. 23 & 68. See also 
<http://www.icair.iac.org.nz/treaty/protocol/protocol.html>. 
 
    14In 1991-1992 India declined to host the A.T.C.M., which then became the responsibility of Italy. 
There are reasons to believe that other countries will "pass" on the opportunity in the coming years. 
    15Of course, a secretariat will become indispensable in the 
 
 
 
6
continuity between Consultative Meetings and timely circulation of documents, which a permanent 
secretariat would be better suited to ensure than the present decentralized system. 
 
 
4. The formal recognition of the need for a secretariat 
 
 
Increasing awareness about these difficulties and the continuing expansion of the scope of 
regulatory powers within the Antarctic system has led to the gradual recognition by Consultative 
Parties of the need for a permanent secretariat. The first full evaluation of such need took place at 
ATCM XIII in Brussels whose final Report stated the following: 
 
 
"The way in which the work of the Consultative meeting has developed in recent years led 
many delegations to the conclusion that there was a growing need for some kind of 
permanent infrastructure to be established, and that there may well soon be no alternative to 
doing so. Such infrastructure, which in the view of some delegations might take the form of 
a secretariat, was envisaged as having functions which should include documentary 
preparation and follow-up of consultative Meetings as well as certain functions relating to 
the preparation and dissemination of up-to-date records and information about the Antarctic 
Treaty and the Consultative Meeting process. Some delegations noted that a secretariat 
might in time come to have more extensive functions. Emphasis was, however, laid by some 
on the need for any permanent infrastructure to be proportional to the real needs, which in 
the immediate future called only for something modest in scope and cost"16. 
 
 
In spite of the favorable orientation expressed in this Report by "many delegations", 
consensus on the establishment of a secretariat did not develop quickly. At the XIVth ATCM, the 
question was discussed again on the basis of several papers presented, inter alia, by the United 
States, Argentina, Australia and China. Although the majority of views among Consultative Parties 
was again in favor of a permanent secretariat, several delegations maintained the view that the 
system did not need any new permanent infrastructure: 
                                                                  
event of the establishment in the future liability annex of a 
compensation fund. But even without such a fund, the environmental 
liability regime would increase the need for administrative 
infrastructure and communication. 
    16Final Report of the XVII A.T.C.M., Annex E, Antarctica and International Law (cited above note 18), 
pp. 80-83. 
 
 
 
7
 
"The role of host Governments in the preparation and follow-up of  Consultative Meetings 
(including preparation and publication of the Final  
Report), 
the 
role 
of 
the 
depositary 
Government of the Antarctic Treaty, the  
national contact points established pursuant to 
recommendation XIII- 1, and  the provision for reports by the other components of the Antarctic 
Treaty  system at each Consultative Meeting pursuant to Recommendation XIII-2,  were all cited 
as examples of how the Consultative mechanism has evolved  
and could continue to evolve 
in the future in an effective fashion to meet  
the growing needs. These delegations emphasized 
that the establishment of  
a permanent infrastructure to carry out some or all of the functions 
 
mentioned was not necessary and expressed doubts about what effective  
contribution 
such infrastructure could make" (emphasis added)17. 
 
 
It was not until the XVIIth ATCM in Venice (November 1992) that we find the first unambiguous expression of a general 
consensus among Consultative Parties as to the need for the establishment of an Antarctic Treaty secretariat. As we can read in the 
Final Report 
 
"consensus existed that a secretariat should be established to assist the  Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the 
Committee for  
environmental protection in performing their functions"18. 
 
 
The Venice meeting also marked the beginning of serious discussions on the form of 
establishment, composition, functions and sharing of costs of the new structure. An ad hoc contact group 
was established which benefit from the active contributions of many Antarctic Treaty Parties and a 
document containing the essential elements of an Antarctic Treaty secretariat was attached to the 
Final Report19. 
 
 
After Venice, the subject of the secretariat was regularly revisited at every ATCM, in Kyoto 
(1994), Seoul (1995), Utrecht (1996), Christchurch (1997) and Tromso (1998) and also during 
intersessional meetings devoted to the question of liability. After six years, the lack of substantial 
results is not certainly due the technical and legal problems involved in the establishment of the 
secretariat, but rather to the political issue of its location. As we know, this issue has proved to be a 
major stumbling block in the process of creating a secretariat. Argentina has offered Buenos Aires 
for the secretariat seat and it has been supported by most Consultative Parties. The United Kingdom 
objects to establishing the secretariat in any of the three countries maintaining overlapping territorial 
claims, thus excluding itself as well as Argentina and Chile from the list of eligible candidates. 
 
It is not the purpose of this paper to enter into the merits of this sensitive political question. 
Our purpose is rather to focus on the legal issues surrounding the establishment of the secretariat. 
Clarification of these issues is not likely to accelerate the process of political accommodation among 
potential candidates for the seat of the secretariat. However, it is hoped that by indicating the 
7                     
    17Final report of the XIV A.T.C.M. (Rio de Janeiro), reprinted 
in Antarctica and International Law, binder 1, booklet AT 4 (February 1991), p. 8, para. 28. 
    18Final report of the XVII A.T.C.M. (Venice), reprinted in 
Antarctica and International Law, binder 2, booklet AT 92C (June 1995), p. 13, para. 43. 
    19Final Report of the XVII ATCM, Annex E, Antarctica and 
International Law (cited above note 18), pp.80-83 
 
 
 
8
options available to the Consultative Parties, such clarification may remove technical obstacles to 
the establishment of the secretariat and make possible the timely adoption of its constitutive act, 
once the issue of its seat is finally resolved. 
 
II. LEGAL QUESTIONS INVOLVED IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECRETARIAT 
 
 
There are basically three major legal questions involved in the creation of an Antarctic Treaty 
secretariat. These are: the form of the legal instrument by which it is to be established; the status of the 
secretariat, i.e., its personality and legal capacity; its privileges and immunities. To these, one may add 
further substantive questions relating to the range of functions, the criteria for sharing the costs 
among the contracting Parties, and, perhaps, the advisability of a dispute settlement mechanism. 
 
I will examine these questions individually with the caveat, however, that there is a high 
degree of interdependence between them. 
 
5.What legal instrument for its constitution? 
 
 
In principle, one can envisage three different ways by which the establishment of a 
secretariat can be achieved in the present legal setting of the Antarctic Treaty. The first is the 
adoption of an ad hoc deliberation by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The second is the 
conclusion of a headquarters agreement with the prospective host State. The third is the conclusion 
of an additional protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, supplemented by a host country agreement to deal 
especially with the issue of privileges and immunities. 
 
 
1) If we consider the first option, it might appear rather attractive because 
of its simplicity and the strong connotation it would attach to the establishment of the secretariat as 
part of the structure and process of the ATCM. However, this avenue is not free of problems. First 
of all, it is not clear in what "type" of act such deliberation should be embodied. At the XIX session 
in Seoul the ATCM decided that acts adopted pursuant to art. IX were to be divided into three 
categories: a) measures which designate "a text which contains provisions intended to be legally 
binding"; b) resolutions, indicating "a hortatory text"; c) decisions which are to be taken with regard 
to "internal organizational matters". Under this new typology, it is clear at the outset that one should 
exclude the possibility of resorting to a resolution. Its non-binding character would not provide an 
adequate legal basis for the establishment of a new institution whose functioning must be secured by 
effective obligations of all contracting Parties. The question, therefore, is whether such deliberation 
should take the form of a measure or a decision. Surprisingly enough, remarkably little attention has 
been given to this subject during the six years of discussions within the ad hoc contact group. In my 
view, the more suitable instrument would be a measure since the area of application of a decision is 
intended to remain confined to "internal organizational matters". This narrow definition could 
hardly encompass the setting up of a new infrastructure capable of far reaching effects on the 
operation of the ATS also in "external" relations. In any event, a decision could only proclaim the 
"birth" of a secretariat whose actual existence and functioning would only depend on the appropriate 
follow-up by the Consultative Parties, in terms of financial support and implementing measures. This 
leads, again, to the conclusion that a measure would be required. 
 
A second problem arising from the use of an article IX instrument for the creation of the 
 
 
 
9
secretariat is the requirement that all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties consent and 
subsequently approve it before it becomes legally binding. This is a notoriously slow process. But, 
in this case it is doubtful that it would be slower than that of an ordinary international agreement 
since the new institution would only become established with the consent and the full participation 
of all Consultative Parties. 
 
 
2) The second option available for the setting up a secretariat would be an international 
agreement with the host country. This agreement would have at the same time the character of a 
constitutive instrument of the secretariat and of a headquarters agreement providing for the seat, 
legal capacity and privileges of the new organ. This solution underlie the early work done by the 
contact group of the ATCM and it is expressly contemplated in Annex D attached to the Final 
Report of the XVIII ATCM in Kyoto20. The advantage of this solution would be its simplicity. The 
disadvantages are 1) the uncertainties of the legal status of the secretariat outside of the host country - 
and this may be critical with respect to the need for the secretariat to leave its permanent seat to 
assist the rotating ATCM - and 2) the lack of a unified international subject - supposedly an Antarctic 
Treaty Organization - having the legal capacity and competence to enter into the headquarters 
agreement with host state. The latter inconvenient could be overcome by the conclusion of an 
identical agreement between the host country and all the Consultative Parties acting jointly as 
members of the ATCM. 
 
 
3) Lastly, a third solution would be the adoption of a protocol additional to the Antarctic 
Treaty for the establishment of a secretariat and the conclusion of a separate host State agreement 
providing for the accommodation, services, privileges and immunities to be enjoyed by the 
secretariat and its staff within the territory of the host country. This is probably the most traditional 
approach that one can follow. It has the advantage of facilitating recognition of the secretariat's legal 
capacity, and, perhaps, of privileges and immunities, in the territory of all Consultative Parties. 
 
This approach, however, raises concerns with regard to two main issues. The first is the risk 
that it may lead to the creation of a secretariat with a separate international status, independent from 
a "parent" international entity for whose services it would be created. This risk is amplified with 
regard to the Antarctic Treaty because the ATCM is not personified as an international subject and 
it does not possess legal capacity as such independently of the joint will of the Consultative Parties. 
The secretariat would thus be an intergovernmental institution supposed to act as an organ of an 
international body that does not exist. This conclusion, quite correctly, is not accepted by some 
Consultative Parties21. The second issue is an operational one. If the secretariat is endowed with 
international personality, and thus for all intents and purposes is a small international institution of 
its own, how can we ensure that it remains responsive to and effectively controlled by the ATCM? 
 
The most radical and legally sound way to resolve these issues would be the transformation 
9                     
    20Final Report of the A.T.C.M. XVIII (Kyoto), Annex D, 
reprinted in Antarctica and International Law, binder 2, booklet AT 94C (September 1995), pp. 56-
59. 
    21See UK paper on file with the author. 
 
 
 
10
of the present ATCM into the plenary organ of a new Antarctic Treaty Organization. Such a step, although 
technically possible, would require a modification or amendment of the Antarctic Treaty by 
unanimous vote pursuant to article XII para. 1. However such a decision is quite unlikely, at least in 
the near future. Indeed, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties confirmed on the occasion of the 
3Oth anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty that they remain "convinced of the continued 
effectiveness"22 of the present structure of the Antarctic Treaty System. There is no indication that a 
new philosophy is now emerging in the ATCM. 
 
Short of such radical step, a more realistic approach would be the creation of a secretariat 
with functions limited to providing administrative and organizational support to the ATCM and its 
subsidiary bodies, such as the Committee on Environmental Protection. In this perspective, the 
constitutive instrument should contain provisions that would ensure that the Consultative Parties are 
able to exercise effective control over the secretariat's functions and its acts. In this way, the secretariat 
would be conceived as an "organ" of the collective will of the ATCM rather than an 
intergovernmental entity capable of its own will. 
 
6.Legal status of the Secretariat 
 
 
The question of the secretariat's legal status has been discussed for quite some time within 
the ATCM contact group, and it revolves essentially around the dilemma of whether the secretariat 
ought to have legal personality only in the domestic law of the host country or whether it should 
enjoy full international personality. Views on this issue among Consultative Parties continue to 
remain divided. 
 
In my opinion, the choice between these two options should not be based on pre-conceived 
ideological models but, rather, on the pragmatic evaluation of the object, purpose and functions of 
the future secretariat. 
 
A fairly broad consensus has emerged so far that the secretariat should be rather small and 
cost effective. A set of well-identified functions has emerged especially from the work of the 
XVIIth through the XXth ATCMs. These functions consist of: 
 
1) assistance in the preparation of ATCMs and of other special meetings under the Antarctic 
Treaty; 
 
2) coordination of information under the Antarctic Treaty and the environmental Protocol; 
 
3) maintaining the records of the ATCM and of other meetings under the Antarctic Treaty; 
 
4) preparing reports of ATCM and other official meetings; 
 
5)circulating information received from contracting Parties of activities in Antarctica by 
non-parties. 
 
 
Although the ATCM may determine that other technical or administrative functions could 
be attributed to the secretariat, it is clear from the above list that there is no need to create a 
secretariat with a high profile and with the attribute of international personality that even the ATCM 
does not possess. What is really needed is an executive body with limited contractual capacity to 
10                     
    22Report of the A.T.C.M. XVI (Bonn), reprinted in Antarctica and International Law, binder 2, booklet 
AT 91G (February 1994), p. 90. 
 
 
 
11
ensure the hiring of staff or to maintain and transfer funds, the capacity to acquire and dispose of 
property, and the capacity, if necessary, to commence legal proceedings in the host state, possibly 
with the approval of the ATCM. At this stage, proposals advanced to the effect of giving the 
secretariat the capacity to conclude international agreement23 are not convincing. Given the 
instrumental character of the secretariat, such agreements could reflect only the will of the ATCM 
of which the secretariat is only an organ. Consequently, if the need arises for an international 
agreement - such as the headquarters agreement - it ought to be concluded by the Consultative Parties 
acting jointly or by the secretariat acting in an agency relationship with the ATCM and pursuant to 
an ad hoc delegation of powers by the Consultative Parties. 
 
The main argument put forward in support of an international personality is that the 
secretariat should be able to act in the territory of all Consultative Parties especially in relation to the 
need to provide support to the rotating host country. This is certainly a genuine need. However, it is 
hardly conceivable that it ought to justify the granting of an international legal personality. There 
are organs set up by international agreements that for the fulfillment of their functions convene in a 
different host country every year without enjoying or claiming, for this very reason, an international 
personality. An example is the World Heritage Committee, an organ of the 1972 UNESCO 
Convention for the protection of the World cultural and natural heritage24. To the best knowledge of 
this writer, in the more than 25 years of practice of this organ, which has a broad range of powers 
and an annual budget of several million US dollars, there has never been a single occasion in which 
the need for attributing it an international legal personality has arisen or has even been proposed25. 
11                     
    23"The Secretariat shall have full legal personality and such 
legal capacity to carry out its functions. In particular, the 
secretariat shall have the capacity: (iv) to conclude subject to 
prior approval of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
international agreement". 
 
 
Art. 3(iv.) of the draft presented at the informal contact 
group on the Secretariat convened in Tromso during the XXII 
A.T.C.M.. Document on file with the author. 
 
    24Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural 
and National Heritage, Paris, 1972. 11 I.L.M. 1358 (1972). See 
also <http://www/unesco.org/whc/nwhc/pages/doc/main.htm>. 
    25Article 14 of the World Heritage Convention provides that "the World Heritage Committee shall be 
assisted by a secretariat appointed by the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural 
Organization". From 1992, the Committee has been served by a special unit of the UNESCO Secretariat that 
has been named the "World Heritage Centre". The question of the legal capacity of the Secretariat/Centre to 
enter into international agreements - especially agreements with member states and inter-govemmental and 
non-governmental organizations 
- has been a recurrent theme of discussion at the World Heritage 
Committee's meetings. At the 1996 meeting in Merida, Mexico, the World Heritage Committee decided that 
the capacity to enter into international agreements would be reserved to the Committee itself and the 
competence to enter into such agreements would be conferred to the Chairperson of the Committee. See 
UNESCO, Report of the World Heritage Committee, Merida, 1996. Paper on file with author. 
 
 
 
12
 
To stay within the family of the Antarctic instruments, we can find another example of an 
executive organ which, although it is required to perform some functions outside the host State, is 
not for this sole reason endowed with an international personality nor with an independent legal 
status. I refer to the CCAMLR Secretariat which, under art. XVII of the Canberra Convention, is 
appointed by the Commission, which is the sole body of the convention to be endowed with legal 
personality and to "... enjoy in the territory of each of the Contracting Parties such legal capacity as 
may be necessary to perform its functions". This wording makes it clear that the legal capacity 
referred to is of a domestic law nature and does not necessary entail on international personality. 
 
To conclude on this point, I believe that the ATCM does not need to set up a Secretariat 
with international legal personality. Such a step is not required by the nature of the activities and 
functions to be performed by the secretariat. Further, I believe that the establishment of such an 
international legal personality would not be appropriate in the specific circumstances of the 
Antarctic Treaty where the plenary body itself - the ATCM - is not an international subject. The best 
solution would be the adoption of a functional approach - similar to the above quoted articles VIII 
and XVII of CCAMLR. In analogy with the CCAMLR Commission, the Antarctic Treaty 
secretariat would simply be attributed "legal personality", without further specification, and would 
enjoy legal capacity, first of all, in the host country, and, secondarily in the territory of the other 
Contracting Parties but only to the extent that such capacity would be indispensable for the 
performance of the functions contemplated in the constitutive instrument (measure, protocol or 
headquarters agreement) or provided, if need arises, by specific agreement or ATCM's decision. 
 
7. Privileges and Immunities 
 
 
The efficient and unimpeded performance of the secretariat's functions would require that a 
certain number of privileges and immunities be granted to the secretariat as an institution and to its 
staff. There is no disagreement that such immunities ought to be accorded in the territory of the host 
State, where the secretary is permanently located and where its functions normally are to be 
performed. The question arises as to whether immunities should be extended also to the territory of 
other Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. This point has attracted extensive debate in the ATCM, 
especially after the introduction of several papers (United Kingdom, Australia) at the XIXth and 
XXth ATCMs. In a UK paper presented at Utrecht in 1996 a strong case was made for the granting 
of a broad range of privileges and immunities by all Consultative Parties in view of the need to 
guarantee the undisturbed performance of the secretariat functions in the territory of all States that 
would be potential hosts of the ATCM or of other special meetings for which the assistance by the 
secretariat is required26. It is still unclear to what extent this position is a consequence of the theory, 
which favors the granting of international personality to the secretariat. Such consequential link 
would appear to be inherent to the view according to which the obligation to grant immunities to 
international organizations rests on a norm of customary international law27. This view, however, is 
12                     
    26Paper on file with the author. 
    27Dominicé, C., L'immunité de jurisdiction a de l'éxecution des organization internationales, 
Recueil des Cours, 1984, IV, pp.14S ff.; Lalive, J.F., L'immunité de jurisdiction des états et des organisation 
internationales, Id., 1953, III, pp.2O5 ff.; Conforti, B., Diritto Internazionale, 1997; Weissberg, The International 
 
 
 
13
contested by those who maintain that the sole basis of the obligation to accord immunities to international 
institutions is the treaty providing for them28. If this view is correct, nothing would prevent the 
Consultative Parties from regulating the question of immunities independently of the international 
personality of the secretariat and in a way as to restrict such immunities to the territory of the host country. 
 
Undoubtedly, this theoretical dispute is relevant to the correct orientation of the ongoing debate 
over the status and immunities of the future Antarctic Treaty secretariat. However, for the purpose of this 
paper, I do not believe that it is necessary to take a firm position on the issue of the legal foundation of 
immunities of international organizations. This is for the simple reason that it is 
not necessary, and indeed it would not be appropriate, to give the future secretariat the status of an 
international organization29. 
 
On this point, we need only to recall the need to avoid solutions based on a mechanical imitation 
of existing models of international organizations. Our choice should rather be inspired by the specific 
nature of the ATS and by the pragmatic evaluation of the object and functions of the secretariat. It is hardly 
necessary to repeat that, short of an amendment of the Antarctic Treaty, the future secretariat cannot be 
conceived as an organ of an international organization - which the ATCM is not; it must not be established 
as an independent international entity capable of its own will since its sole purpose is that of serving the 
ATCM and the other subsidiary organs of the ATS such as the Committee on Environmental Protection. 
Therefore, the secretariat should be the organ of the collective will of the Consultative Parties as expressed 
in the organized structure of the ATCM. In this perspective what is necessary and sufficient is the 
delineation of a set of functional immunities designed to protect the undisturbed exercise of the secretariat's 
functions rather than the independence of an imaginary international organization. Such immunities should 
include traditional tax exemptions, immunity from local jurisdiction and execution, inviolability of the 
seat, archives and official communications. They would be primarily relevant in the relations 
between the secretariat and the host country. Therefore they should be provided either in an ad hoc 
headquarter agreement between the host country and the Consultative Parties or in the constitutive 
instrument of the secretariat (be it a protocol or an ATCM measure). If in the actual life of the 
secretariat the need might arise for the extension of privileges and immunities to the territory of 
other Parties, this result could be achieved by ad hoc provisions to be included in a separate protocol of 
agreement or in a measure to be adopted by the ATCM and by subsequent approval/ratification of 
such provisions in the respective domestic legal systems of State Parties. 
 
This functional approach is in line with several precedents in international practice. Besides 
the already mentioned CCAMLR articles VIII and XVII, under which the privileges of the 
Secretariat are parasitic on the Commission's, we may refer to GATT 1947 whose secretariat was 
established in the absence of an international organization with privileges and immunities. In this case the 
functional approach was underscored by the fact that immunities were conferred by a decree of the Swiss 
Government unilaterally extending to the GATT secretariat the guarantees provided to the United Nations in 
the headquarters agreement of 19 April 1946. 
 
 
                                                                  
Status of the United Nations (1961). 
    28Sinclair, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1985, 37th Session, Vol. 1, p. 289. 
    29See above section 6. 
 
 
 
14
8. Other Issues 
 
 
Besides the three key legal issues discussed above, the establishment of an ATS secretariat entails 
some other questions of predominantly political and financial character. I refer to the question of the scope 
of powers and functions of the secretariat and to the question of cost sharing. 
 
The first question has been addressed since the Venice ATCM and there is now broad consensus 
on the range of functions outlined by the contact group at the XVIII ATCM (Kyoto). See section 6 above. 
 
On the second question, uncertainties still exist as to whether the future secretariat should be 
financed by equal shares of all Consultative Parties or by a system of assessed contributions that should 
reflect the different economic strength of the participants or the different scale and importance of their 
activities in Antarctica. Resistance toward the latter solution comes from those countries which wish to 
preserve the special character of the Antarctic Treaty as an instrument based on the formal equality of all 
Consultative Parties and on consensus. However, even if the approach based on equal shares were to 
prevail, it would be difficult to maintain an unadulterated consensus system with regard to the adoption of a 
budget necessary to meet the expenses of the secretariat. A system based on a high majority, such as a three 
quarters majority, would avoid the risk of a paralysis for the secretariat in the event of a veto by one 
contracting Party or a tiny minority of the contracting Parties. However, even the introduction of such a 
majority would constitute a departure from the Antarctic Treaty article IX para. i and 4 and would raise the 
issue of the necessity of an amendment pursuant to article XII. 
 
III. CONCLUSIONS 
 
 
This paper has argued that developments occurred in the Antarctic Treaty system over the past forty 
years present strong evidence in favor of the timely establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The 
entry into force of the environmental Protocol in 1998 and the formal establishment of the Committee for 
environmental protection the same year, represent new important developments in the system, for which 
corresponding institutional up-grading is called for. 
 
Having recognized this, we have maintained that the setting up of a new secretariat infrastructure 
should not occur in a way as to transform the Antarctic Treaty into an international organization. The 
secretariat should be conceived and set up as a support structure for the ATCM. It should have a functional 
capacity limited to the performance of the tasks entrusted to it by the ATCM and privileges and immunities 
reflecting the inter-governmental nature of the body - the ATCM -of which it would be an emanation. In this 
perspective it would not be necessary, and perhaps it would be legally inappropriate, to endow the 
Secretariat with international personality. 
 
As to the choice of the constitutive instrument, preference should go to either the adoption of a 
"measure" under article IX, or of an ad hoc protocol additional to the Antarctic Treaty. The choice between 
one or the other, ultimately depends on how high a profile the Consultative Parties wish to give to the future 
secretariat. 
 
Beyond these issues, there remains the political problem of how to determine the site of the future 
secretariat. This decision is important; but not so much because of the prestige and national pride that are at 
stake. Rather, because hosting the first institution of the Antarctic Treaty carries with it a strong symbolic 
value and legacy: the host country's uncompromising commitment to further the spirit of mutual trust and 
international co-operation that, so far, has preserved Antarctica as a "natural reserve, devoted to peace and 
science". 
