XXIII ATCM - LIMA 
 
--Information to CEP-- 
 
The European Project for Ice Corin
 is a 10-European nation joint 
research project in Antarc
ded jointly by  10 European nations, namely 
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, No
n
The United Kingdon  Additional funding is provided by European Union. It started in 1996 a
planned to be finished by 20O5. EPICA is an ambitious program to drill two ice cores in two 
different regions of Antarctica in order to obtain specific records of past climate from the sing
most important source of such information specifically the Anta
g in Antarctica (EPICA)
tica carried out and fun
rway, Sweden, Switzerla d and 
nd is 
le 
rctic ice sheet. 
Land. 
 
The analysis of ice cores is the most powerful means we have to determine how climate has 
changed over the last few climate cycles and to relate this to changes in atmospheric 
composition in particular to concentrations of greenhouse gases. This knowledge will in the end 
enhance our ability to better predict future climate developments. 
 
The two drill sites are situated on DOME C and in Dronning Maud Land respectively. While 
previous knowledge enabled the immediate site selection for DOME C and subsequently the 
start of drilling operations, a phase of presite survey field studies was necessary in order to 
select optimal drill site in Dronning Maud 
 
The original plan was to start drilling in Dronning Maud Land after DOME C drilling was 
completed, however, some initial delays and the drill becoming stuck at a depth of 78O meters 
in DOME C during the 1998/99 season have obviated this plan and it has become necessary to 
advance the start of drilling operations in Dronning Maud Land in order to keep in line with 
European Commission funding cycles. 
 
This information paper serves the purpose of informing CEP that there will be a CEE 
forthcoming within the time frame for XXIV ATCM and will be circulated according to set 
procedures. It is planned to follow the example set by the accepted CEE for the DoME C 
operation, since the DML-drilling operations will be quite similar. 
