1 
 
 
ANTARCTIC EDUCATION RESOURCE PACK FOR SCHOOLS 
 
 
 
Introduction. 
 
The importance of educating and training those intending to visit Antarctica has long been 
recognised by Treaty Parties.  Significant progress has been made in recent years on improving 
coordination amongst Parties on national training programmes and other mechanisms of educating 
scientists, support staff and tourists, intending to visit the continent. 
 
However, as our understanding of the global importance of Antarctica grows, it is becoming 
increasingly necessary to inform the wider general public on Antarctic related matters.  In this 
context it is important to ensure that adequate educational opportunities are provided to students. 
 
The need to enhance the extent to which Antarctica is included within national education 
programmes was considered at the 1993 SCAR / IUCN Workshop on Environmental Education 
and Training (Gorizia, Italy)1.  A number of the Recommendations stemming from the Workshop 
emphasised the importance of educating students about Antarctica. 
 
Notably Recommendation 2.3 of the Workshop report stated: 
 
"That, recognising the importance of Antarctica in global environmental processes, governments 
should have the goal of ensuring that present and future generations are made aware of the 
significance of the Antarctic continent by incorporating teaching about these processes at all levels 
within national education systems". 
 
Recommendation 2.4 of the Workshop report stated: 
 
"That teaching about these processes and systems is coordinated by national authorities within the 
relevant curricula for primary, secondary and tertiary education so that the associated themes and 
issues and an understanding of the systems and processes themselves is covered in a sequential 
manner." 
 
In the UK Antarctic issues are becoming an increasingly important component of the secondary 
education programme.  For example, Antarctica is now a core subject within the "Managing the 
Wilderness" unit of the "Advanced level" geography syllabus for 16 to 18 year old students. 
 
However, the growing interest in Antarctica in UK schools, has not been matched by an increase 
in the literature and resource materials available to students.  To fill this void, the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office and the British Antarctic Survey have produced an educational resource 
pack on Antarctica.  For the first time the resource pack provides UK students with up-to-date and 
accurate information on a wide range of Antarctic issues. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Educational Resource Pack. 
 
In a well-presented format, the resource pack contains 15 worksheets and associated background 
information sheets.  The wide range of topics covered includes, the Antarctic ozone hole, marine 
conservation, the Antarctic Treaty System and tourism. 
 
The worksheets provide students with detailed background information on each topic and set a 
number of innovative tasks to aid their understanding of the issues. 
 
The resource pack has been extremely well received in those schools to which it has so far been 
circulated.  It is anticipated that the pack will be distributed, free of charge, to approximately 6000 
secondary schools throughout the UK during 1999. 
 
One copy of the resource pack will be made available to each delegation at XXIII ATCM.  The 
pack will also be made more widely available through the website of the British Antarctic Survey.  
Website address:  http://www.nerc-bas.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Reference: 
 
1.  Dingwall, P.R. and Walton D.W.H .Eds. (1996), Opportunities for Antarctic Environmental 
Education and Training.  IUCN, Gland and Cambridge. XVII + 174pp. 
