Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition 
 
(ASOC) 
 
Report pursuant Article 111 (2), under Agenda Item 5 (b) 
 
Since XXII ATCM in Tromso, ASOC and its member groups have continued to work on the protection of the 
Antarctic environment, and in particular on the implementation of the Madrid Protocol. With this purpose, ASOC 
has established two Regional offices in Latin America (Buenos Aires) and Europe (Amsterdam) to complement the 
work of its Southern and Northern Hemisphere Secretariats (in Canberra and Washington DC, respectively). We 
expect to establish a similar Regional office in Asia shortly. 
 
Protocol implementation 
 
As a contribution to the process of implementing the Protocol, ASOC has developed a Protocol Implementation 
Checklist to evaluate compliance with the Protocol. The checklist enumerates the items fundamental to the 
Protocol's implementation and identifies Parties' efforts to comply with and enforce each of the Protocol's 
provisions. Applying the same checklist to each Party will facilitate a uniform and systematic review. 
 
ASOC hopes that this checklist, which has been submitted as an Information Paper, will be of use to Contracting 
Parties and the CEP and welcomes comments that would improve the checklist and make it more useful. 
 
ASOC notices that pending ratification by some Parties, Annex V has not yet entered into force. This is plainly a 
matter of concern, and means that even a part of the Protocol that is completed is not yet in force. ASOC 
congratulates those Parties that have ratified, and urges those Parties that have not to ratify as a matter of urgency. 
 
EIA process 
 
ASOC participated in the intersessional discussions on EIA guidelines coordinated by Argentina. The final 
document is an important contribution towards the standardization of the EIA process in the Antarctic Treaty 
System. ASOC congratulates the Parties that contributed to the production of a very useful document. 
ASOC considers that the tasks ahead in this issue include the implementation of the ElA process with uniform 
standards through the Antarctic Treaty System, and the development of mechanisms to ensure the continuous 
improvement of this process, including an improved feedback of the accuracy of assessments. 
Liability 
 
ASOC remains concerned about the lack of progress towards the liability regime promised by Article 16 of the 
Protocol, some eight years after its adoption. The elaboration of a comprehensive liability regime is essential to give 
full effect to the undertakings of the Protocol. The extremely restricted conception of liability enunciated by some 
Parties would undercut the spirit and purposes of the Protocol. We are alarmed that Parties who have designated 
Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, should contemplate lower liability standards for 
Antarctica than are found domestically, and emerging elsewhere under international treaties. 
 
Secretariat 
 
Once again, ASOC notes with disappointment the continuing failure to establish a Secretariat that would greatly 
facilitate implementation of the Protocol and increase the effectiveness of the entire Antarctic Treaty system. 
 
Tourism 
 
ASOC is concerned about the unrestricted growth of tourism in Antarctica. A number of extremely large ships - 
with a capacity of several hundred to over a thousand passengers - are scheduled to operate in Antarctic Treaty 
waters in the 1999/2OOO austral summer. We note that as some of these proposed activities are organized in a 
Non-Consultative Party (Canada) which has neither ratified the Protocol, nor enacted domestic legislation requiring 
prior EIA, these activities will be conducted without complying with the Protocol. ASOC believes that this should 
concern all Parties, and again urges Canada to ratify the Protocol. 
 
Southern ocean Whaling and Fishing 
 
One ASOC member group - Greenpeace - carried out an expedition to the Southern Ocean from December to 
March 1999 to inspect, document and publicly expose illegal, unsustainable and pseudo-scientific harvesting 
activities in the Southern ocean. The expedition included, but was not limited to, waters of the Antarctic Treaty 
Area. No landings were intended or made. ASOC has tabled as Information Papers a report on this expedition, and 
the IEE prepared prior to the expedition. 
 
ASOC considers that the serious issue of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and its consequences for the 
credibility of the Antarctic Treaty System should be discussed at this meeting. ASOC congratulates New Zealand 
for sending a ship to patrol the waters of the Northern Ross Sea in the search for illegal fishing vessels. 
Climate Change 
 
ASOC is concerned about the growing evidence of human-induced climate changes around the world, particularly 
with reference to impacts on Antarctica, and the role Antarctica will play in influencing global climatic changes 
over the next years. ASOC is currently working with IUCN to update its Information Papers circulated to ATCM 
XIX and XXII. 
 
Conclusion 
 
ASOC looks forwards to working with delegates at this XIII ATCM and to the successful resolution of some of the 
most important issues mentioned above. 
