Follow-up to Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) 
 
Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts  
in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica 
1998/99 Activities 
 
 
New Zealand 
Information Paper 
 
 
 
 
1. 
The Cape Roberts Project 
 
The Cape Roberts Project is a scientific drilling project being undertaken jointly between 
Italy, New Zealand, the United States, Germany, Australia, and the United Kingdom.  
Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand’s Antarctic institute) as project manager has 
responsibility for implementation of the requirements of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation (CEE).  Preparations began at Cape Roberts in January 1995 
and after a shortened drilling season in 1997/98, drilling recommenced at the second drill 
hole in October 1998. 
 
The final CEE for the project was completed in January 1994 (ATCM XVIII/IP 21).  New 
Zealand has tabled papers at both the ATCM XX, XXI and XXII reporting on 
implementation of, and changes to, the CEE since 1994 (ATCM XX/WP 1, ATCM 
XXI/IP 5, ATCM XXII/IP 23).  This paper reviews activities completed during 1998/99 
and records changes to the activities described in the CEE.   
 
The paper provides information consistent with the methodology outlined in ATCM 
Resolution 2 (1997) for reviewing activities for which a CEE has been prepared.   
 
 
2. 
Summary of Activities Completed during 1998/99 
 
The project operated in the Cape Roberts area from early September 1998 to the end of 
January 1999.  Cape Roberts Project personnel first arrived at Cape Roberts on 4 
September 1998 and the last people departed at the end of the drilling operations phase on 
11 December.  Maintenance and winterisation of Cape Roberts equipment took place from 
13-29 January 1999 involving a team of 3-5 persons. 
 
During the set-up phase in September the support team of eight deployed the main Cape 
Roberts camp and Drill Site camp onto the sea ice in preparation for drilling.  Drilling 
operations commenced in October and continued through into November during which 
drilling and core recovery was undertaken.  Drilling occurred in two shifts around the 
clock and, weather permitting, shift changes were made by helicopter.  Two sledge train 
trips were made to Marble Point to obtain more fuel.   
 
The drill site buildings and equipment were deployed and set up on the sea ice at a site east 
of Cape Roberts.  The sea riser (the part of the drill system extending from the sea ice to 
the sea floor and below) was deployed to approximately 13 metres below the sea floor, in a 
water depth of 177.78 metres.  Coring commenced and a bottom hole depth of 625 metres 
below the sea floor was reached.   
 
During this phase some 100 people visited the Project.  These included official Cape 
Roberts Project visitors (Cape Roberts Project scientists working at McMurdo Station and 
Scott Base, media, distinguished visitors (DVs), environmentalists and divers), other DVs, 
media and senior New Zealand and United States officials.  Most visitors stayed for an 
average of two hours at the Cape Roberts sea ice camp and did not stay overnight. 
 
The average population of the sea ice support camp between 13 September and 7 
December 1998 was 23 persons.  A number of other New Zealand and United States field 
parties also visited the Cape Roberts area over the 1998/99 season. 
 
The camp and drill site was decommissioned in early December following the departure of 
drillers and scientists.  Equipment, buildings, sledges and fuel were returned to Cape 
Roberts for storage over the winter period.  The support team then returned to Scott Base 
by Hagglunds vehicle.  In January, a support team of four carried out essential equipment 
maintenance and winterisation of all plant and buildings on Cape Roberts.   
 
Environmental procedures, based on the requirements outlined in the CEE, have been 
incorporated into the Cape Roberts Project Operations Plan.  All staff and scientists 
received briefings on relevant procedures prior to visiting Cape Roberts.  Ongoing 
monitoring work continued throughout the duration of project activities.   
 
At the invitation of Antarctica New Zealand, the Australian Antarctic Division 
Environmental Manager visited Cape Roberts for five days and carried out a review of the 
project against its CEE.  The Antarctica New Zealand Environmental Manager also visited 
Cape Roberts in November 1998 and again in late January 1999.  Monitoring work was 
carried out during both visits and skua population surveys were also completed in early 
December and late January.  
 
 
 
 
3. 
Review of Activities Carried out in 1998/99 
CRP CEE 
2 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
 
3.1 
Departures from the activities described in the CEE 
 
No significant departures of project activities from those described in the CEE (excluding 
approved changes, refer ATCM XXI/IP 5 and ATCM XXII/IP 23) were observed or 
reported during the 1998/99 season.   
 
 
3.2 
Mitigation measures 
 
Mitigation measures aimed at limiting environmental impacts were carried out in 
accordance with the requirements of the CEE and with environmental procedures outlined 
in the Operations Plan.  This included all activities at Cape Roberts, on transport routes, 
the drill site and the support camp. 
3.3 
Impacts of activities carried out in 1998/99 
 
Cape Roberts 
The CEE predicted that the main potential impacts on Cape Roberts itself were likely to be 
disturbance in the storage area, oil spills and the effects of helicopter operations.  The 
main impact on Cape Roberts observed in the 1998/99 season was considerable ground 
disturbance that occurs each year on the soft sands and sediments of the storage area.  
Disturbance is due to foot and vehicle traffic that occurs when the area is snow free in 
January.  This impact is largely unavoidable and has been limited to the main U-shaped 
track in the area.   
 
No oil spills were reported in the storage area.  Helicopter landings were minimised to six 
although other non Cape Roberts Project field parties made more landings.  When landing 
at the sea ice camp, pilots were instructed to avoid overflying Cape Roberts on their 
approach and take off. 
 
Population surveys of adult skuas at Cape Roberts carried out in December 1998 and 
January 1999 reported approximately 59 breeding pairs.  This compares to 40 pairs in 
1992/93 and 52 pairs in 1997/98, an increase of almost 50% in six years.  During the 
January census 18 live chicks were observed at Cape Roberts (compared with two the 
previous year).  Not surprisingly, it appears that pairs occupying territories in the storage 
area (now used for storage of camp buildings and drilling equipment) have been displaced 
to the areas immediately adjacent to the storage area.   
 
The CEE provided data showing there had been a substantial increase (at a similar rate) in 
the population along the coast to the south between 1965/66 and 1987/88.  Further work 
would be required to determine whether the increase at Cape Roberts was significantly 
different from that at the breeding area further south. 
 
CRP CEE 
3 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
Sea ice 
The CEE predicted that the main potential impacts on the sea ice were likely to be on 
transport routes and at the sea ice camp and included disturbance to seals, ice biota, 
contaminants from sewage and grey water, emissions and fuel spills.  No significant 
impacts were observed on the sea ice at these locations during the 1998/99 season. 
Weddell seals did not take up residence around Cape Roberts or in the vicinity of the drill 
site.  A few seals were observed later in the season from the road to the drill site and 
vehicles and personnel maintained minimum approach distances. 
  
Marine ecosystem 
The CEE predicted that the main potential impacts on the marine ecosystem were likely to 
be from sewage and grey water disposal, loss of drilling fluids and escape of liquid 
hydrocarbons.  The main impacts on the marine ecosystem observed in the 1998/99 season 
were disturbance to the sea floor and the loss of drilling fluid.   
 
During the embedment and early coring phases of the drilling some cement grout, drill 
mud and cuttings escaped from around the drill annulus up to the sea floor.  An area of the 
seafloor, approximately five metres in diameter (and about one metre thick at the center) 
was covered.   The total volume exiting to the sea floor was estimated to be 1.25 cubic 
metres or 0.2 percent of the total drill mud and grout used in the hole.   
This volume was within the three cubic metres upper limit described in the CEE.  As 
drilling deepened drill fluids ceased escaping to the sea floor sediments.  However, the 
majority of drill fluids used in the drilling of the hole were ‘lost’ to the formation.  Drill 
mud and cuttings retrieved at the drill rig were disposed of either by spreading on the sea 
ice or placing down the sea riser ice hole. 
 
An underwater camera was used to observe the greywater emission from the sea ice camp.  
Although clearly visible, the relatively strong current at the site appeared to rapidly 
disperse the discharge. 
 
Cumulative Impacts 
Cumulative impacts from activities in 1998/99 relate largely to physical disturbance in the 
storage area.  The nature and extent of this impact is recorded each season and will be one 
of the main focuses for remedial work at the completion of the project.  
 
 
 
Overall Impact 
It is considered that the activities carried out in 1998/99 resulted in impacts on the 
Antarctic environment that were consistent with or less than those predicted in the CEE 
(and subsequent changes to it).   
 
 
CRP CEE 
4 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
3.4 
Independent review 
 
Following commencement of drilling in October 1998, Mr. Tom Maggs (Environmental 
Manager, Australian Antarctic Division) visited Cape Roberts for a five-day period to 
carry out a review of project activities against the CEE.  The aim of the review was to 
assess compliance of actual activities carried out with those described in the CEE, 
including subsequent changes.    
 
The report of the visit concluded the following: 
 
“The activity as conducted in the 1998/99 season is in accordance with the CEE and 
amending documents.  The impacts of the activity are within and in many cases well within 
the environmental limits set by the various monitoring programs.  It was apparent from 
the detailed site inspection that the CEE adequately anticipated the project’s major 
impacts, and proposed mitigation measures.  Essential changes to the project’s operating 
methodology have been accommodated in thorough review documents, and have been 
reported to Treaty Parties through ATCMs. 
 
Commitment to environmental protection was noted during the site visit to be part of the 
Cape Roberts organisational culture.  It was evident in the state of the storage, base 
camps and drill sites, and in the degree of familiarity and commitment by staff with the 
project’s objectives and environmental issues. 
 
The involvement of a representative from another Party (in a review such as this) greatly 
enhances the exchange of information throughout the Antarctic Treaty system.” 
 
 
4. 
Changes to the Activities Described in the CEE 
 
4.1 Record of changes 
 
Five changes to the activities described in the CEE have been made since the document 
was finalised in January 1994.  Three of these changes were noted and explained in 
ATCM XXI/IP 5 and ATCM XXII/IP 23.  They include the disposal of non macerated 
sewage into holes drilled in the sea ice; the use of explosives for down-hole logging and 
for cutting the outer drill casing at the completion of each of the four proposed drill holes 
and modified containment provided for drummed fuel. 
 
Two further changes were proposed and approved for the 1998/99 season.  These included 
the use of an additional drilling mud and the use of new rigid buoyancy on the sea riser. 
 
 
4.2 
Reasons for the changes 
 
Mud system 
CRP CEE 
5 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
CRP CEE 
6 
New Zealand  
Information Paper 
The unexpected, “difficult to drill” geological formations encountered during drilling in 
October 1997 identified the need for use of an additional type of drilling mud.  The drill 
team lacked a viscosifier of sufficient density to shore up the hole and retain good mud 
circulation.  This was required for effective drilling should similar formations be 
encountered in the next hole.  Additional drilling mud called Guar Gum was proposed for 
use in the 1998/99 season and was required by the drilling team to adequately deal with 
fragmented and unconsolidated sediments.  Guar Gum is a non-toxic, organic polymer 
extracted from lima beans.  During the season 1.5 metric tonnes of Guar Gum was 
successfully pumped down the hole, along with other muds approved by the CEE.   
 
Use of syntactic foam floats 
The drill sea riser is supported in the water column and its weight neutralised by using two 
types of flotation – inflatable and rigid.  In 1997/98 the rigid flotation system failed (the 
floats imploded at 20 metres although rated to 90 metres water depth).  The change 
proposed the use of syntactic foam floats as a replacement.  One hundred syntactic foam 
floats were transported to Cape Roberts in September and the majority was fitted to the sea 
riser casing.  All floats were recovered at the end of drilling without being damaged. 
 
 
4.3 
Environmental consequences 
 
EIAs were completed for these changes.  New Zealand’s independent Environmental 
Assessment and Review Panel examined the evaluations and recommended that the 
impacts of the changes would likely have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the 
Antarctic environment.  The changes were subsequently approved.  
 
 
4.4 
Changes proposed for 1999/2000 
 
Following activities in 1998/99, the parties to the project agreed to extend drilling to 
another season.  The EIA requirements associated with extension of the project are being 
considered.  No further amendments to the CEE are planned for 1999/2000. 
