opening statement by Ambassador Dagflnn Stenseth, Head of the Delegation of 
Norway, ATCM XXIII, Lima 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
I congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I 
extend my delegation's sincere thanks to the Government of Peru and to the city of Lima for the warm 
welcome accorded us and for the excellent arrangement of this consultative meeting. 
 
The XXIII ATCM takes on additional importance by the fact that it coincides with the 4O'h anniversary of 
the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
It stands out as a historic, unique and enduring achievement that over these four decades it has been 
possible to safeguard Antarctica as a natural reserve securing its unique environment for future 
generations. Since its inception during the Cold War period the parties to the Treaty have managed to put 
aside conflicts over sovereignty issues. This achievement has been and remains at the very core of 
Antarctic diplomacy. 
 
Today Antarctic cooperation is broadly based on three pillars - peace, science and environmental 
protection. 
 
In spite of serious challenges Antarctic cooperation has continued to evolve. The coming into force of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Treaty last year marks a major development of the Antarctic 
Treaty System. With the establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection at the XXII ATCM 
in Tromsoe a new, significant and dynamic element has been added to Antarctic cooperation. 
 
Norway, being among the twelve original Consultative Parties, is firmly committed to Antarctic 
cooperation and determined to be active and supportive of consensus solutions in questions of importance 
to the future of the Antarctic. 
 
My delegation sees it as a priority task to ensure the full and efficient implementation of the Protocol. The 
Committee on Environmental Protection should be consolidated in its role as the expert body advising 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings on all questions of relevance for the implementation of the 
Protocol. There should be clarity of the role of the Committee both within the ATCM, and with regard to 
SCAR, CoMNAP and CCAMLR. 
 
We would like to see progress in important areas such as environmental monitoring, initial and 
comprehensive environmental evaluations, preventive and precautionary measures, and response action in 
the protection of the environment. My delegation will contribute to progress on the complex question of 
developing a liability regime for environmental damage, building on discussions and conclusions from the 
XXII ATCM in Tromsoe. We should look for constructive and pragmatic ways to bring this work 
towards its completion within a reasonable time-frame. 
Now as before, the Norwegian delegation is convinced of the need for a permanent secretariat in support 
of Antarctic Treaty cooperation. The entry into force of the Environmental Protocol and the establishment 
of the Committee on Environmental Protection only underline this need. We hope that time now is 
maturing for this step to be taken. 
 
We would like to see a further streamlining of routines for reporting on activities in the Antarctic with a 
view to avoiding duplication of efforts and securing greater costeffectiveness, using to the degree possible 
electronic means of communication. 
 
In marking the 4OIh anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty we are conscious of the fact that 
we may look back on almost two hundred years of human endeavours in the Antarctic region which have 
left valuable historic remains. We should further consider how we even better might preserve this human 
Antarctic heritage for future generations. 
 
our agenda rightly includes an item dealing with the interrelationship of developments in the Arctic and 
the Antarctic. To Norway, the Arctic and the Antarctic are two sides of the same coin. The unique 
importance of both polar regions for life on Earth and for the understanding of our common physical 
environment underline the relevance of bipolar contacts and interchange. 
 
Antarctica is of great importance to everyday life and to the future of mankind as a whole. It is enough to 
mention the ozone hole and sea level changes. This makes it essential that the general public should have 
an informed basis for making judgements about what is at stake in research and cooperation on the 
seventh continent. openness and transparency in Antarctic affairs are important. Antarctic cooperation 
deserves greater attention from the media. We should look for ways and means to stimulate increased 
public interest in Antarctic affairs. The 4O'h anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty should be seen as an 
occasion to this end. 
