Antarctic Treaty                                                    
XXIII Consultative Meeting                                        
Traité sur l’Antarctique                                            
XXIII Réunion consultative                                        
Tratado Antártico                                                 
XXIII Reunión Consultiva                                           
Договор об Антарктике                                              
XXIII Консультативное Совещание                                   

                                                       XXIII ATCM/ IP84
                                                       May, 1999
                                                       Original: English

                                                       Agenda Item 16




Removal and clean up of Filchner                                  
summer base from iceberg A-38B                                    
by the Alfred Wegener Institute for                               
Polar and Marine Research                                         


Submitted by
Germany
Removal and clean up of Filchner summer base from iceberg A-38B
by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research

1. Introduction

In October 1998 it was stated by satellite observations at Rothera station that a large 
iceberg marked as A-38 calved from the Filchner-Ronne iceshelf. Until the end of 
October this iceberg broke to three pieces where Filchner summer base was now 
located at A-38B. Since 1982 this base has been operated by the Alfred Wegener 
Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI).

According to the provisions of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty it became a priority to remove base facilities and equipment for shipping them 
back to Germany as soon as possible. This operation could be successfully performed 
from 26 January until 11 February during leg ANT XVI/2 of RV Polarstern as previously 
announced to COMNAP/SCALOP by notice of Dec. 16, 1998.

2. Voyage to iceberg A-38B

On 22 January after completing the resupply operations for Neumayer Station and 
loading of transport vehicles and tools for the salvage of Filchner base, RV Polarstern 
steamed from the Atka Bay to south-west. Seven technicians of the salvage team were 
on board. On 24 January the ship reached Drescher Inlet, a bay cut deeply into the 
front of Riiser-Larsen Ice Shelf. A fuel depot was established there for aircraft operations 
which was part of the the German scientific program during the season 1998/99. In the 
afternoon the aeroplane "Polar 4" landed with further two members of the salvage team. 
They had been on a traverse 1300 km south of Neumayer Station and had been unable 
to return sooner on account of bad weather. With the team completed by this transfer 
flight, RV Polarstern steamed further south, in order to drop off a group of four 
Norwegians at „Blaenga“, to retrieve a sea level recorder for the UK programme and 
finally to reach the Filchner iceberg.

The carrying out of all these operations became very complicated due to heavy ice 
conditions. On 25 January at 76° 37' S, 31° 19' W a barrier of icebergs was met, which 
were stranded on a submarine ridge running perpendicular to the coast. South of this, 
a solid cover of fast ice had developed that extended over the Filchner Depression and 
formed an insurmountable obstacle for the ship. As a result the disembarkation of the 
Norwegians and their equipment had to take place by helicopters over a distance of 65 
nautical miles. This operation was time-consuming because fuel had to be flown as 
sling cargo. The sea level recorder could not be retrieved, because it was located in a 
band of thick ice.

Navigating westward was very difficult due to the fast ice fields. Therefore, the ship 
sailed back north, as far as 74° 30' S, where ice cover was looser and westerly progress 
was possible. Turning again west-south-west towards Filchner, the ice cover again 
became more compact. However, a wide area of open water was visible westward of the 
fast ice barrier in satellite pictures. Additionally a line of fractures could be identified 
extending about 90 nautical miles eastward from the north-eastern corner of the 
Filchner iceberg. On 28 January this mighty iceberg A-38B could be seen from a 
distance of about 70 nautical miles filling the horizon.

On 28 January a helicopter survey was performed and an advance party was landed on 
the iceberg. A quick inspection showed that the base was in good condition and no 
damages were observed due to the ice shelf crash in October. The base was now located
about 3 km south from the newly formed ice cliffs of the eastern edge, which towered more than 50 m above the sea ice pressed against its base. At many points there were impressive scars, formed by collisions with other icebergs. At the western side of the iceberg cliffs were found with a height of roughly 26 m.

The route to A-38B proved to be troublesome. At a distance of about 20 nautical miles the ship got quickly stuck in the ice. At that time it was not foreseeable whether the iceberg could be reached. During the night the turning of tide reduced ice pressure, and by using all power the ship managed to break through. They arrived at the iceberg on January 30. Just 30 km away from the base, a section of the former ice front was found with enough optional low cliffs of only 18 m height, where loading could be performed from ice to ship.

3. Removal of the base

On 31 January the salvage team of nine people disembarked and the equipment needed (required) for the work unloaded on the western side of the iceberg A-38B (Fig. 1). Three trains of sledges towed by tracked vehicles (Pisten Bully) moved from the landing site to the base over a distance of 30 km. At the base an advance party was already busy getting heating system, meltwater tank, kitchen and radio-room in working order.

The salvage work began on 1 February. First, the covering of snow was removed from the equipment that was distributed around the station platform. A generator, a number of depots with both full and empty fuel drums, which lay under 1 to 2 m of snow, a further Pisten Bully and a tank container sledge, which had to be recovered from 4 m of snow, were dug out. The recovered drums and other miscellanous items were loaded onto sledges and transported to the landing site. At the same time work was proceeding on the base.

The base consisted of a platform supported by 14 legs at a height of about 4 m above the current snow surface to prevent the accumulation of snow around it. Kitchen, storage and accommodation containers were secured to the platform. The storage container was cleared out and loose items on the platform were packed for transport. The storage container was then dismantled and the other containers were unfastened from the platform. On 7 February the first 20 tons of material were taken on board "Polarstern". This first load comprised of miscellaneous items, including dangerous goods such as fuel drums, gas bottles and old batteries.

On 10 February the dismantling of the station was completed. A snow ramp had been pushed up (prepared) around the station platform, and the station containers were pulled down on it and placed on sledges or simple runners. During the night transportation of the material to the ship had already begun. During the day the Pisten Bullies were still in use for dismantling the last parts of the station and loading the sledges during the day, whereas the sledge trains were towed to the landing site during the night.

On 11 February, all 119.8 tons of material from dismantling the Filchner base and 48 tons of equipment from Neumayer Station (Pisten Bullies, sledges, containers, etc.) to be used for their transportation had been brought to the landing site and then loaded on board. The cargo included 30,200 l of fuel, comprising 8,000 l of kerosene, 9,800 l of Arctic diesel and 12,400 l of petrol. During the salvage operation 5,200 lt. of fuel were consumed. The kerosene and Arctic diesel are being used for fuel on "Polarstern" and the petrol will be unloaded at Neumayer Station. All base equipment and containers are transported back to Germany. Material still left at the former base consists of the steel support structure, buried in the snow.

Despite the hard conditions and the speed at which the work was undertaken, no serious incident occurred.
4. Ship operation during dismantling work

This summer sea ice hardly broke out at all in the southern Weddell Sea, so that floes and pressure ridges of last winter were still present. Southern winds opened up the ice cover a little, but the temperatures dropped to −15°C and new ice formed immediately between the floes. The water was almost everywhere at or close to the freezing point, so that even with milder temperatures new ice was forming. Although ice pressure only increased slightly, the influence of tidal currents was again strong enough to hold up RV Polarstern for several hours until tide had turned. Warm air masses together with a constant heavy cloud cover and occasional snow falls limited any helicopter operation.

The priority to remove Filchner base as well as these difficult meteorological and ice conditions only allowed restricted scientific activities with RV Polarstern during the period from 26 January until 11 February. When the salvage team was working on the iceberg the ship only operated in nearby detected polynyas in order to be quickly available in case of emergency.

As long as the coastal polynya in front of Ronne Ice Shelf was kept open by southern winds it was possible to carry out a hydrographic section from A-38B, west along the ice front to within a few miles of the Lassiter Coast. A buoy with salinity and temperature sensors was deployed in an inlet on 2.5 m thick fast ice. Data will be continuously transmitted via satellite. During next winter this buoy will measure the formation of High Salinity Shelf Water, and in spring, when the ice breaks out, it will drift northwards through the western Weddell Sea to collect data in a region that is more or less inaccessible by ships.

After 5 February northerly wind drove ice from north against the iceberg A-38B, and a broad belt of pack ice developed, partly consisting of ground up floes and partly of floes that had been heaped up into impressive ridges. It was obvious that this ice field could only be penetrated with great difficulty, and that a late return to the polynya north of the iceberg would be equally difficult. Thus hydrographic work was stopped and the ship was waiting in the shrinking polynya until salvage of Filchner base could be finished as quick as possible on 10 February.

5. Conclusions

The priority to salvage Filchner base from iceberg A-38B limited the scientific activities on board of RV Polarstern for about 16 days during leg ANT XVI/2. Furthermore, other geophysical programmes of AWI had to be cancelled in order to provide personnel man power and transport equipment for this operation during the season 1998/99.

The direct costs for this logistic operation covered about 1.2 Million German marks shifted from the regular budget of AWI by reducing or cancelling other research activities and logistic field operations during the season 1998/99. The given figure considers personnel (7 technicians, cook, medical physician), 16 ship days of RV Polarstern for operations in the southern Weddell Sea and 6 logistic flight hours with aircraft Polar 4 for personnel transport. Overheads as well as expenses during pre- and post phase activities are not considered in the figure.

Due to the heavy ice conditions in the Weddell Sea and to safely return the ship from the area, the available time frame was extremely limited and the operation had to be performed as quick as possible. The removed base equipment and facilities amount to about 120 tons. All material left behind consists of the steel support structure, buried in the snow. The position of the location was 75° 21.44’ S; 53° 02.52’ W on 10 February 1999, when the base ceased its existence.

Environmental regulations were strictly observed during the dismantling and transport works. Material left behind does not conflict with provisions and obligations of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Thus, further activities are not planned which would need an excessive logistical effort and would lead to an additional environmental impact.
01                                          01
32°30' W    31   15   30   00   29   28   30   15   00   45   23   22   15   50°05' E
74°50'S                                    
990000m N.
98                                        
00'
96                                        
95                                        
94                                        
93                                        
             900000m N.
55°25'W          15'  00'  29'  28'  30'  27'  15'26  00'  45'  30'  22'15  53°00'W
                                  PS. WGS 84 (GPS)

Iceberg A-38 recorded Jan. 05, 1999                  1:750 000 Scale                  RCI

Kilometres 10         0         10        20        30        40        50        60
Miles 10     0         10                  20                  30                  

Fig. 1:
RADARSAT image of iceberg A-38B in the southern Weddell Sea recorded on January 5,
1999. At the northern edge landing site (L) is indicated by full dot; the location of
Filchner base (B) by cross; distance between both sites is about 30 km. Additional
distances are indicated between Filchner base and corners of iceberg.
Fig. 2: View of Filchner base before removal on January 28, 1999.

Fig. 3:
View of the remaining steel support structure of the former Filchner base after removal 
on February 11, 1999.
