XXIII ATCM/IP58 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
CEP II Agenda Item 5a) 
 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment of 
Ny-Alesund International Research 
and Monitoring Station, Svalbard 
Submitted by 
Norway 
 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment  
of Ny-Alesund international research and monitoring  
station, Svalbard 
 
 
Background 
Ny-Ålesund (78º55’N, 11º56’E), one of the most northerly settlements in the world, has been 
designated by the Norwegian Government as the principal centre of scientific research on 
Svalbard, and make it a leading international research and monitoring station in the Arctic.  
This also implies that local human impacts should be at the lowest possible level, in order to 
maintain the environment as a reference site for natural sciences, and in particular for research 
related to long range pollution, climate change and polar ecology. 
 
In 1995, the Ny-Ålesund Science Managers Advisory Committee (NySMAC) became 
concerned that the rapid expansion of human activity and facilities at Ny-Ålesund might be 
causing significant local environmental effects and conflicts with important research. There 
was, however, a serious lack of systematic information regarding human impacts on the local 
environment and research and monitoring activities. 
 
In early 1996, NySMAC therefore agreed that an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
was to be undertaken by the Norwegian Polar Institute, on behalf of NySMAC.  The work 
was initiated and was completed in 1998.  The work was done with major assistance from the 
British Antarctic Survey. 
 
The objectives of the Ny-Ålesund EIA were to: 
• Examine the impact of human activities on the environment at Ny-Ålesund; 
• Examine the conflicts between the various activities; 
• Recommend actions to reduce impacts and conflicts in order to maintain and restore the 
area as a near pristine site for the environmental research and monitoring. 
 
 
Relevance to the Antarctic 
The situation in Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard is to a large degree parallel to the that of the research 
stations in Antarctica.  Research and monitoring, as well as the importance of minimizing the 
impact of humans, are also obvious concerns in relation to Antarctic research stations.   
 
We believe that the report from the EIA studies done for Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard can be useful 
as reference material also in the Antarctic connection.  A few copies of the report will be 
available for review at the CEP2 meeting.  The report can also be ordered from: 
 
 
1
Norwegian Polar Institute 
Polar Environmental Centre 
9296 Tromsø 
Norway 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shears, J., Theisen, F., Bjørdal, A. and Norris, S.: 
 
Environmental impact assessment.  Ny-Ålesund 
international scientific research and monitoring 
station, Svalbard.   
 
Norsk Polarinstiutt Meddelelser No. 157, 1998 
 
ISBN: 82-766-157-2 
e-mail: njaastad@npolar.no  
 
Fax:  +47 77 75 05 01 
