Environment Related Studies at the King Sejong Station, King George Island during the 1998/99 
(Republic of Korea) (Agenda item #15, ATCM XXIII) 
 
A. Nearshore Marine Biological Studies 
 
During the whole year of 1998, seasonal variations in species composition and abundance of microalgal 
communities occurring in the Marian Cove have been investigated by collecting seawater samples on a 
regular time interval. Related oceanographic and meteorological parameters, such as ice cover, seawater 
and air temperature, salinity, wind speed and direction, and W radiation have also been measured. This 
long-term and regular monitoring on microalgal communities at the Marian Cove has been conducted 
year-round since the 1993/94 season in order to understand natural processes within the nearshore marine 
ecosystem and furthermore to clarify changes in the ecosystem consequent to environmental changes. 
Microalgae are major primary producer to sustain Antarctic marine ecosystem, thus their change means 
change of whole marine ecosystem. 
 
During the summer months of the 1998/99 season, experimental studies to determine the enhanced UV 
effect on the development of sea urchin (Sterechin~s neumayeri) embryos were conducted at the station. 
Under a persistent and intense UV-radiation, abnormal development of the embryos was observed at 
blastula stage. In addition, molecular phylogeny of some key species such as sea urchins and clams 
(Laternula elliptica) were investigated in order to understand the evolution and adaptation of Antarctic 
marine invertebrates in the Antarctic shallow waters. We transferred the specimens to Korea, and 
sequenced mitochondrial genes such as cytochrome oxidase subunit I and 12S rRNA. The genetic 
sequences will be used for the construction of molecular phylogeny of the marine invertebrates. 
 
B. Long-term and Regular Monitoring on Solar Ultraviolet Radiation and Total 
ozone over the King Sejong Station 
 
Solar ultraviolet (W) and W-B radiation have been measured routinely at King 
Sejong Station since 1994, using an Eppley Total Ultraviolet Radiometer (model TWR) and a 
Robertson-Berger type UV-Biometer (model 501), respectively. These observations are used to 
investigate temporal variations of solar UV radiation and the UV-B radiation/ozone relationship at the 
station, which is located on the marginal area of the ozone hole. Time series of W and W-B radiation 
showed significant seasonal variations. Radiation dropped nearly to zero during winter and increased 
gradually up until the beginning of summer. In springtime, UV and UV-B radiations were recorded as 
relatively high compared to those in summer, and the enhanced UV radiations were shown to be mainly 
associated with the ozone depletion. Data on daily total ozone have been obtained from Brewer ozone 
spectrophotometer (MK IV) installed at King Sejong 
station on January 1998. The first data set collected during the year of 1998is currently under 
analysis. Collected data are also being analyzed in conjunction with biological parameters obtained from 
the nearshore microalgal studies. 
 
C. Environmental Monitoring on Human Impacts at the Station 
 
This work is to assess the impacts on the surrounding environment and living organisms caused by 
emissions from fuel combustion, solid waste incineration, and liquid waste disposal (mostly grey water) at 
the station. Soil, nearshore marine sediment, bivalve molluscs (Laternula elliptica), limpets Nacella 
concinna), and lichen have been regularly collected to assess metal pollution and other environmental 
changes. The work done during the years of 1998 and 1999 are summarized as follows. 
 
1. Marine pollution  Monitoring 
 
As a preparatory work for a long-term regular monitoring of sea water quality adjacent to the King Sejong 
Station, nutrients, trace metals, pH, temperature and salinity etc. were measured at several stations within 
the Marian Cove. Analysis showed that local geochemical process (inflow of ice-melt water loaded with 
some heavy metals, such as Cu, Mn from the surrounding terrestrial environment) apparently have a great 
influence on the natural backgound of physico-chemical properties of the sea water in the cove. This 
suggests that the local geochemical process should be considered in water quality monitoring. Apart from 
the influence of natural geochemical process, concentration of Pb was the highest at the sampling station 
nearest to the King Sejong Station, indicating that Pb was originated from the station. 
 
Heavy metal concentrations were determined also in the tissues of marine organisms. In the 1998/99 
summer, various sizes of the Antarctic clam, Laternula elliptica, which was suggested as a suitable 
biomonitor for metal pollution from a previous study, were collected to determine the effects of size on 
metal accumulation. In addition, the limpet, Nacella concinna were collected from intertidal zones of two 
sites (area near the station and a control site) to determine utility of this limpet species as an indicator for 
heavy metal pollution monitoring in intertidal areas. The Antarctic limpet was shown to strongly 
accumulate most of heavy metals analyzed, and this result suggests that N. concinna can be used as a useful 
indicator for metal pollution monitoring in the intertidal zones along the Antarctic Peninsula and the 
adjacent islands where this species is abundant and easily collective. 
 
In addition, a basis for long-term monitoring on the nearshore benthic community was established using a 
new method, under water stereo-photogrammetry. Quantitative analysis on abundance of indicator 
species and some other dominant species can be easily conducted by taking under water video and 
consequently by analyzing still images using a computer program. Furthermore, histological and 
molecular studies to develop 
biomarkers which could be used as sensitive tools for early detection and prediction of human impacts 
was initiated using clams and sea urchins. 
 
2. Monitoring on atmospheric and terrestrial pollution 
 
The occurrence of atmosphenc pollution by heavy metals (Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, and Zn) which 
might be emitted into the air from the station was investigated using epilithic lichen, Usnea antarctica. For 
most of heavy metals, there were no significant differences between the lichens collected at the station and 
the lichens from remote sites (about 1 km). However, Pb contents in the lichens collected within 2OO m 
from the station were shown to be significantly higher than the values in the lichens from the remote sites, 
indicating that Pb was released probably from combustion of diesel oil and leaded gasoline at the station. 
Management plan to reduce the emission of Pb was recommended, and during the 1998/99 austral 
summer, an aerosol sampling system was installed at the station to assess the accurate amount of 
emission. Air samples are currently being collected biweekly by overwintering members and the samples 
will be analyzed early next year. 
 
3. List of Publication in 1998 & 1999 on Environmental Monitoring Work 
 
Ahn, I.-Y. et al. (1999). A preliminary study on heavy metals in the Antarctic limpet, Nacella concinna 
(Strebel, 19O8) (Gastropoda: Patellidae) in an intertidal habitat on King George Island. Korean J. Polar 
Resear. Vol. I O/No. I (in press) 
Hong, S.-M. et al. (l999). Lichen biomonitoring for the detection of local heavy metal pollution aroung 
King Sejong Station, King George Island. Korean ~. Polar Resear. Vol. I O/No. I (in press) 
KoRDI ( 1998) Annual Report of Environmental Monitoring on Human Impacts at the King Sejong 
Station. BSPP 98OOI-O2-1151-7, Ministry of Maritime Affairs & Fisheries. (Abstracts and some 
parts in English) 
Ko RDI(1998) A map for bathymetry of the Marian Cove 
