PROCEDURE 
 
for consideration and issuance of permits to authorize activities of the Russian 
individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic 
 
At the XXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Tromso (Norway), the delegation of the Russian 
Federation informed the international community about its practical actions for implementing the 
requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (XXII ATCM/IP 63). 
 
As a result of measures undertaken in 1998, the Government of the Russian Federation in its Decision of 
December 11 , 1 998 approved the rules and regulations for consideration and issuance of permits for the 
activities of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
 
According to the Procedure adopted, any activity of the Russian individual persons and legal entities in 
the Antarctic shall be based on the permit issued by the Executive Body of the Federal Authorities. The 
permits for scientific and fishing activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area in respect of the marine living 
resources are issued in compliance with the provisions of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the 
International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. 
 
A permit issued to authorize the activity of the Russian individual persons and legal entities is a formal 
document specifying the terms and the effective date of activity that can be undertaken under the permit. 
 
The permits are issued by the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of 
Russia (Roshydromet) as agreed with the Russian Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Ministry for 
Natural Resources. They are based on the applications from the Russian individual persons and legal 
entities and the expert conclusion of the State Committee for Environmental Monitoring of the Russian 
Federation on the Environmental Impact Assessment of the activity in question submitted by the 
applicant. 
 
Roshydromet set up a special interagency commission for consideration of the applications for permits. In 
addition to the representatives of Roshydromet, its membership includes representatives of the Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs, Ministry for Regional Policy, Ministry for Natural Resources, Ministry of Transport, 
Ministry for Science and Technology, Ministry of Justice, the State Committee for Fishery, the State 
Committee for Sports and Tourism and the Federal Service for Geodesy and Cartography. 
 
The specific regulations and a specific period of time for processing the applications for permits ~vere 
established. 
The Commission at its session makes a decision on the: 
 
- permit issuance or denial for the activity in question; 
 
- need for additional information; 
 
- permit suspension, restriction, renewal or revocation . 
 
In case there is a need for the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation procedures, the Russian 
Federation will submit as appropriate the Draft Evaluation to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and 
the Committee for Environmental Protection of the Antarctic Treaty. In this case the permits will be 
issued only after the applicant makes corrections in accordance with the comments and proposals of the 
ATCM and the corrected variant of the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation is submitted to all 
Consultative Parties. 
 
The control for meeting the requirements and the conditions set forth in the permits is performed through 
specially authorized observers who are specifically designated by Roshydromet as proposed by the 
Commission. 
 
If the applicant violates the conditions stipulated in the permit, the activity can be suspended or restricted 
by the responsible representatives of Roshydromet designated for all Antarctic infrastructure objects of the 
Russian Antarctic Expedition. 
 
For administration of the activities of the Commission, rules, regulations and procedures, order of 
designating the observers and responsible representatives, order of permit suspension and restriction, 
application and permit forms and list of data required for the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment 
were worked out. 
