Antarctic Treaty                                XXIII ATCM/ IP74
XXIII Consultative Meeting                      May, 1999
Traité sur l'Antarctique                        Original: English
XXIII Réunion consultative                      
Tratado Antártico                               Agenda Item 7a)
XXIII Reunión Consultiva                        
Договор об Антарктике                           
XXIII Консультативное Совещание                 

On creating a four-language
glossary of the main terms and
definitions used in the Antarctic
Treaty Documentation

Submitted by
Russia
On creating a four-language glossary of the main terms and definitions used in 
the Antarctic Treaty documentation

With the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty coming into 
force and subsequent activity of the Committee on Environmental Protection 
performed on a constant basis, as well as a multiyear effort of the Working Group of 
Legal Experts on elaborating Annex VI "On liability for Environmental Damage in 
Antarctica", the range of issues typically discussed at ATCM has significantly 
expanded. This, in turn, resulted in a dramatically increased use of special terminology 
and notions whose interpretation in the main languages of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting (English, French, Russian and Spanish) is not always 
unambiguous. At the last XXII ATCM in Tromso, Norway, the delegation of France 
hash drawn the attention of participants to the need of providing translation and 
interpretation services for the Group of Legal Experts (XXIII ATCM/WP9). We think 
that other non-English speaking countries also experience certain problems not only in 
discussing the ATCM agenda, but also in preparing the working and information 
documents. Obviously, highly professional services of the ATCM interpreters 
considerably facilitate the problem of mutual understanding between all ATCPs. 
However, at some instances even these professionals experience difficulties. We all 
remember the situations where during the discussion of some final ATCM documents 
even the USA and Great Britain delegations could not come to a consensus on the 
usage of some English words since in these countries these words have different 
connotations.

In this respect, adequate translation of the documents into four official ATCM 
languages is extremely important for achieving complete mutual understanding 
between the Parties in discussing a wide range of issues and adopting appropriate 
decisions without being impeded by language difficulties.

In translating from English into Russian there is still no standard usage system for 
some English terms in the EIA preparation procedure. In different countries, the EIA 
procedure itself is sometimes called differently whereas one and the same term may 
have different meanings. This discrepancy leads often to tedious arguments their only 
cause being a different meaning put into one and the same notion.

We think that one of the solutions on this matter is to create an official four-language 
glossary of the ATCM terms. Such glossary could be prepared by a special Working 
Group of the Committee for Environmental Protection with active participation of 
SCAR and COMNAP and naturally, by professional translators. The first stage could 
be to prepare a list of necessary terms and definitions in four languages (English, 
French, Russian and Spanish). In future, the criterion for choosing some term or other 
should be based on its closeness to the real meaning put into it, rather than on a 
formally exact translation of a similar term.

This Glossary can be a good practical aid both for specialists involved in the Antarctic 
issues and for professional translators and interpreters.
