Subprogram "Study and Research in the Antarctica" under the Federal Research 
Program " World ocean" as a new long-term concept of Russian activities in the 
Antarctic 
 
New long-term research programs adopted by many Consultative Parties to the Antarctic 
Treaty characterize the process of Antarctic studies at the end of the 2Oth century. On the 
one hand, this is related to natural progress both in the world and national science and new 
priorities in basic and applied studies. On the other hand, this is due to the actual changes 
in the Antarctic Treaty system itself when the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty that came into force imposed significant restrictions on the character of 
activities under the national programs in the Southern Polar Area. 
 
Similar activities took place in the Russian Federation. In August 1998, the government of 
the Russian Federation approved the Federal Research Program "World ocean" with the 
Subprogram "Study and Research in Antarctica" being one of its sections. The Subprogram 
executors will be institutions, organizations and specialists of the Federal Service for 
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia, Ministry for Natural 
Resources of the Russian Federation, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian 
Federation, Ministry for Defense of the Russian Federation, Ministry for General and 
Professional Education of the Russian Federation, State Committee for Environmental 
Protection of the Russian Federation, State Committee for Fishery of the Russian 
Federation, Federal Service of Geodesy and Cartography of  Russia and the Russian 
Academy of Science. 
 
The Subprogram is to be fulfilled in three stages: 
 
Stage I      1999-2OO2 
 
Stage II      2003-2007 
 
Stage III     20O8-2012 
 
The main directions of activities: 
 
- basic studies; 
 
- environmental monitoring of the Antarctic; 
 
- scientific-applied studies and developments; 
 
- environmental protection; 
 
- logistics. 
 
The new program of the Russian Antarctic studies is based on the results of previous 
activities both in the area of regional (Antarctic) projects and in the other fields of  basic 
and applied national science applicable in the Antarctic. The level of the actual and 
possible participation of Russia in the ongoing international projects and naturally the 
current economical situation in the country served as an important argument for creating 
the Subprogram "Study and Research in the Antarctic". The latter factor determined for the 
most part the Federal Client of the entire Federal Research Program, and namely, the 
Ministry for Economy of the Russian Federation. The  Federal Service for 
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring of Russia, the main Russian agency in 
respect of organizing and carrying out the Russian Antarctic Expedition was designated as 
the Client of the aforementioned Subprogram. 
 
Implementation of the Subprogram will supplement the existing data bank and contribute 
to our basic knowledge created over more than a 4O year-period on the state and the main 
typical features of development of the natural processes and climate in the Antarctic. It will 
also  allow us to  set up the geo-information systems based on current technologies. An 
analysis of the obtained and available archived data will  allow an assessment of the state 
and prognostic changes of the environmental characteristics for different periods in 
advance as affected by natural and anthropogenic impacts throughout the entire Earth's 
geographical sphere: near-space, upper free and surface atmosphere, hydrosphere, 
cryosphere, biosphere and lithosphere. 
 
Continuation of the comprehensive geological-geophysical studies will enable us to 
develop the theory of learning the nature and the global geo-dynamical processes and 
investigate the stratigraphic structure of the sedimentary layer of the Earth's crust. In spite 
of the fact that bedrock outcrops in Antarctica comprise less than 2% of its surface within 
the Antarctic sheet of East Antarctica, they are represented for the most part by the oldest 
and highest temperature metamorphic complexes known at our planet. Their geological 
study can offer significant insight to the history of development of our planet as a solar 
system body. 
 
A unique character and unstable balance of the Antarctic biodiversity are of special interest 
and simultaneously an important research topic, as along with addressing the problems of 
basic biological science, it covers the complicated and comprehensive applied issues of 
ecological character and the sustained use of Antarctic biological resources. 
 
In order to meet the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, the Subprogram envisages a complex of special nature protection 
measures. They include cleaning the territory of the Russian Antarctic stations and 
seasonal field bases, introducing current technologies of renewable energy sources, human 
waste disposal and creating operational emergency response plans for the Antarctic 
environment. 
 
The current economical situation in Russia and the actual changes in geopolitical world 
space required reconsidering the existing infrastructure of the logistics support for the 
Russian Antarctic studies. In accordance with a special decision of the Government of the 
Russian Federation of August 28, 1997, the infrastructure of the Russian Antarctic 
Expedition should correspond to the minimum permissible parameters providing the 
implementation of the entire complex of scientific and geopolitical interests of Russia in 
the Antarctic. The logistics of the Subprogram aims to support these objectives. 
 
The first stage of the Subprogram "Study and Research in the Antarctic" is implemented in 
the framework; of 19 scientific projects: 
 
1. Feasibility study for reconstructing the infrastructure of the Russian Antarctic 
expedition; 
 
2. Legislative aspects of activity of the Russian physical and legal entities in the Antarctic; 
 
3. Processes that form current climate of the Antarctic and its future changes in the 
atmosphere-ice-ocean system; 
 
4. Climate-forming role of the Southern ocean; 
 
S. Monitoring of Antarctic climate as part of the global climatic system; 
 
6. Paleoclimatic changes in the Antarctic based on the ice cores from deep boreholes and 
bottom sediment cores from the water bodies of the Antarctic oases; 
 
7. Studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok; 
 
8. Ice sheet regime and evolution in the marginal zone of the Antarctic and SubAntarctic; 
 
9. Structure and dynamics of helio-geophysical processes in the Southern Polar Cap of the 
magnetosphere; 
 
IO. Dynamics of the Southern Polar Cap boundary variability and linking of 
magnetosphere phenomena in high latitudes of the southern and northern hemispheres; 
 
I 1. Spatial-temporal variability of trace gases in the Antarctic atmosphere; 
 
12.Conditions forming the aerosol-optical properties of the atmosphere and the radiation 
balance components above the Antarctic; 
 
13. Geoinformation system "Antarktika"; 
 
14.Supplementing the data bases and banks with new information on the Antarctic 
environment; 
 
15. Information-retrieval system on the ecology of benthos in the Antarctic; 
 
16. Comprehensive study of Antarctic biota; 
 
17. Ecology of the Antarctic sea ice zone; 
 
18. Main structural features of potential mineral resources in the Antarctic lithosphere; 
 
19.Geological-geophysical study of the international ANTALITH and GEOMAUD 
geo-traverses, creation of special geophysical databases and medium-scale charts. 
 
The executors of the Projects will be selected on a competitive basis. 
