REPORT oF THE WoRLD CoNSERVATIoN UNIoN (IUCN) 
 
Under Article II1 (2) of the Antarctic Treaty 
 
XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
 
24 May 1999 
 
IUCN, The World Conservation Union, is a unique parlnership of States, government agencies and 
non-governmental organisations. Founded in 1948, it now has over ~8O members, including 173 state and 
government agency members, from 133 countries. In addition, over 8OOO volunteer scientists, legal experts, and 
practitioners contribute to fulfilling lUCN's mission through six global Commissions. 
 
The Union's mission is: 
 
"lo influence, encourage and assist societies throughol~t t~le world to conserve the integrity and diversity of natur~ 
an~l to ~nswe that any l~se of nat~ral resources is equitable and ecologically sl~stainabl~. " 
 
lUCN provides a "neutral forum" for the discussion of issues by bringing both Gos and ~GOs to the table to 
consider problems and devise strategies to facilitate conservation of nature throughout the world. The elements of 
IUCN's policy and programme are agreed by the triennial World Conservation Congress of members and their 
execution is coordinated by an interna~ional Secretariat. IUCI~l's six Commissions, bodies of volunteer experts 
from all over the world, make a major contribution to the development and execution of the programme. With its 
extensive and diverse membership, worldwide networks of experts and long experience in Antarctic matters, IUC~ 
is in a unique position to offer advice to the Antarctic Treaty Parties on such issues as protected area designation 
and management, environmental monitoring, environmental impact assessment, environmental legislation, and 
liability for environmental damage. 
 
IUCi\ has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for over 37 years. In 1991, Si,Y months before the 
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection was signed 
in Madrid, it published the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation. Many elements of this Strategy were incorporated 
in the Protocol and its annexes. 
 
In 1992, two workshops were held in partnership with SCAR's Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation (GoSEAC), on conservation management and research in the sub-Antarctic islands, and on protected 
area policy and management issues relevant for Antarctica. 
 
In 1993 a workshop on Antarctic environmental education and training was held, again in partnership with 
GOSEAC. The Proceedings of all these workshops have now been published and are available, and the 
recommendations from these workshops have been presented at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. 
 
A fourth technical workshop was held in Washington DC in September 1996, entitled "Cumulative Environmental 
Impact in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management." The workshop built on the results from the SCAR/CoMNAP 
workshops on environmental monitoring, focusing on aspects relevant to cumulative impacts. The outcome should 
be useful in a practical way to the ATS in general, as Protocol implementation will require a much better 
understanding of this concept, and specifically to national, nongovernmental and commercial operators and to the 
Antarctic scientific community. The report of this workshop was tabled at ATCM XXI. A follow up paper detailing 
ways of implementing the recommendations contained in that report has been tabled at this ATCM. This paper 
builds on comments received by IUCN from Parties and interested observers and experts. 
 
IUCN participated in the planning of, the second Protected Areas Workshop, which was held immediately prior to 
this ATCM, and which followed from the first such workshop before ATCM XXII; Both workshop built on many 
of the recommendations of the SCAR/IUCN workshop on Protected Areas held in 1992. 
 
IUCN would like to raise the following specific issues: 
 
Anne~; on Liabilitv for environmental damage 
 
IUCN is dismayed at the slow pace of nego~iations of an Annex on Liability for environmental damage, and urges 
Parties to make greater efforts towards the prompt completion, adoption and implementation of this Annex pursuant 
to Article I6 of the Protocol, and applying to all activities in Antarctica in the area covered by the Protocol which 
might result in damage to the Antarctic environment. 
 
Environmental lmPact Assessment 
 
It is pleasing to note the progress made inter~sc.ionally on EIA guidelines, and Argentina has to be commended tor 
its efforts in coordinating this work. 
IUGN is loo~;ing forward to Programmes meeting the challenge of minimising cumulative impacts through joint 
regional planning, or in a first step, al least producing joint EIAs for separate programmes and projects. For 
example, an overall EIA could be produced for activities in the Dry Valleys, covering science, tourism, other 
activities, US, New Zealand and other nations, covered in one overall assessment and mitigation effort. 
 
Alien species and diseases 
 
IUCN is looking forward to the report from the workshop on Diseases in Antarctic Wildlife which was held in 
Hobart, Australia in 1988. ~ecent work on antibodies in Antarctic penguins and on effects of macroinvertebrates on 
ecosystem functioning at sub-Antarctic islands has shown clearly that it is not just the effect of introduced 
vertebrates (cats and rats, etc.) that we must worry about introducing: it is also the invertebrates down to the level of 
viruses. It is now believed that globally, invasive introduced species, including those that cause diseases, are 
responsible for more species extinctions than habitat loss . Fortunately, the Antarctic situation is not as dramatic, 
but rather than a reason for complacency, this is a reason for increased efforts of prevention of introductions. 
Intersessional work would be welcome on this matter, and the Global Invasive Species Programme (GISP), 
coordinated by the Scienlific Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCoPE) and which includes IUCN, and 
IUCN s Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) can usefully contribute to this work. 
 
Tourism 
 
With respect to tourism, IUCN notes the rapid increase in Antarctic tourism, and submits that absence of proper 
overall management is a problem which must be addressed. ASMAs may be one way to address this, as there would 
be the ability to specifically manage numbers and access for tourists and o~her visitors, in those sites most at risk 
by direct or cumulative impacts. 
 
IUCN's concern is also based in large part on the lack of knowledge on how best to deal with repetitive visits of 
large groups of people in areas of close contact with wildlife. At the moment, for example, we lack sufficient 
understanding to decide whether in practice impacts are best minimised by "lumping" or "spreading" visitors over 
sites. IUCN suggests that the precautionary approach would call for a freeze on Antarctic tourist numbers and sites 
until we have a better understanding of the contribution to cumulative impact. 
 
Another area of concern, is the planned visit next season, of several large ships to Antarctica: in November 1999, 
the World Cruise Company of Canada intends to send the S50passenger ocean Explorer I on an Antarctic cruise. At 
the end of December 1999, Marine Expeditions Inc. (MEI, also of Canada) plans to sail the Aegean 1, with 830 
passengers and 
crew. In 2OOO, the U.S.-based Holland Arnerican Line Westours, Inc., will sail the Dutchflagged ms Rotterdam 
to the Antarctic with 1,600 people on board. At least one of those voyages is presently intending to make landings. 
The concern is not only based on the risl; of impacts from these ships in case of a mishap - there is also the 
cumulative impact of ever increasin~ numbers, and the possibility that this is the beginning of a trend of large 
vessels, which in future could be expected to wish to carry out landings. 
 
Protected Areas 
 
The workshop preceding this Meeting certainly provided good points for further discussion. Intersessional work by 
an open ended contact group, with terms of reference agreed on by this the CEP, is desirable. 
 
However, last year's workshop as well as the more recent one were limited in their terms of reference to discussing 
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, ASPAs. This is of course a very good start. But it is also clear that the 
discussion needs to widen, and that it needs to include Antarctic Specially Managed Areas ASMAs. Without this it 
will be very difficult to manage large areas - where access may need to be regulated but not restricted. ASMAs also 
are potentially relevant, and likely one of the best tools in the management of tourism. 
 
Secretariat 
 
IUCN also calls on Parties to redouble their efforts to resolve urgently the remaining disagreements over the 
location of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat since the current impasse is detrimental to the implementation of the 
Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. 
 
Unregulated fishing 
 
IUCN notes wilh alarm the continuing reports of unregulated fishing on the Patagonian toothfish, and the 
consequent incidental seabird mortality. The seabirds which are caught in the longline gear include several 
lUCN-listed threatened species of albatross and petrels, and this mortality is unsustainable for the species involved. 
IUCN submits that Parties take all steps necessary both through the Antarctic Treaty System and through 
CCAMLR, to bring these fisheries under control. 
 
Science in a ra~)idlv chan~in~ world 
 
Globally, ownership of scientific data is increasingly commercial, and as a consequence, access to the results of 
scientific research and to knowledge will be increasingly concentrated 
in the hands of those able to pay the high price demanded. If this attitude were to find its way into the Antarctic, 
both Antarctic science and mankind as a whole would suffer. The concept of freedom of access to scientific data is 
enshrined in the Antarctic treaty. The challenge will be to safeguard it against global trends that run counter to this 
admirable principle. 
 
Conclusion 
 
IUCN continues to place a high priority on helping the Antarctic Treaty System to maintain and enhance its 
effectiveness in conserving and protecting the Antarctic region. As always, IUCN puts its resources and expertise at 
the service of the ATCM towards this end. 
 
Many challenges are waiting to be dealt with at this Meeting. What better place to face challenges and find 
innovative solutions that our venue, Peru. This country, and its neighbor, Ecuador, have after all managed recently 
to find a peaceful answer to a political problem that many thought impossible to solve. These nations proved that 
goodwill and the willingness to embrace innovative thinking can solve the most complex of problems. We are 
looking forward to see this same spirit applied by all to the challenges facing us at this Meeting. 
