XXIII ATCM/ IP55 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 12 
 
 
  
 
 
Relevance of Developments in the 
Arctic and the Antarctic  
Submitted by 
Canada 
 
 
  
 
 
Relevance of Developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic 
 
 
Mr. Chairman: 
 
 
I am pleased to report briefly some recent developments in the Arctic region that may be 
of interest to the ATCM.  This report has been compiled from information supplied from Arctic 
countries. 
 
Activities related to the Arctic Council 
 
 
As noted at the last two ATCM's, the Arctic Council, which was inaugurated in 1996 
after extensive discussions among the eight circumpolar arctic countries, continues to develop 
as a high level political forum to promote co-operation, co-ordination and interaction among the 
Arctic States on common or shared Arctic issues.  The Arctic indigenous communities are 
directly involved in the Arctic Council through the representatives of their international and 
national organizations which have the status of Permanent Participants; and representatives of 
non-Arctic countries with Arctic interests or activities, plus United Nations agencies, attend 
Council meetings as observers. 
 
 
In 1998 the Chair and Secretariat of the Arctic Council passed from Canada to the 
United States for a two-year term.  The Council continues to focus on questions of international 
co-operation with regard to environmental protection in Arctic regions, sustainable social and 
economic development including management of trans-boundary resources, and issues 
involving children and youth in Arctic society.  At the recent May 1999 meeting of the Senior 
Arctic Officials to the Council there was further discussion about how research in both polar 
regions, and exchange of information, could contribute to these goals. 
 
 
The Arctic Council oversees and co-ordinates the programmes established in 1991 
under the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS), namely the Arctic Monitoring and 
Assessment Programme (AMAP), Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), Protection 
of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME), and Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and 
Response (EPPR).  Recent developments in each of these programmes may have bi-polar or 
Antarctic interest or relevance. 
 
 
During the past year the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP) 
completed and released its major technical report "The AMAP Assessment Report", a fully 
referenced compendium and analysis of pollutants and contaminants in all parts of the Arctic 
region, with assessments of the state of knowledge of the behaviour, mechanisms of distribution 
and concentration, and biological consequences of pollution impacts in polar environments.  
Delegates will recall that a condensed, less technical version of this work, entitled "Arctic 
Pollution Issues:  A State of the Arctic Environment Report" was distributed to the XXII 
ATCM at Tromso in 1998.  Much of the information on detection, monitoring and on physio-
chemical processes or biological effects of pollutants in polar environments has relevance to 
Antarctica. 
 
1
 
  
 
 
The programme on Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF) has included 
studies of the dynamics of populations of migratory birds that spend part of their annual cycle in 
the northern polar regions, their relations to and effect on habitat and habitat changes, and the 
sensitivity of habitats and migratory fauna to regional or global climate change.  Related to 
these concerns are issues connected with the strengthening and maintenance of the Circumpolar 
Protected Areas Network (CPAN).  CAFF is also undertaking a review of international 
legislative mechanisms related to marine conservation in northern seas. 
 
 
The programme for Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME) has 
developed its work plans for the period 1999-2002.  Major activities include (i) circumpolar 
coordination of the Regional Programme of Action for the Protection of the Arctic Marine 
Environment from Land-Based Activities; (ii) implementation of previously approved Arctic 
Offshore Oil and Gas Guidelines; (iii) review and up-date of bi-lateral and multi-lateral 
international agreements regarding protection of the arctic marine environment; (iv) 
continuation and improvement of data on current and potential shipping activities in north polar 
seas.  PAME continues to work with and provide high-latitude ocean expertise to the 
UNEP/CSD Global Programme of Action for Protection of the Marine Environment from 
Land-based Activities (GPA).  It has prepared an initial report to UN-CSD noting, on the basis 
of the AMAP investigations (see above) that Persistent Organic Pollutants and Heavy Metals 
pose major pollution threats to the arctic marine environment and ecosystems.  On behalf of the 
Arctic Council, PAME co-operates with the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in 
providing information on environmental problems that may be related to development of the 
International Code of Safety for Ships operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code).  PAME is also 
embarked on an analysis of international agreements and arrangements related to the dumping 
of wastes in ice-covered waters.  The Government of Iceland has offered to host the PAME 
Secretariat for the next two years. 
 
 
PAME and other Arctic Council programmes are working together with the 
Government of Russia and the Advisory Committee on Protection of the Sea (ACOPS) to 
develop, through international partnership, a co-ordinated programme for protection of the 
coastal zone and Arctic Seas close to Russia, including issues of radionuclides, PCB's, marine 
resources, and traditional lifestyles and livelihoods. 
 
 
The programme for Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and Response (EPPR) 
includes a number of subjects of potential bi-polar or Antarctic interest.  These include:- 
 
 
 
- 
development of principles for identification and mapping of areas and 
ecosystems in the Arctic circumpolar region that are at risk or sensitive to 
environmental emergencies.  The data base will cover all seasons, and the end 
product will be a geographic information system (GIS) for use by specialists, 
officials, on-site managers, and the public; 
 
 
- 
completion and distribution of the "Arctic Guide for Emergency Prevention and 
Preparedness." This is a general guide to help international consistency and co-
ordination; 
 
 
- 
completion of the "Field Guide for Oil Spill Response in Arctic Waters".  This 
technically specific practical guide for field use is being distributed to all Arctic 
Council marine agencies, to IMO, and also is for sale to the public.  Two 
chapters on actions to be taken are being translated into northern native 
 
2
 
  
languages for community use on site. 
 
- 
on-going activities with regard to risk identification and risk analysis. 
 
Information about the Arctic Council and any of the above noted activities may be obtained 
through the Arctic Council web site, http://arctic-council.usgs.gov. 
 
 
Scientific and other activities 
 
 
In addition to the intergovernmental activities related to the Arctic Council, following 
are some recent developments in the Arctic that may be of interest to the ATCM. 
 
 
- 
The International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), the principal circumpolar 
non-governmental international circumpolar arctic science organization, 
continues to develop activities that are bi-polar in nature, in co-operation with its 
southern polar counterpart, SCAR.  In August 1998 IASC and SCAR, with the 
co-operation of the Norwegian Polar Institute, organized a symposium on "Polar 
Aspects of Global Change".  This meeting provided opportunities for Arctic and 
Antarctic scientists to compare and contrast the signals, the known processes 
and the state of knowledge in a wide range of fields from biology and 
oceanography to upper atmosphere chemistry in polar regions related to global 
change.  The discussions can be expected to have an influence on the priorities 
of scientific studies in polar regions, and on Antarctic/Arctic scientific co-
operation, in coming years. 
 
 
- 
Emerging from the symposium on Polar Aspects of Global Change which 
identified the desirability of closer co-operation between logistics managers and 
operators of Arctic scientific studies of different countries, discussions have led 
to the establishment of a voluntary informal "Forum of Arctic Research 
Operators" as a means of communication and co-operation between persons or 
agencies managing the logistics and support services to arctic scientific studies.  
The Forum has some similarities to COMNAP, with which it will co-operate 
where relevant; indeed, there is overlapping membership. 
 
 
- 
Studies of the arctic stratosphere and ionosphere, its changes and dynamics, and 
effects on world or regional climate and the nature of the radiation received at 
the Earth's surface continue from high-latitude laboratories and observatories in 
Svalbard, Norway and Ellesmere Island, Canada, supported by a number of 
circumpolar monitoring stations.  These studies are co-ordinated with 
investigations and monitoring in the Antarctic, and together are providing a 
clearer picture of the increasing disturbance of the planetary upper atmosphere 
and ionosphere environment. 
 
 
- 
The multi-discipline research station at Zackenberg in East Greenland, ZERO 
(Zackenberg Ecological Research Operations), reported to ATCM in 1997 and 
1998, is now well established and starting to provide long-term data on the 
Arctic polar environment.  Of interest to Antarctic studies are the two basic 
transects, known as Geo-basis and Bio-basis, in areas kept free from disturbance 
or other research, which it is hoped will provide an valuable reference point for 
circumpolar Arctic studies and a useful northern hemisphere reference for 
 
3
 
 
 
4
 
Antarctic studies. 
 
 
- 
An international team of scientists completed a year-long study transect of the 
Arctic Ocean, using a Canadian icebreaker as a platform.  This expedition 
provided new information on the nature, energy exchange, and stability of the 
water masses in a small ocean that has a critical influence on three-dimensional 
circulation of the World Ocean and on regional and world climate.  Data were 
obtained and techniques developed that, it is hoped, will be useful to similar 
studies in Antarctic waters. 
 
 
- 
Following the operational and scientific success of the Swedish-led "Ymer" 
traverse along the Arctic coast of Siberia in 1994, plans have been laid for a 
somewhat similar study, again led by Sweden but with an international team of 
scientists and using a Canadian icebreaker, of the terrestrial biology and 
ecological processes in the coastal areas of Arctic North America.  The plan 
entails using an ice-going well-equipped scientific ship stationed offshore as a 
research base, from which scientists fly inland to research sites, take 
measurements and specimens, and return to the ship without making camp on 
land except in emergencies.  The scheme allows scientists working in the most 
remote parts of the Arctic to be always within one day's travel of a well-
equipped laboratory for analysis, calibration and specimen treatment, and avoids 
the expense, logistic challenges, and scientific delays involved in establishing 
expeditionary-type camps and operations on land.  It is hoped to undertake the 
campaign, to be known as "Tundra 99", along the coasts of northern Canada and 
Alaska, in the coming 1999 Arctic summer.  If the technique again proves to be 
successful, there may be merit in considering its applicability to parts of 
Antarctica. 
 
 
 
 
- 
Of interest in the development of new technologies for scientific studies in 
remote regions, it may be noted that the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, after extensive reconnaissances and preliminary tests in 
Antarctica, has established a station within an ancient meteorite crater on Devon 
Island in the Canadian arctic islands to develop and test equipment to be used in 
the Martian Lander enterprise planned for early in the next century.  Antarctica, 
then Devon Island, then Mars, appear to be the steps toward extra-planetary 
technologies. 
 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, as tourism and eco-tourism in polar regions continue to grow in 
numbers and in variety, we are conscious of the need, both in the Arctic and the Antarctic, for 
sensible policies and controls that will preserve the natural values of both polar regions for 
scientific study and for future generations to enjoy, and at the same time to permit present 
visitors and adventurers to obtain maximum gratification and enjoyment from these fascinating, 
beautiful, sensitive and challenging regions.  Although the two polar regions are quite different, 
both those managing the tourism, and the tourists, in each region may have much to benefit 
from communication and exchange of information. 
