XXIII ATCM/ IP57 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 16 
 
 
 
Clean-up of small private field station
Submitted by 
Norway 
 
Clean-up of small private field station 
 
 
 
In the early 1990s a small private Norwegian expedition to Antarctica had its base near the 
Filchner Iceshelf.  A small field station consisting of four small station units and a main 
station unit was left behind at the end of the expedition.  The units were equipped with 
household effects and other expedition equipment.  There were also 8 snow mobiles and 18 
sledges left behind.  Five weather stations and approximately 60 aluminum poles were 
placed in the surrounding area for weather and glaciological monitoring.    
 
The Norwegian Polar Institute assumed responsibility of the automatic weather stations, as 
well as the glaciological measurement network left behind from the private expedition in 
late 1998.  
 
The Norwegian Polar Institute considered it essential that all harmful material left behind at 
the field station should be removed (in accordance with the provisions of the 
Environmental Protocol).  A clean up operation was consequently initiated for the 1998/99 
Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition.  A four-person field party, whose main task was 
to collect data from the weather stations, was also charged to remove as much as possible 
of any harmful material left at the field station. 
 
The clean-up was carried through in accordance with the given plans, and the operation is 
considered to have been successful.  Weather data from the automatic weather stations 
were collected and the five stations were removed. In addition, essentially all material and 
equipment at the field station were removed as well.  Due to the complexity of the 
operations, the station units which were build of wood, and a small fuel depot, were not 
removed from the site. 
 
Analysis of the data from the weather stations will commence in the near future. 
 
The Norwegian Polar Institute would like to thank the Argentinean Antarctic Program for 
their assistance in the clean-up operations, and the German Antarctic Program for their 
support with transport of personnel and equipment. 
 
1
