1 
 
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS 
SAILING VESSEL WRECKAGE, SOUTH-WEST COAST OF ELEPHANT ISLAND, 
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS 
 
 
Introduction. 
 
At ATCM XXII, the United Kingdom submitted a Working Paper (XXII ATCM/WP21) detailing 
the discovery of the wreckage of a large wooden sailing vessel in a small cove on the south-west 
coast of Elephant Island, South Shetland Islands. 
 
The significance of the find (no other such historic wreck sites are known in Antarctica), and the 
suspicion that the wreckage might be either that of Dr Otto Nordenskjold’s Antarctic or Sir Ernest 
Shackleton’s Endurance, prompted ATCM XXII to designate the cove and the adjacent coastline of 
Elephant Island as an Historic Site and Monument (Measure 2(1998)). 
 
At the same time the UK, through the United Kingdom Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT) and the 
Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI), Cambridge, undertook to carry out further investigations in 
an attempt to identify the wreck.  This paper provides Parties with an update of those investigations. 
 
Current Information. 
 
The wreckage was thoroughly surveyed by a party from the UK’s Ice Patrol Vessel, HMS 
Endurance, in March 1998.  At the same time small samples of some of the timbers were removed.  
These samples were returned to SPRI for dendrochronological analysis.   
 
The results of these analyses have confirmed that the wreck's timbers are not of Scandinavian 
origin.  This evidence coupled with detailed examination of the photographic survey of the wreck, 
and comparison with the original plans of the Endurance, has demonstrated that the wreckage was 
neither the Antarctic nor the Endurance. 
 
The 1998 timber samples were not adequate for a full dendrochronological analysis to be 
undertaken.  Further core samples were therefore taken from larger timber specimens in January 
1999.  These are currently being analysed by SPRI and other Departments of the University of 
Cambridge.  It is anticipated that these studies will reveal the geographic source of the timbers as 
well as the approximate timing of the felling of the trees.  It should then be possible to correlate 
these data with the historical records so as to identify the vessel.  The results will not be available, 
however, until later this year. 
 
Nevertheless, whilst the identity of the vessel remains unconfirmed, historical evidence has been 
accumulated by SPRI, suggesting that the wreckage might be that of the Charles Shearer, a United 
States sealing vessel, which disappeared without trace in the South Shetland Islands in October / 
November 1877.  The attached annex provides further detail of this vessel. 
 
Next Steps. 
 
The investigations outlined above will continue until such time as the wreckage can be identified.  
In the increasingly likely event that the relics are identified as being of a nationality other than 
British, the UK and the UKAHT will relinquish its interests accordingly.  The UK will continue to 
keep Parties informed as these investigations continue. 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex. 
 
 
 
Charles Shearer. 
 
Although the identity of the wrecked vessel on Elephant Island remains unconfirmed, circumstantial 
evidence gleaned from historical data, suggests that it may be that of the Charles Shearer. 
 
 
The date of construction of this vessel has not been determined, but it is believed to have been built 
in the 1860’s and probably in or around the port of Stonington, Massachusetts,USA.  Published 
catalogues indicate that she made voyages to the South Shetland Islands in 1874-75 and the “South 
Atlantic” (probably South Georgia) in 1875-76.  Captain Walter G. Cheseboro commanded both 
voyages. 
 
 
On the 3rd July 1877 Charles Shearer sailed from Stonington under the command of James 
Appleton (or Appleman) again bound for Antarctica.  She left a sealing gang on Islas Diego 
Ramirez in October 1877 and then continued south to the South Shetland Islands where she 
disappeared without trace.  The sealing gang on Diego Ramirez was rescued six months later. 
 
 
During the austral summer of 1879 – 80, two sealing voyages from Stonington, USA, searched, 
unsuccessfully, for the Charles Shearer and any survivors.  The Express, commanded by Thomas 
B. Lynch and the Thomas Hunt commanded by Andrew J. Eldred, searched the South Shetland 
Islands, South Orkney Islands and Trinity Peninsula, but to no avail. 
 
 
Although several other vessels are known to have been wrecked in the South Shetland Islands all 
were from the earlier half of the 19th Century.  The rate of deterioration of the timbers suggests the 
wrecked material on Elephant Island does not stem from the earlier period of South Shetland 
Island’s sealing between 1820 and 1824. 
