 
Ross Sea Region State of the Environment Report 
An Update on Progress 
 
 
New Zealand 
Information Paper 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
1. The Ross Sea Region State of the Environment Report is being developed as a New 
Zealand initiative with the following objectives: 
 
i. 
To summarise the current state of the knowledge about the Ross Sea region 
environment to the year 2000: 
• 
identifying any critical gaps in our understanding of the region; 
• 
serving as a standard reference work for the future against which natural and 
human-induced change might be measured; and  
• 
providing a means of informing future policy and management. 
 
ii. 
To provide a framework for the development and management of activities in 
the Ross Sea region, in particular a basis for making informed assessments of, and 
judgements about, the environmental consequences of proposed activities in the 
region. 
 
iii. 
To provide information to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) 
in relation to its state of the environment reporting objectives under the 
Environmental Protocol, particularly the requirement for monitoring of 
environmental impacts, including cumulative effects. 
 
iv. 
To provide a basis for the ongoing development of research priorities and 
protected area management in the Ross Sea region. 
 
v. 
To identify the level of past environmental impacts from human activities and 
provide a basis for considering appropriate responses. 
 
2. The report will provide a scientific basis for future management of the region by pulling 
together accessible and relevant information on the state of the region’s natural, 
physical and historic features and values.  The report will also help to identify any 
significant gaps in our understanding of particular aspects of the region. 
Information paper 
1 
New Zealand 
RSR –SOER 
 
3. New Zealand reported on progress with producing the report to the last ATCM (IP 46).  
In the past year, project management and resource issues have been worked through, 
drafting has commenced on the substantial chapters of the report and consultation is 
underway with other interested countries operating in the region.  New Zealand is 
conscious of the need to consult widely throughout the development of the report and is 
encouraging input from a wide variety of interested groups and individuals.   
 
 
The Approach 
 
4. New Zealand is using the OECD “pressure-state-response” framework as the basis for 
developing the report.  The framework is based on the concept of causality.  That is, 
human activities exert pressures on the environment and change or alter its state or 
condition. Polices are implemented in response to this changed state, which in turn 
influence human activities that apply pressure on the environment.  While a number of 
refinements have been proposed to this model, in particular those that recognise the 
ability of response actions to directly change the state of the environment, the basic 
approach is still worthwhile.   
 
5. The publication in 1997 of New Zealand’s first domestic state of the environment 
report, based on this model, and other recent international efforts will provide valuable 
experience and information to the project team. 
 
 
Report Structure and Priorities 
 
6. The current working structure for the report is attached.  The priority for the report will 
be to identify, within the limits of existing information, what the state of the 
environment is in the region and what human activities have lead to changes in this 
state.  The emphasis will be on key environments, values and changes in indicators of 
environmental change.  Possible threats for the future, such as fishing activities, tourism 
and global change will also be explored.   
 
 
Project Management 
 
7. Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand’s Antarctic institute) and the Royal Society of 
New Zealand are managing the preparation of the report through an Executive 
Committee.  A project manager and editor have also been appointed who oversee the 
Information paper 
2 
New Zealand 
RSR –SOER 
 
day to day management of the report preparation. A policy oversight group made up of 
members from relevant government agencies act as an overall steering group.   
 
Contributors 
 
8. New Zealand Antarctic scientists, managers, and other experts are providing the 
majority of substantial contributions to the report.  All written contributions are to be 
internationally peer reviewed.   
 
 
Timeline 
 
9. The report is scheduled for completion by 1 December 2000.  Given publication and 
editorial lead times, the report will in effect provide a snap shot of the state of the 
environment in the Ross Sea region in 1999. 
 
 
Further Information 
 
10. Further information and updates on progress with the development of the report can be 
found on the Antarctica New Zealand WWW site: 
 
http://www.antarcticanz.govt.nz 
 
Alternatively the Project Manager would welcome any queries to the address below: 
 
Emma Waterhouse 
Environmental Manager 
Antarctica New Zealand 
Private Bag 4745 Christchurch 
New Zealand 
RSR-SOER@antarcticanz.govt.nz
Information paper 
3 
New Zealand 
RSR –SOER 
 
Structure for the Report 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
 
1.1 
New Zealand's Objectives for the Report 
1.2 
How to use the report 
 
 
2.  
The Ross Sea Region at a Glance 
 
 
2.1 
Key Facts/Unique Features  
 
2.2 
Administrative Frameworks 
 
2.3 
Environmental Management 
 
 
3. 
State of the Ross Sea Region Terrestrial Environment 
 
 
3.1 
Introduction 
 
3.2 
Glaciers and Ice Shelves 
 
3.3 
Soils/Ice Free Areas  
3.4 
Lakes and Streams 
3.5 
Terrestrial Biota 
 
 
4. 
State of the Ross Sea Region Marine Environment 
 
 
4.1 
Introduction 
 
4.2 
Coastal Ecosystems 
 
4.3 
Offshore/oceans 
 
 
5. 
State of the Ross Sea Region Atmosphere 
 
 
5.1 
Introduction  
 
5.2 
Air 
 
5.3 
Atmosphere 
 
 
6. 
Pressures and Threats 
 
 
6.1 
Introduction 
 
6.2 
Science and Support Activities 
 
6.3 
Tourism/Private Sector 
 
6.4 
Fishing/Maritime Activities 
 
6.5 
Global Threats  
 
6.6 
Other Threats  
Information paper 
4 
New Zealand 
RSR –SOER 
 
Information paper 
5 
New Zealand 
RSR –SOER 
 
 
 
7. 
Responses 
 
 
7.1 
Policy Responses 
 
7.2 
Science and Research 
 
7.3 
Environmental Management Mechanisms 
 
7.4 
Monitoring and Key Indicators 
 
 
8. 
Conclusions about the State of the RSR Environment 
 
 
8.1 
State of the RSR Land, Oceans and Atmosphere 
 
8.2 
State of Key Values of the RSR 
 
8.3 
Pressure Points and Future Challenges 
 
8.4 
Agenda for Action 
 
 
