Umweltbundesamt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 November 1998 
I 3.4 - 94 002 - 2/0 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report of the Federal Republic of Germany pursuant to Article 17 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(1998) 
 
 
 
(1) 
Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs  
1 and 2, of the Protocol 
 
The Federal Republic of Germany has taken the following measures to ensure compliance 
with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: 
 
− Adoption of the Act on the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the 
Antarctic Treaty (Gesetz zum Umweltschutzprotokoll vom 4. Oktober 1991 zum 
Antarktis-Vertrag) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part II, p. 2478 et seq.) 
 
− Adoption of the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 
1991 to the Antarctic Treaty (Gesetz zur Ausführung des Umweltschutzprotokolls vom 4. 
Oktober 1991 zum Antarktis-Vertrag) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, 
p. 2594 et seq.), as amended by Regulation of 21 September 1997 (Federal Law Gazette, 
part I, p. 2390 et seq.). 
 
The Act on the Protocol on Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the Antarctic 
Treaty entered into force on 6 October 1994. The Act to Implement the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection of 4 October 1991 to the Antarctic Treaty entered into force on 14 
January 1998. Since then, a considerable number of licencing procedures has been concluded. 
To facilitate procedures, several questionnaires for applicants have been developed. 
Guidelines for waste management plans have also been set up.  
 
Several regulations under the Act to Implement the Protocol are in the process of adoption. 
These include, inter alia, a regulation on specially protected and specially managed areas, a 
regulation on compliance and monitoring, and a regulation on the prevention of marine 
pollution. 
 
 
(2) 
Contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the 
Protocol 
 
For the German Neumayer Station, an Oil Spill Contingency Plan and Emergency Response 
Plan have been established. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
As far as ships are concerned, Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans (SOPEPs) exist, in 
accordance with MARPOL regulations, for MS Polarstern, MS Hanseatic and MS Bremen. 
 
 
(3) 
Arrangements for  
− collecting and exchanging records and statistics concerning the 
numbers or quantities of each species of native mammal, bird or 
plant taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 
− obtaining and exchanging information as to the status of native 
mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area, and the extent to which any species or population needs 
protection, 
− establishing a common form in which this information shall be 
submitted by Parties 
(Annex II, Article 6 (2) of the Protocol) 
 
Records and statistics concerning the numbers or quantities of species of native mammal, bird 
or plant taken annually in the Antarctic Treaty Area will be drawn up annually by the 
Umweltbundesamt. They will be based on the post activity reports prepared by researchers 
whose activities were licenced under the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection. 
 
As far as information on the status of native mammals, birds, plants, and invertebrates in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area is concerned, Germany is a co-sponsor of the ongoing research project 
„Antarctic Site Inventory“ which monitors environmental changes of areas in the Antarctic 
peninsula and also collects some of this information. 
 
 
(4) 
Number and Nature of Permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol 
during the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998 (Annex II, Article 6 (2) 
of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998, no permits were issued under Annex II of the 
Protocol. 
 
 
(5) 
Waste Management Plans Prepared in Accordance with Annex III,  
Article 8 of the Protocol (Annex III, Article 9 (1) of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998, a waste management plan (parts I and II) was 
prepared. It refers to research stations run by the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und 
Meeresforschung, Bremerhaven and to expeditions for which the Institute is responsible. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
(6) 
Inventory of Past Activities in Accordance with Annex III,  
Article 8 (3) of the Protocol (Annex III, Article 9 (1) of the Protocol) 
 
At present, an inventory of past activities is being drawn up. It will be available in spring 
1999. 
 
 
(7) Number and Nature of Permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol 
during the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998 (Annex V, Article 10 (2) of 
the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998, no permits were issued under Annex V of the 
Protocol. 
 
Umweltbundesamt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 November 1998 
I 3.4 - 94 002 - 2/0 
 
 
 
Report of the Federal Republic of Germany pursuant to Annex I, Article 6, 
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(1998) 
 
 
 
(1) 
Procedures to Consider the Environmental Impacts of Proposed  
Activities in Antarctica 
(Annex I, Article 6, lit. a, of the Protocol) 
 
 
General 
 
The procedures to consider the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica are 
laid down in the Act to Implement the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty of 4 October 1991 (Gesetz zur Ausführung des Umweltschutzprotokolls zum 
Antarktis-Vertrag vom 4. Oktober 1991) of 22 September 1994 (Federal Law Gazette, part I, 
p. 2593 et seq.), as amended by Regulation of 21 September 1997 (Federal Law Gazette, part 
I, p. 2390 et seq.). Under this act, a licence by the Federal Environmental Agency 
(Umweltbundesamt) is required for all activities in Antarctica  
− proceeding from, or organized on, German territory and  
− carried out by German individuals, other individuals resident in Germany, and German or 
other legal persons or unincorporated associations.  
 
In each case the applicant is required to submit relevant information on his or her activity and 
the expected impacts on the environment. If the applicant does not expect any environmental 
impacts he or she must give a reason for this. The Federal Environmental Agency then 
classifies the activity according to the categories 
− less than minor or transitory impacts (category 1) 
− minor or transitory impacts (category 2) 
− more than minor or transitory impacts (category 3). 
 
Activities with less than minor or transitory impacts will be licenced without any additional 
environmental evaluation. The licence may specify conditions which the applicant will have 
to comply with. However, before the licencing decisions, other relevant German authorities 
will be asked for their opinion. Also, the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und 
Meeresforschung may give its comments. In the case of category 1 activities, the applicant is 
entitled to obtain a licence, but this may contain special rules (e.g. to take precautionary 
measures).
 
2 
 
 
Initial Environmental Evaluation 
 
If an activity is seen as having at least minor or transitory impacts on the Antarctic 
environment, an Initial Environmental Evaluation is necessary. This will take place within the 
licencing procedure. The applicant will have to submit additional detailed information on the 
expected impacts as well as on possible alternatives. Again, other relevant German authorities 
and the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung will be asked for comments. 
In the case of category 2 activities, the Federal Environmental Agency has discretionary 
powers to grant the licence as requested, to grant it subject to specific conditions, or to deny 
it. It will have to give the reasons for its decision. 
 
In the case of scientific activities, an independent scientific committee set up by the Federal 
Ministries of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, the Federal Ministry for 
Education, Research, and the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs, will also be asked for 
comments. These will be taken into account in the licencing decision. 
 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation 
 
If more than minor or transitory impacts are expected, a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation will have to take place. This will also be carried out in the framework of the 
licencing procedure. It consists of the following steps:  
 
Scoping; Environmental Impact Study 
 
The applicant will have to draw up a detailed environmental impact study. Before he does so, 
the relevant details of the environmental evaluation such as methods, the geographic area to 
be examined, the relevant environmental features to be included etc. will be discussed and 
decided in a scoping process. In this process, other authorities and the public may also take 
part if the Federal Environmental Agency agrees with this.  
 
Review 
 
The environmental impact study will then be sent to the other relevant German authorities and 
the Alfred Wegener Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung for comments. In the case of 
scientific activities, the independent scientific committee mentioned above will be asked to 
give its comments as well. The environmental impact study will also be made available, at the 
premises of the Federal Environmental Agency, to the public for inspection during a period of 
ninety days. The public may also give its comments. This will be announced at least three 
weeks in advance in the Federal Gazette (Bundesanzeiger). After the ninety day period, the 
comments will be discussed with the applicant and the comments’ authors at a hearing. 
Furthermore, the environmental impact study will be forwarded to all other Parties to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty who also may give their 
comments during ninety days, and to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) 
established under Article 11 of the Protocol. A decision on the licence may only be taken if 
there was sufficient time for an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to consider the 
environmental impact study. This makes it necessary to forward the study to the CEP at least 
120 days in advance of such a Meeting. The Federal Environmental Agency will have to take 
the comments of the Meeting into account when deciding on the licence. However, if no 
Meeting takes place within a period of 15 months after the study has been forwarded to the 
 
3 
 
 
CEP, or if during that period the deliberations within the Meeting have not been concluded, 
the Federal Environmental Agency may proceed with the licencing procedure. 
 
Comprehensive Statement of Environmental Impacts 
 
The Federal Environmental Agency then prepares a comprehensive statement of 
environmental impacts. This will be based on the applicant’s study, on the comments received 
in the review process, and possibly on additional information of the Federal Environmental 
Agency. 
 
Decision 
 
Finally, the Federal Environmental Agency takes its decision on the basis of the 
comprehensive statement. The agency again has discretionary powers to grant the licence as 
applied for, to grant it subject to specific conditions, or to reject it. The decision must be 
explained; in the explanation, the likely environmental impacts of the activity will have to be 
evaluated. If the decision deviates from comments of other authorities or of the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting, the reasons for this must be stated. 
 
Information of Participants on the Decision; Start of the Activity 
 
The Federal Environmental Agency will forward its decision together with the explanation 
and all relevant information to the Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and to the CEP. A copy of the decision will also be available for public 
inspection at the Federal Environmental Agency. If the activity has been licenced, it may only 
proceed sixty days after the decision has been sent to the Parties to the Protocol. 
 
Licencing Requirements 
 
For all categories of activities, the substantial licencing requirements are laid down in Art. 3, 
para. 4 of the Act as follows: 
 
(4) 
A permit may only be issued if the activity in the Antarctic does not give cause 
to suspect any: 
 
1. 
adverse effects on climate or weather patterns; 
2. 
significant adverse effects on air or water quality; 
3. 
significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial, aquatic, glacial or 
marine environment; 
4. 
harmful changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of 
animal or plant species or their populations; 
5. 
further jeopardy to endangered species or populations; 
6. 
harm or significant jeopardy to areas of biological, scientific, historic 
or aesthetic significance or of a primeval nature; or 
7. 
other significantly detrimental effects on the environment or dependent 
and associated ecosystems. 
 
4 
 
 
(2) 
Annual List of any Initial Environmental Evaluations prepared in 
Accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol  
(Annex I, Article 6, lit. b, of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998, no Initial Environmental Evaluation was 
prepared in accordance with Annex I, Article 2, of the Protocol of Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
 
(3) 
Significant Information Obtained, and any Action Taken in  
Consequence thereof, from Procedures Put in Place in Accordance  
with Annex I, Articles 2 (2) and 5, of the Protocol  
(Annex I, Article 6, lit. c, of the Protocol) 
 
During the period 1 July 1997 to 30 June 1998, no significant information was obtained from 
the above-mentioned monitoring procedures. 
 
 
