Antarctic Treaty       
XXIII Consultative Meeting       
Traité sur l'Antarctique       
XXIII* Réunion consultative       
Tratado Antártico       
XXIII Reunión Consultiva       
Договор об Антарктике       
XXIII Консультативное Совещание       

                 XXIII ATCM/ IP 137
                 June, 1999
                 Original: English
                 Agenda Item 5b)

Statement by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP)

Submitted by
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme


UNEP


The XXIIIrd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Lima, 24 May - 4 June 1999

STATEMENT BY THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME (UNEP)

UNEP thanks the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for their invitation to attend the XXIII ATCM,
and would like to express his gratitude to the Government of Peru for the excellent organisation of the
eeting and the warm welcome and hospitality extended to its delegation.

UNEP was established in 1972 to serve as a focal point for environmental action and co-ordination
within the United Nations system. Through its various programmes, UNEP addresses assessment,
management and policy aspects of global and regional environmental issues, to many of which
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are of relevance.

UNEP has closed-linked global programmes on the conservation, management and monitoring of the
marine environment and its living resources. They include the Global Plan of Action for the
Conservation, Management and Utilisation of Marine Mammals, the Global Programme of Action for
the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, and the Regional Seas
Programme. UNEP also supports the work of the Joint Group of Expert on the Scientific Aspects of
Marine Environmental Protection (GESAMP).

The Assessment Programme of UNEP has particular responsibility for carrying out UNEP's state of
the environment functions. UNEP has produced a number of global state of the environment reports
d assisted with a number of regional and national reports. UNEP is currently finalising the second
volume (GEO-2000) of the Global Environment Outlook series, which will be released in September
of this year.

UNEP also administers the secretariats of various global conventions that deal with subjects relevant
to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. They include the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer and its Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, the Convention
on Biological Diversity, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora, and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.

UNEP would like to commend the Committee for Environmental Protection for the work it carried out
during its second meeting, which reflects the commitment of its members to the protection of the
Antarctic environment. UNEP is pleased to be able to attend this meeting to offer its co-operation,
experience and assistance to the parties of the various agreements pertaining to Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean, as well as to the observer organisations in any manner that those parties and
organisations deem appropriate.

-----
