Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

XXIII ATCM/IP18
April 1999
English
Original: Spanish

Agenda Item 7a

Measures Adopted in Compliance with
the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty

Submitted by
Uruguay
MEASURES ADOPTED IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

As regards Article 13, Compliance with this Protocol, Uruguay has taken, for the period
1998/1999, appropriate administrative measures within its competence to ensure compliance with
this instrument.

These administrative measures concern the following:

- Issuance of instructions contributing to the efforts to avoid any activities contrary to
the provisions of Annex III, Article 3 (2), Waste Disposal by Incineration.

- Drafting of an Initial Environmental Evaluation Form to be attached to the National
Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment on the Antarctic Environment.

Issuance of instructions contributing to the efforts to avoid any activities contrary to the
provisions of Annex III, Article 3 (2), Waste Disposal by Incineration

These instructions, which are directed to Uruguayan personnel in the Antarctic and are
meant to contribute to the Parties' efforts to steer clear of any activities contrary to the Protocol,
call attention to the provisions of Article 3 (2) mandating that any open burning of wastes shall
under no circumstances extend beyond the end of the 1998/1999 season.

Although the open burning of waste is not practiced at Uruguayan facilities, which
implement the provisions of Article 3 (1), the above-mentioned instructions were issued as a
reminder of the entry into force of the burning ban, and also to bring it to the attention of non-
governmental entities which, because they that may be unaware of the requirements, might
continue to use this method of waste disposal.

Should any activity employing the method banned by the Protocol be observed, efforts will
be made to contact the individual(s) in charge of the site to alert them to the relevant provisions;
in every instance, the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute will be apprised of the situation so that it can
take action in accordance with the regulations governing Compliance with this Protocol, thus
contributing to their implementation.

Drafting of an Initial Environmental Evaluation form to be attached to the National
Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment of the Antarctic Environment

In the light of the experience of the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute, which drafted a
National Procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment of the Antarctic Environment by
drawing on valuable information from the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research as well as
on important information disseminated by other Consultative Parties, it was deemed useful to
have a form attached to said National Procedure, at least for the Initial Environmental Evaluation,
2

not only in order to explain the process but also to take less experienced planners step-by-step through the EIA process, covering each of the elements to be considered and pointing-out which ones have to be developed further, so as to provide them with a tool that systematically reflects this logical procedure.

The Bologna practical guides were used as the basis for preparing an annotated form that assembles the vast body of knowledge available on matters of environmental impact assessment; this form was further enriched by the experience we ourselves gained and particularly by the very valuable contributions supplied by all the members of the Antarctic System through exchanges of information. In this context, it should be noted that the experience gained through these exchanges, which enabled Uruguay to participate in the Intersessional Group coordinated by Argentina on the preparation of Guides for the Implementation of the Environmental Evaluation Procedure, was enhanced by the multiplier effect of the contributions of the twelve-country group, enabling Uruguay to take advantage of the new contributions included in Draft 2, by improving the form through the inclusion of additional and supplementary information - included in this document as ANNEX "ALFA". Furthermore, given how useful the form has been to the Institute to date in preparing Initial Environmental Evaluations, it is scheduled to be updated into its final form upon approval of the guides.

On the other hand, the methods used for environmental impact evaluations are similar, regardless of whether it is a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation or not, inasmuch as the initial environmental reference state must be taken into account in both evaluations so that the predicted changes due to the proposed activity can be studied and their impacts analyzed appropriately. This is one more reason for attaching an annotated form to the national procedure, for even though the Protocol specifies a shorter document for an Initial Environmental Evaluation than for a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation, logically many of the points in the latter are implicit in the evaluation procedure; therefore, the form makes it easier for planners to prepare the environmental impact evaluation. This is particularly true for the more frequently prepared Initial Environmental Evaluation and in some instances will serve as the basis for a subsequent Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. Thus the use of an annotated form to prepare and submit evaluations makes it possible to consider the various elements listed in the process of environmental impact evaluation; these elements will be developed by planners in their Initial Environmental Evaluation to the extent they are applicable to the activity at hand.

The Protocol requires that an Initial Environmental Evaluation include a description of the activity as well as the consideration of alternatives to the activity and their impacts, but it does not preclude the inclusion of additional information, which in this case is part of the logical process that makes it possible to compile the data specifically required and which could be included in the document at the discretion of Antarctic planners. By being more specific, it would be possible to meet the provisions of Annex I, Article 2, regarding the inclusion of sufficient data in the Initial Environmental Evaluation to assess whether a proposed activity is likely to have no more than a minor or transitory impact, while simultaneously facilitating the development of the environmental impact evaluation procedure from a technical point of view.

To the extent that a greater number of relevant components are considered, the analysis and development of these components make it possible to arrive at correct, scientifically rigorous
results that will support appropriate value judgements on the basis of the experience gained, 
through a better understanding of how and when to undertake an environmental evaluation 
procedure.

ANNEX "ALFA" - INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION (IEE)
ANNEX "ALFA"

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
(IEE)

Name of the Project or Activity:

Name, Address and Organization of the Author of the IEE:

1.    Description of the activity

a.    (1)    Objectives or aims:

      (2)    Design characteristics. (General design and technical details. Construction 
requirements, equipment to be used, including types of materials, 
technologies, and sources of energy. Will dangerous chemicals be involved 
or not? Need for building permanent facilities, size of any facility, 
including area, weight, volume, and other appropriate measurements. 
Personnel involved.)

      (3)    Need for the activity. (Why the activity is needed and its relation to 
previous or current relevant activities.)

b.    Location of the activity using maps and charts. (Describe the location, 
specifying its coordinates in latitude and longitude. Attach maps and charts to the 
IEE as a reference.)

c.    Duration and date of the period during which the activity will take place. (If 
relevant, indicate the various phases of installation, operation and 
decommissioning.)

d.    Scope of the activity. (i.e., area of influence affected by the activity proper.)

e.    Intensity of the activity. (In terms of time and space.)

f.    Proposed accesses and transportation facilities. (i.e., type and number of 
airplanes, ships or vehicles involved, loading and unloading points, routes, hiking 
expeditions.)

g.    Assessment of the type and quantity of products. (i.e., discharge of water, air 
and soil pollutants, as well as noise, light, and heat pollution.) (Use the applicable 
topics of Table 7.1 of the Environmental Impact Evaluation Procedure.) (In 
assessing the geographic dispersal of a product to determine the extent of
exposure, conside[?] space as a criterion; in determining whether several activities 
are occurring simultaneously, consider time as a criterion.)

h.    Assessment of the type and amount of waste likely to be produced. 
      (Dangerous and non-dangerous, classified by groups as per Waste Disposal and 
      Waste Management, Annex III, Article 8.

2.    Description of the initial and future environment

      a.    Initial environment

            Describe the initial environmental reference state likely to be affected by the 
            activity, with which predicted changes are to be compared. It is important to 
            ensure that the description reflect the extent of the activity being considered (e.g., 
            for an island, ice-free area or a lake, provide both a general description and a more 
            detailed description of the specific site.) Mention should be made of the data base 
            used as baseline, identifying those parameters for natural recovery that will make it 
            possible to assess the impact. Mention should also be made of whether the data 
            base needs to be compiled from earlier observations or from field research surveys 
            carried-out specifically for the purpose of understanding the state of the 
            environment in the area on which information is unavailable. The description 
            should be supported by maps, photographs, charts or other visual aids and should 
            include:

            (1)   Physical characteristics. Describe the following items bearing in mind 
                  existing environmental processes (e.g., sea-ice cycles) and their 
                  characteristics as regards space and time.

                  (a)   Meteorology and climate
                  (b)   Hydrography (including the quantity and quality of the waters)
                  (c)   Tides
                  (d)   Currents
                  (e)   Topography
                  (f)   Geology
                  (g)   Geomorphology
                  (h)   Glaciology
                  (i)   Ice conditions (identify areas of permanent and semi-permanent ice 
                        and thawing areas)
                  (j)   Soil
                  (k)   Landscape (specify visual basins)

            (2)   Flora and fauna. Describe the biota list, including plant and animal 
                  species, populations and communities and other important traits such as the 
                  presence of breeding areas and when appropriate, information on surface 
                  cover, position on the terrain, etc., for both flora and fauna, particularly as 
                  pertains to terrestrial components. In addition, describe any dependent and
3

associated populations (e.g., nesting areas for birds, associated feeding 
areas.)

When applicable, explain existing ecological processes (e.g., ecosystem 
dynamics, production and decay of phytoplankton), describing the 
important characteristics in terms of time and space.

(3) Protected areas within close proximity. Include the Antarctic Specially 
Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas, and Historical Sites 
and Monuments, as well as any cultural values as yet unclassified under the 
categories of Annex V, Area Protection and Management.

(4) Human activity. Describe the activities, whether logistical, scientific or 
other, that are likely to affect the environment where the proposed 
activities will take place.

b. Future environment

Predict the future environmental reference state in the event that the proposed 
activity should not take place.

3. Description of the methods and data used to predict the impacts of the 
proposed activity

The identification of impacts requires a systematic, step-by-step, logical approach. 
Different methods of evaluation are available depending on the methodology of the activity's 
nature, on the environment likely to be affected, and on available information. Among the 
methods that can help to identify impacts are:  the matrix method - based on the impact 
classification tables indicated in this procedure; checklists; overlay maps; scaling and measurement 
techniques.

4. Identification and prediction of impacts

This consists of estimating the nature, extent, duration, and intensity of the likely direct 
impacts, the possible indirect or second order impacts, and the consideration of the cumulative 
impacts of the proposed activity in the light of existing activities and other known planned 
activities.

In identifying impacts, a first step would be the an analysis of the effects that similar 
activities have had on similar Antarctic environments, bearing in mind their individual 
distinguishing features. To this effect, previous environmental evaluations are a valuable source of 
information; ideally, they would be based on observation procedures that allow verification of the 
predicted impacts and would only be taken into account to the extent that they comply with the 
regime set out in the Protocol.
4

Some impacts, for instance on historic or aesthetic values, are difficult to quantify or even to predict, in which case value judgements provided by qualified personnel based on their experience should be substituted to the quantitative approach.

Many activities can cause minimal impact at some sites and major impacts at others, or the intensity of the impact can vary depending on the time of year when the activity takes place, particularly in view of the seasonal characteristics of many of the Antarctic biota's components.

In keeping with the definitions agreed at the Oslo and Texas Workshops, note should be taken of the hypothetical example of Table 2 of the Antarctic Environmental Impact Evaluation Procedure.

In other words, similar activities can produce different impacts depending on the outcome of the interaction of their products and the environment's exposure to them.

5. Alternative activities

The possible alternatives to the proposed activity shall be analyzed to enable a comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of different options. The alternatives will include:

    a. Continued use of the current facilities
    b. Use of other locations
    c. Joint operation of other programmes
    d. Use of different technologies or equipment

One possible alternative is to not undertake the proposed activity; the rationale for choosing a given alternative shall be provided in every instance.

6. Measures to minimize or mitigate impacts

This consists in identifying measures that should be included to minimize or mitigate the identified impacts of the proposed activity. These measures can vary depending on the nature of the activity and the environment, but as a rule they are geared to on-site control procedures for the activity through appropriate and qualified monitoring, intended to ensure that established procedures are followed (i.e., waste treatment); or they can consist in carrying-out the activity at a more appropriate time of the year (i.e., avoiding the breeding season of nearby fauna.)

7. Environmental observation programme

The establishment of an Observation Programme makes it possible to evaluate and ascertain the predicted impact of the proposed activity while enabling the detection of unforeseen impacts, avoiding adverse effects, and allowing accidents to be dealt with promptly and effectively. This issue of environmental observation will be dealt with in further detail given its importance in monitoring how proposed activities are developed.
8.      Conclusion

If at the conclusion of the procedure described above, an Initial Environmental Evaluation were to indicate that a proposed activity is predicted to have only a minor or transitory impact, the activity could be initiated once the Institute's Council had been informed; the evaluation should note in its conclusions the anticipated intensity of impact and, if need be, proceed to a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. An example of an activity likely to have a minor or transitory impact is the construction of new facilities to expand or replace existing ones.

According to this evaluation, the proponent considers that the activity can be undertaken without further evaluation (YES/NO). If no, indicate whether a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation is required.

9.      Environmental Officer's report

a.      Date:

b.      Remarks:

10.   Approval

Date                                                  Signature and Title
