XXIII ATCM/ IP41 
May, 1999 
Original: English, French, 
              Spanish 
 
Agenda Item 5b), 11 and 16 
 
 
 
Report from the International 
Hydrographic Organisation 
Submitted by 
IHO 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Report from the International Hydrographic Organisation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
At the ATCM in Seoul in 1995, the Treaty nations passed a resolution [1/1995] 
concerning the importance of improving the charting of Antarctic waters, in the interests 
of the safety of navigation, and to prevent the environmental pollution which might result 
from a shipwreck. 
 
The International Hydrographic Organisation presents a short report on the progress of 
these endeavours since ATCM XXII in Tromso in 1998. 
 
 
Progress of surveying and charting 
 
The national hydrographic offices of IHO Member States have continued to progress the 
work of conducting surveys and improving charts in the Antarctic area.   This work was 
described in greater detail in the IHO report to ACTM XXII. 
 
The nations which carry out regular surveying and charting activities in Antarctica are 
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, 
New Zealand, Norway, Peru,  Republic of Korea, Republic of South Africa, Russian 
Federation, Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay.    
 
Links with other Organisations. 
 
COMNAP.     The IHO was represented at the 1998 COMNAP conference in 
Concepcion, Chile, and provided delegates with a briefing in the IHO work in Antarctica.   
COMNAP members remain supportive of the Antarctic survey programmes of the IHO, 
recognising that they are a vital component of the Antarctic navigation infrastructure. 
 
IAATO.     An IHO representative attended the 1998 IAATO meeting in Washington 
DC, and provided a briefing to IAATO members concerning the IHO activities.   It is felt 
that IAATO members can make a significant contribution to the improvement of the 
charts in the Antarctic area, since their ships frequently visit poorly charted areas and are 
able to report uncharted dangers and recommended routes.   By contrast, the survey 
activities of IHO members are focussed on the areas frequented by government vessels.   
However this focus is being modified as resource allocations permit, recognising the 
regular traffic patterns of IAATO members, as indicated in the IAATO traffic statistics. 
 
SCAR.     An IHO representative attended the 1998 meeting of the SCAR Working 
Group on Geodesy and Geographic Information [SCAR WGGI], held in Conception, 
 
1
 
2
Chile.    Bathymetry is one of four fundamental data sets for the Antarctic Spatial Data 
Infrastructure [ASDI].   A significant amount of the detailed bathymetric data for 
Antarctica is in the custodianship of IHO members.    The IHO is working with the 
International Standards Organisation to provide standards for the compilation and 
transfer of bathymetric data, which will be of great benefit in constructing the ASDI. 
 
 
IMO.     The IHO has made a submission to IMO concerning the development of the 
Polar Navigation Code.     It should be noted, however, that the Polar Navigation Code is 
mainly concerned with the technical features of vessels and the training of personnel.   
Although the Code refers in its Preamble to the ‘relative lack of good charts’, it is not 
strictly concerned with the polar or the Antarctic navigation infrastructure, of which 
navigation charts are one of the most significant elements.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Continued Support for National Hydrographic Programmes in Antarctica 
 
The IHO requests ATCM members to continue to express their support for the Antarctic 
programmes of  the national hydrographic offices of the IHO Member States.  
 
The Managers of  National Antarctic Programmes should be invited to continue their 
support for this important work. 
