Antarctic Treaty               XXIII ATCM/ IP94
XXIII Consultative Meeting     May, 1999
Traité sur l'Antarctique       Original: English
XXIII Réunion consultative     
Tratado Antártico              Agenda Item 5a)
XXIII Reunión Consultiva       
Договор об Антарктике          
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling 
East of Cape Roberts in Southwest 
Ross Sea - A review of the Project 
against its CEF

Submitted by
New Zealand
Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts
in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica

A review of the project against its CEE
2-5 November 1998
This report is submitted in accordance with a request by Antarctica New Zealand for 
an independent review of the activities of the Cape Roberts Project in the 1998/99 
season against the project's CEE. It was prepared by the Environmental Manager of 
the Australian Antarctic Division following a site visit hosted by New Zealand 2-5 
November 1998.

January 1999
Cape Roberts CEE Review

1. Executive Summary

The Cape Roberts stratigraphic drilling project has several aims:
· to determine the timing of onset of Antarctic glaciation and subsequent 
fluctuations causing sea-level change;
· to examine the palaeoclimatic record; and
· to further constrain the tectonic history of the West Antarctic rift and 
Transantarctic Mountains.

These aims will be achieved by drilling sedimentary strata deposited 100-30 
million years ago.

The project's prime operating window of September to December is determined 
by the maximum development and stability of sea-ice, which provides a platform 
for the drill rig.

To reduce the project's environmental impacts on Cape Roberts itself, a modular 
base camp which supports the drilling project is established on the sea-ice close to 
the Cape, which is 140km north of Scott Base, Ross Island. The camp houses 10 
dedicated support staff, eleven drillers, and up to 18 scientists. Up to 30 more 
scientists working on the project are accommodated at Scott Base and McMurdo 
Station, and work principally at the Crary Laboratory at McMurdo.

The drill rig is set up each drilling season at a location determined by the exposure 
of sedimentary strata on the sea bed, up to 20 kilometres offshore. Drilling 
system safety and environmental procedures have been developed from those 
used in the CIROS project. Holes are drilled through about 2 metres of fast-ice 
over depths of up to 400 metres of water, and into the sea-floor to depths of up to 
700 metres. Base camp and drill site infrastructure is dismantled and stored on 
Cape Roberts at the end of each drilling season.

The project is run by a consortium comprising Australia, Germany, Italy, New 
Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States, with New Zealand 
coordinating the environmental management and logistics, principally through 
Scott Base.

This report details the finding of a review which was conducted during a site visit 
in November 1998, in accordance with an undertaking by New Zealand in ATCM 
XXII Inf 23. The report concludes that the activity as assessed during the review 
was conducted in accordance with the CEE (as amended), and has resulted in 
negligible environmental impact.

January 1999                                          1
Table of Contents

1.    Executive Summary .......................................................1
2.    Project summary.......................................................3
3.    Methodology.......................................................4
4.    Impacts predicted in the CEE .......................................................4
5.    Changes to the CEE.......................................................5
6.    Environmental Review.......................................................7
    6.1    Cape Roberts storage site. .......................................................7
    6.1.1    Cape Roberts storage site monitoring program.......................................................8
    6.2    Cape Roberts base camp.......................................................10
    6.2.1    Base camp monitoring.......................................................14
    6.3    Drill site.......................................................14
    6.3.1    Drill site and operational monitoring. .......................................................18
    6.4    Other related issues .......................................................18
    6.4.1    Cape Roberts site remediation and cleanup.......................................................18
    6.4.2    Further drilling seasons.......................................................19
    6.4.3    Monitoring program.......................................................19
    6.4.4    EIA process and CEE review .......................................................20
7.    Conclusion .......................................................21
8.    Recommendations.......................................................22

Appendix A: Cape Roberts Master Checklist
Appendix B: Cape Roberts field camp and storage site checklist
Appendix C: Cape Roberts Drillsite checklist
Appendix D: Cape Roberts Project Operations Plan Monitoring Requirements

January 1999
Cape Roberts CEE Review


ROSS
SEA


ROSS SEA


Figure 1: Cape Roberts in relation to the Ross Sea. (source: CEE)

January 1999                                                          2
Cape Roberts CEE Review

2. Project summary.

The Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Cape Roberts project stated that:

"It is proposed to investigate Antarctic glacial and tectonic history for the period from 36 to more than 100 million years ago, by coring continuously a 1500+m sequence of the most accessible strata exposed in special circumstances off Cape Roberts in the southwest corner of the Ross Sea. The cores and related seismic data would permit the investigation of a range of problems in late Cretaceous-early Cenozoic history." (CEE,3.1)

New Zealand has coordinated the environmental impact assessment process including the preparation of the CEE. Antarctica New Zealand undertook to manage the logistic and support requirements including environmental management and monitoring.

The project's physical presence comprises three principal field sites:
    a storage site on the Cape Roberts peninsula;
    a temporary base camp on fast-ice close to the Cape;
    a drill-site camp.

The operation begins in August, with the unpacking of the storage site and establishment of the base camp adjacent to Cape Roberts. The components of the drill site are then deployed to a pre-determined position on the fast-ice according to the sampling needs of the project, with the aim of drilling holes at one to two sites per season.

All personnel are accommodated at the base camp, with two drill-site teams deployed on 12-hour shifts to the drill rig by helicopter or all-terrain-vehicle. The drill rig and supporting infrastructure are dismantled and moved to safety in the event that the sea-ice becomes unsafe. This design was proven effective when a storm threatened the sea-ice in the 1997/98 season, and the entire site was returned to Cape Roberts in less than 24 hours.

Drilling is expected to be completed by the end of November, when the sea-ice begins to deteriorate. The drill site and base camp will then be dismantled and moved to the storage site on Cape Roberts.

Following acceptance of the final CEE, its environmental requirements were written into the Cape Roberts Operations Manual, which is administered on site by the Project Manager.

January 1999                                                                                 3
Cape Roberts CEE Review

3. Methodology

The review was conducted principally during a site visit 2-5 November 1998 against checklists (Appendix A) derived from the text of the CEE and its subsequent modifying IEEs. A master checklist was drawn from the text of the CEE and site-specific checklists were drawn from it. The checklists set out predicted environmental impacts and proposed mitigation measures, and provided a clear framework of review criteria for each of the project's principal sites. The checklists were themselves reviewed before, during, and after the site visit to ensure that they covered all potential and actual aspects of the project.

Briefing on-site was provided mainly by the Antarctica New Zealand Environmental Manager, Ms Emma Waterhouse, the Cape Roberts Project Manager, Mr Jim Cowie, Science Support Manager Mr Alex Pyne, and Drilling Manager Mr Pat Cooper.  The cooperation and hospitality of all Cape Roberts and Scott Base personnel was freely given, as well as the necessary transport and other necessities for a thorough review.

The principal limitation of the review is that it was of necessity conducted during only one of the three phases of the operation - the drilling phase - and therefore cannot make absolute observations of the project's effects during the commissioning and decommissioning phases. However the site visit allowed adequate time at the Cape Roberts storage site which, even though it was partly snow covered at the time of the visit, showed no significant impacts resulting from the project in any of its previous phases.

4. Impacts predicted in the CEE

The most significant unavoidable impacts of the project were summarised by the CEE (Section 13) to be:

-   local damage to benthic communities at the drill sites due to return of drill cuttings and biodegradable mud to the seafloor and to the drillhole itself;
-   cemented steel casings left in place in the seafloor sediment;
-   all activities on the fast ice would cause minor short-term physical disturbance of the ice surface and exhaust emissions into the air above it;
-   camp sites and drill sites would have minor local and transient impacts on some trophic levels of the marine ecosystem;
-   cumulative damage at Cape Roberts in an area already disturbed by human activities, principally due to terrain disturbance or compaction, and fuel spills;

January 1999                                                                                                   4
Cape Roberts CEE Review

-   some disturbance to skua territories due to vehicle, helicopter and other human activities in and around the storage area.

In the case of the last four of these impacts, the CEE identifies fuel spills as the most significant impact, and sets out mitigation measures accordingly.

The CEE identifies the most significant potential impact of the project as resulting from "the [very unlikely] escape of hydrocarbons or other sedimentary fluids".

5.  Changes to the CEE

New Zealand submitted Information Paper 23 to ATCM XXII reviewing activities completed during 1997/98 and recording changes to the activities described in the final CEE (Jan 1994).

Changes made to the CEE until 1998 were:
-   disposal of non macerated sewage into holes drilled in the sea ice;
-   the use of explosives for down-hole logging and for cutting the outer drill casing at the completion of each of the drill holes; and
-   no containment provided for drummed fuel.

Two further change were foreshadowed in ATCM XXII/Inf 23, and approved in August 1998:
-   a new rigid flotation material for the sea riser component of the drilling system; and
-   a new drilling mud.

These changes were approved through the New Zealand IEE process, and are reflected in the checklists and review report.

All mitigation measures identified in the CEE and amending documents were adopted as standard operating procedure for each of the three sites through the Cape Roberts Operations Plan, and their implementation was overseen by the Project Manager.

The CEE and amending documents anticipated all of the impacts that were observed during the site visit.

January 1999                                                                                    5
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Figure 2: Approaching Cape Roberts and the Base Camp from the South. Note vehicle track from storage area at left.  (Photo: T Maggs)

January 1999                                              6
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6. Environmental Review

6.1 Cape Roberts storage site.

Cape Roberts was identified as the closest suitable staging site for the fast-ice component of the project. The most significant impact predicted for the Cape Roberts site was "cumulative damage in... an area already disturbed by human activities", resulting from terrain disturbance and compaction and possibly from fuel spills. Indirect impacts were predicted to arise from "casual human visitation outside the CS1 area", specifically through disturbance to vegetated areas and nesting skuas.

Conversationally and in answer to specific questions, Cape Roberts personnel showed a clear awareness of the environmental mitigation measures and the reasons for them.

The storage site is clearly delineated by the disposition of the equipment stored there, as determined on three sides by the suitability of the terrain. "No-go" areas have been declared outside the storage site to protect skuas and vegetation, access routes for vehicle and pedestrian traffic are marked by flagged canes, and compliance by Cape Roberts personnel is effectively managed.

Project staff attempt to minimise terrain disturbance at the storage site by limiting heavy vehicle traffic, ensuring that tracked areas are kept snow-covered, and by avoiding disturbance to the small central pond, which, when thawed, is used by skuas.

Fuel is stored on platforms or on sleds at the lower end of the storage site, to minimise terrain damage in the event of a spill. Storage is in 205 litre drums, separated according to fuel type, and bunded by heavy duty tarpaulins. There was no evidence on the snow or on ice-free areas of spilt fuel. The most significant impact associated with fuel storage was dispersed paint flakes which had peeled from the drums (this is so for all fuel storage sites inspected). In most cases the flakes were contained within the tarpaulin bunding, but there were several square metres downwind of each storage platform or sledge over which they were spread. The flakes varied in size below roughly 5 square cm.

Fuel drums are inspected at Cape Roberts and at Marble Point (where they are refilled), and any unsound drums are destroyed, but this does not include the condition of the painted surface, which deteriorates rapidly in Antarctic conditions. Rust, flaking paint, and peeling labels are common by-products of drummed fuel, and the ubiquity of painted mild steel drums in Antarctic operations indicates that those aspects do not generally cause unacceptable impacts. The effects of paint on the recovery of the storage site after the removal of the Cape Roberts infrastructure have not been determined.

January 1999                                      7
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6.1.1 Cape Roberts storage site monitoring program

Monitoring programs (described in the Operations Plan) are established at Cape Roberts for vegetation and terrain disturbance, soil contamination, and skua breeding. Monitoring for the 1998/99 season of vegetation and terrain disturbance and for soil contamination was inconclusive at the time of the site visit due to the extent of snow cover, however the results of monitoring from previous seasons indicate that disturbance is within the environmental limits set by the monitoring program. At the time of the site visit, indications were that skua numbers had increased over the project's three seasons, and the variability of breeding success, particularly the poor 1997/98 season, was not attributable to the activities of the project.

The skua monitoring program, which has been conducted for 3 seasons, indicates a slight increase in the Cape Roberts skua population:

|          | 1 Dec 1992 | 30 Nov 1996 | 1 Dec 1997 | 1 Dec 1998 |
|----------|------------|-------------|------------|------------|
| Pairs counted | 40         | 42          | 52         | 59         |

|          | Mid Jan 1996 | Mid Jan 1997 | Mid Jan 1998 | 27 Jan 99 |
|----------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-----------|
| Chicks counted | 13<sup>1</sup>       | 28<sup>2</sup>       | 2<sup>3</sup>        | 18<sup>4</sup>    |

<sup>1</sup> count conducted over the area of the Cape to the west of the storage area
<sup>2</sup> count conducted over storage area, eastern area of the Cape, and around to the west for approximately 300m.
<sup>3</sup> uniform breeding failure across entire Cape Roberts colony, including areas most remote from storage area activitites - see ATCM XXII Inf23 (NZ).
<sup>4</sup>count conducted over the whole of Cape Roberts.

Significantly most of the activities at the storage site associated with the annual commissioning of the activity occur before the skua breeding period., while decommissioning occurs from early to mid-December, when the skua territories have largely been established and many birds are on eggs..

January 1999                                                                                                                                   8
Cape Roberts CEE Review

January 1999                                           9

Figure 3: Cape Roberts storage site, looking Southeast.
(Photo: T. Maggs, composition: G Jacobson)
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6.2     Cape Roberts base camp

The base camp was established approximately 800 metres to the north of Cape Roberts, covering an area of about 200 x 80 metres (16000 sq m). A flagged route connected the camp via the east of Cape Roberts to the storage site (CEE Route T2) (See Map 1).

The main direct impacts identified by the CEE and amending IEEs for the base camp were:
        -     sewage;
        -     fuel spillage;
        -     generator, vehicle, and helicopter noise.

The CEE predicted the indirect impacts of increased visitation to nearby sensitive sites.

Sewage handling as described in the CEE was amended in 1996. Holes of approximately 600mm diameter were augered to around 1.5 metres depth in the ~2m sea ice. Two latrines were maintained, with each being moved to a new hole every week or so. Used holes were backfilled with snow and marked with a flagged cane. It is expected that the sewage bolus will gradually thaw as the sea-ice rots and breaks up, so that the sewage will be widely dispersed. The population of the 3 month base camp, averaged over a 6-month summer is less than 20, and well below the suggested requirements of Annex III of the Madrid Protocol, with regards to sewage treatment.

Other wastes are segregated, bagged, and returned to Scott Base for incorporation in the base’s normal waste stream. The base camp was orderly, and there was no litter or unsecured waste.

Fuel management procedures were found to be sound. All fuel tanks included a drip tray with fuel absorbent mat. Absorbent mats were also carried and used on all fuel sledges. Sight-glasses on tanks were fitted with valves, which were turned off after filling to minimise spillage if the sight-glass were damaged.

Fuel was stored in 205 litre drums on sleds bunded with heavy tarpaulins as secondary containment (as at the storage site) even though a change had been approved to the original CEE allowing unbunded storage. The sleds were parked approximately 30 metres from the base camp buildings.

Base camp staff were thorough in the refueling procedure, and there was no evidence of significant fuel spills (say over 5 litres), or of spills which had not been cleaned up. When fuel spills do occur, the fuel-contaminated snow is collected and deposited in a melter, from which the water component is drained. The remaining fuel is decanted into a drum and returned to Scott Base. At the date of the inspection, less than 20 litres of spilt fuel had been recovered in the melter mainly from drip trays under fuel tanks.

January 1999                                                     10
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Figure 4: Cape Roberts Base Camp looking West. (Photo: T Maggs)

Figure 5: Base Camp: Kasborer tracked vehicle auguring toilet pit in sea-ice.
(Photo: T Maggs)

January 1999                                      11
Cape Roberts CEE Review





Figure 6: Base Camp: Fuel tank for power generator. Note Kamlok fittings,
sight gauge, drip tray. (Photo: T Maggs)

The base camp generator is effectively muffled, and both generator and vehicle
noise was practically inaudible to the reviewer at Cape Roberts, some 800 metres
distant. Helicopter noise is audible many kilometres distant, but is sporadic, and
unobtrusive beyond a kilometre in calm conditions. Helicopters approach the
base camp via the east of Cape Roberts to avoid overflight of skua nesting areas.

January 1999                                      12
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Visits to nearby sensitive sites are controlled and monitored by the Project Manager, in accordance with a permit in the case of Protected Areas. As reported in section 5.1, above, areas of Cape Roberts outside the storage site have been declared a "no-go" zone to protect vegetation and skua nesting sites. The project has clearly increased incidental visitation to areas that would otherwise have been inaccessible, but field trips away from the base camp are conducted in accordance with the Operations Plan, and observable impacts were negligible.

Inspection by remote-controlled video camera of the reverse osmosis and grey-water discharge pipes below the fast ice at the base camp showed that the small amount of fine particulate matter in the grey water discharge was rapidly and widely dispersed by the ocean current (estimated at about 2 knots.


Figure 7: Video monitoring of the reverse-osmosis intake and grey-water discharge. (Photo: E Waterhouse)

January 1999                                                      13
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6.2.1 Base camp monitoring

Fuel spillage and waste handling and disposal are monitored at the base camp.
The monitoring program environmental limits, set out in the Operations Plan, are
a total allowable volume of 200 litres per one spill, and a total for any one drill
season of 300 litres. Fuel spill practices are described above. At the time of the
inspection fuel spills were significantly below the levels prescribed in the
environmental limits of the monitoring program.

6.3    Drill site

The drill site was established some 15km to the east of the base camp, and linked
to it by a flagged vehicle route over the fast ice. The route avoids a significant
tide-crack approximately one kilometre to the east of the base camp, and is
inspected several times a week. The principle method of transport between the
base camp and drill site is helicopter, with three or four flights operating morning
and evening for shift changes. In inclement weather shift changes are by
oversnow vehicle.

Figure 8: Drill site. (Photo: J McDonald)

January 1999                                                             14
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Figure 9: Drill site: Drill rig "Emily". Grey discolouration 
on seaice is drillers mud. (Photo: E Waterhouse)

January 1999                     .15
Cape Roberts CEE Review

The area cleared of snow at the drillsite is occupied by the drill rig/mudroom complex, a store/mess/office complex, a laboratory and a number of small storage areas for mud, pipe, fuel, and other supplies. Two pyramid tents have been established some 200 metres towards the coast as emergency shelter.

The area cleared of snow at the drillsite is occupied by the drill rig/mudroom complex, a store/mess/office complex, a laboratory and a number of small storage areas for mud, pipe, fuel, and other supplies. Two pyramid tents have been established some 200 metres towards the coast as emergency shelter.

The CEE (as amended) identified as the major impacts of the drill site:
-   local damage to benthic communities due to return of drill cuttings and biodegradable mud to the seafloor and to the drillhole itself;
-   cemented steel casings left in place in the seafloor sediment;
-   short-term physical disturbance of the ice surface and exhaust emissions into the air above it;
-   minor local and transient impacts on some trophic levels of the marine ecosystem;
-   fuel spills;
-   sewage disposal.

The sea floor around the drill hole was monitored by a permanently installed video camera to check for disturbance, in accordance with the CEE (9.3.4). The nature of the disturbance is that of a cone of mud, tailings, and cement approximately 5 metres in maximum radius and one metre in height. The Drilling Manager and the Science Support Manager describe the cone as composed of a small inner cone of cement and tailings, and an outer cone of possibly four metres of mud and tailings.

This product of the drilling process is greater than would have been the case with a firm substrate: it is the result of leakages during the initial drilling due to the consistency of the top 5-10 metres of the seafloor. Video monitoring showed that, as predicted, some immobile or slow-moving benthic organisms had been buried in the cone.

The drilling operation uses an organic, biodegradable mud, which it is expected will dissipate in the ocean current over a period of perhaps several weeks, leaving the smaller cone of cement and tailings surrounding the drill-pipe stump. This impact is within the bounds of the CEE prediction for sea-floor disturbance.

The proposal to cut the drill casing with explosives was approved as a change to the CEE in September 1997. It proposed the use of a "colliding detonation drill collar cutter" (CDC) to sever the drill casing approximately two metres below the sea floor. A permit has been issued for the use of the CDC, with specific conditions to protect Weddell seals and other marine mammals. No seals or other marine mammals, nor any penguins, were observed within a kilometre of the drill site during the site visit, which coincided with the peak Weddell seal haul-out and pupping period.

January 1999                                                  16
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Short-term physical disturbance of the ice surface occurred as predicted,
principally due to the clearance of the snow overburden, and as a result of vehicle
traffic. Emissions occurred as predicted, principally from the generator and drill-
rig powerpack.

Minor local and transient impacts on some (unspecified) nutrient levels of the
marine ecosystem must have occurred as a result of the drilling activity, but
evidence was undetectable by observation. There were no gross outputs of the
drilling operation that were not predicted by, and within the limits predicted by,
the CEE.

Fuel was managed at the drill site in the same way as at the base camp and
storage site. Spill mats were supplied and obviously used, but there was no
evidence of significant fuel spillage (say over 5 litres). The same problem was
noted with paint flakes from fuel drums as at the other sites, and similarly the
flakes are generally contained within the tarpaulin bunding. Where paint flakes
have been deposited on the sea-ice, it could be expected that their effect will be
greatly dissipated as the ice decays.

Sewage is managed in a similar way to the base camp site, although there are
generally no more than twelve people at the drill site at any time.


Figure 10: POL storage inside drill site stores shelter. (Photo: T Maggs)

January 1999                                                             17
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6.3.1 Drill site and operational monitoring.

Disturbance to the benthic communities in the immediate vicinity of the drill hole 
is monitored by video. Visible disturbance is contained within the 3 metre radius 
environmental limit established by the monitoring program (see also 5.3 above).

Several physical parameters are monitored regularly to ensure the safety of the 
fast ice based infrastructure, eg ice thickness, cracks and movement, and weather. 
In the 1997/98 season weather and impending fast ice deterioration forced the 
abandonment of drilling. The rig was returned to safety at Cape Roberts within 
22 hours.

6.4     Other related issues

6.4.1 Cape Roberts site remediation and cleanup

Disturbance to the Cape Roberts storage site was observed during the site visit to 
be principally terrain disturbance resulting from vehicle traffic (the site still had 
substantial shallow snow cover). Given the friability of the surface soil and 
gravels, it is likely that an effective cleanup of the site will be achievable. The 
Cape Roberts Operations Plan allows for the removal of contaminated soil as part 
of site remediation.

The CEE expresses the intention to remove all equipment associated with the 
project at its completion, leaving the two pre-existing shelters. A final, post-
project audit should be conducted to assess compliance.

The Operations Plan for the project, Section 12.5 Decommissioning and cleanup 
states:

    General
    All Project materials and equipment from the seaice camp and drill site are 
    to be removed to, and stored at, Cape Roberts at the end of each operating 
    season.

    At the completion of the Cape Roberts Project, all Project materials and 
    equipment are to be removed from all sites, including Cape Roberts.

The Operations Plan requires the survey and documentation of the location of 
storage and infrastructure areas, site remediation, and ongoing monitoring, both 
during and at the completion of the project.

January 1999                                                     18
Cape Roberts CEE Review

6.4.2 Further drilling seasons

A further drilling season for the project was approved in November 1998, and 
there has been considerable interest about using the project infrastructure to 
support similar undertakings, both in the Cape Roberts region and elsewhere in 
Antarctica.

Given that this review indicates that the impacts of the project are, as predicted by 
the CEE, "small or insignificant in relation to its advantages", it would seem to be 
an environmentally sound decision to capitalise on the existence of the project 
infrastructure. The financial and environmental prudence of disassembling and 
disposing of its component parts, while ever there is a demand for similar 
undertakings, would have to be considered.

It is recommended that consideration be given to maximising the potential of 
what has proven to be effective and environmentally sound field infrastructure, 
through extending its use as a research tool in the Cape Roberts project, or in 
other related projects where feasible. Such consideration would need to take 
account of the need for continuing monitoring of the project and its impacts, 
including its cumulative impacts, and the desirability of progress reports to the 
CEP for as long as the monitoring continues. Likewise the environmental liability 
issues of a transfer of ownership or stewardship of the infrastructure require 
careful consideration, and may in part be resolved by a pre-handover 
environmental audit of the project and its impacts.

The skills and experience gained by Antarctica New Zealand in coordinating the 
logistics and environmental management of the project might usefully be made 
available to other Treaty Parties, for example as a COMNAP or CEP paper.

6.4.3 Monitoring program

The CEE requires three main types of monitoring of to occur through the Cape 
Roberts project: environmental; operational; and compliance. A detailed 
monitoring plan is contained in the Cape Roberts Operations Plan (Section 13), 
and New Zealand has established the practice of reporting its monitoring results 
to the CEP. This should continue for the life of the monitoring program.

It may be necessary to establish additional environmental monitoring programs if 
the project is found to have unforeseen impacts. Environmental monitoring 
should continue after the project's completion until it is demonstrated that the 
project's delayed and flow-on effects have ceased or become insignificant for the 
particular indicator.

Operational monitoring will by definition continue until the project is fully 
wound-up, including the removal of infrastructure from Cape Roberts itself.

January 1999                                                    19
Cape Roberts CEE Review

Compliance monitoring should continue on a regular basis, at least once during each drilling season, until the project ceases. It would seem that the most appropriate time for this to occur is at a time when the infrastructure is deployed and fully operational (ie when drilling is underway), as this is when the most significant impacts of the activity are predicted to occur. However it would also be worthwhile to monitor the commissioning and decommissioning phases to determine compliance with the Cape Roberts storage site aspects of the CEE.

Comments specific to the monitoring of activities at each of the sites are included in Sections 5.1.1, 5.2.1, and 5.3.1.

The monitoring requirements of the Cape Roberts Operations Plan are at Appendix D.

6.4.4 EIA process and CEE review

Management of the project includes an effective process for modifying and improving its performance, through the efficient communication of advice between those at Cape Roberts, Scott Base, and Antarctica New Zealand. Such modifications include the changes to the handling of sewage, drill pipe flotation, and explosive cutting of the drill pipe (see Section 4). It is apparent that effective change to the original proposal has been enhanced by the close and on-site involvement of appropriate senior Antarctica New Zealand staff, and through the commitment to best environmental and operational practice evident in all project personnel encountered during the review process (see also Section 6).

Changes to the CEE were reviewed by a panel of assessors, and advised to Treaty Parties through ATCM Information Papers.

January 1999                                                             20
Cape Roberts CEE Review

7.  Conclusion

The activity as conducted in the 1998/99 season is in accordance with the CEE and amending documents. The impacts of the activity are within, and in many cases well within, the environmental limits set by the various monitoring programs. It was apparent from the detailed site inspection that the CEE adequately anticipated the project's major impacts, and proposed appropriate mitigation measures. Essential changes to the project's operating methodology have been accommodated in thorough review documents, and have been reported to Treaty Parties through ATCMs.

Commitment to environmental protection was noted during the site visit to be part of the Cape Roberts organisational culture. It was evident in the state of the storage, base camp and drill sites, and in the degree of familiarity and commitment by staff with the project's objectives and environmental issues.

The involvement of a representative from another Party (in a review such as this) greatly enhances the exchange of information and expertise between Parties, and should be encouraged throughout the Antarctic Treaty System.

 
January 1999                                                             21
Cape Roberts CEE Review

8. Recommendations

1. That the project be reviewed against the CEE at least once during each operating season, and that the results of the review be communicated to the CEP;

2. That Antarctica New Zealand make available to other Treaty Parties a paper (for example through COMNAP or the CEP) detailing the environmental and operational planning of the project and lessons learnt, and that this practice be adopted by Parties for projects of a scale comparable to or larger than that of the Cape Roberts project;

3. That Antarctica New Zealand and other Parties capitalise on the proven operational and environmental effectiveness of the infrastructure developed for the Cape Roberts project, by maximising its continued use in support of projects of proven significance;

4. That Parties consider adopting the proven environmental management techniques of the project, such as:
      - the use of heavy tarpaulins to bund fuel sledges and fuel storage racks;
      - the use of sea-ice pit latrines in areas where seasonal dispersal is assured;
      - the use of low-technology equipment for the recovery of oil spills from contaminated snow;
      - the use of remote video monitoring for otherwise inaccessible locations;
      - the continuing involvement of key personnel throughout all or many of the phases of a multi-phase project.

January 1999                                                      22
