Opening Address by Ambassador  
Heikki Puurunen Head of the Delegation of Finland 
 
Mr.Chairman, 
 
On behalf of the Delegation of Finland I wish to congratulate you on your election to the chairman of this 
XXIII Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty. I am convinced that the meeting will be in able hands 
under your chairmanship. I would also like to express our gratitude to the Government of Peru and to the 
City of Lima for hosting this Meeting, for its excellent preparation as well as for warm and kind 
hospitality which we have already experienced here. 
 
Mr.Chairman 
 
We are celebrating this year the 4Oth anniversary of the signature of the Antarctic Treaty. The 
Government of New Zealand started the commemoration by organizing the historical first Ministerial 
Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Parties in Antarctica from 25 to 28 January 1999. During the visit, which 
was meant to be an unofficial fact-finding mission to raise political awarness of Antarctic issues, there 
was a good opportunity for Ministers to discuss the problems and challenges facing the Antarctic Treaty 
System. 
 
The Treaty has been successful in keeping the continent free from discord and dedicated to peace and 
science. The Parties have also until now staved off the external challenges for the Treaty System. There 
are, however, new challenges which the Antarctic Treaty System is facing. To meet them the Parties have 
to work together with the aim of improving the effectiveness and legitimacy of the System. The 
coordination within the ATS must be enhanced. One important element is the strenghtening of the role of 
the ATCM in the system. 
 
The recently established Committee for Environmental Protection has an important role in the 
implementation of the Environmental Protocol of the Treaty. The Environmental Impact Asessment, 
especially the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations, are demanding tasks which need the valuable 
consideration and advice of the Committee. Other relevant issues to be handled in the Committee are the 
monitoring of the environment and the exchange of information and data. The report on the state of the 
Antarctic environment would serve basic information for the guidance of the environmental protection. It 
is important that the CEP will continue effectively its work within the ATCM. 
 
We have some important policy matters to discuss at our meeting. one of them is the question of liability 
for environmental damage. The draft Annex on Environmental Liability to the Madrid Protocol has been 
discussed several years by  the Legal Experts' Working Group. The legal key issues have been identified 
and presented in the report of the Group to the ATCM last year in Tromso. We have many valuable 
elements for the solution at our disposal. What we need now is the mutually agreed timetable and process 
as well as political will for tackling this issue. 
The establishment of the permanent secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty has been a pending issue at our 
meetings for many years. It is well known that Finland supports the establishment of a small and cost 
effective secretariat. There is an urgent need for a consensus on the location of the secretariat. Hopefully 
this will be reached soon. 
 
Mr.Chairrnan, 
 
Next I would like to report briefly on the Antarctic research activities of Finland during the period of  
1998-99. 
 
Special emphasis has been put on the development of a joint Nordic Environmental Handbook for 
Antarctic operations. This work started in 1997 and will be ready before the end of this year. The 
handbook has been developed jointly by the Nordic Environmental officers Network and will be presented 
at the COMNAP meeting in Goa in September 1999. 
 
Due to lack of financing, scientific field expeditions were not carried out during the summer season 
1998-99. However, the preparations for the largest Finnish expedition ever in 1999-2000 to Dronning 
Maud Land are proceeding according to schedule. Altogether 20 tecnicians and scientists will participate 
in the expedition studying aerosols, paleoclimatology, mesozoic basalts, seasonal snow and ice conditions. 
The studies on the ozone depletion will continue in cooperation with the Argentine Meteorological Centre 
at the Marambio research station. 
 
According to the Nordic agreement on joint transports, Finland has the logistic responsibility for the joint 
Nordic expedition in 1999-2OOO. This time a group of German geologists, a meteorological team from 
the Netherlands and a Russian Antarctic Expedition will be transported at the same time with the Nordic 
expeditions at the Russian r/v Akademik Fedorov. 
 
Mr.Chairman 
 
At the Ministerial meeting in Antarctica there were many excellent presentations, which pointed out the 
importance of scientific research cooperation and sharing of information between the Arctic and the 
Antarctic. We have always been in favour for that development and noted with satisfaction that this issue 
has been quite recently included in the Agenda of the ATCM's. Finland as an Arctic country has 
emphasised the importance of Arctic research in the policy of the European Union concerning its Northern 
Dimension. The Antarctic research would have relevance also in that respect. 
