Latin American Workshop on National Antarctic Data Centres. 
5antiago, Chile. 15-16, April, 1999. Antarctic Institute. 
 
The first Latin American Workshop was organised by the Chilean Antarctic 
Institute on behalf of the SCAR - COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data 
Management. The main objective was to comply with Art. Ill of the Antarctic 
Treaty and Resolution XXII-4, that promote free exchange of scientific information 
between ATCPs. 
 
On this opportunity, the meeting had the participation of the Chair of JCADAM 
Mr. Lee Belbin and delegates from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay. 
Representatives of the National Meteorological organisation and the National 
oceanographic Data Centre also participated. 
 
The specific objectives of the Workshop were: 
1. Identification of essential factors to establish an Antarctic national data centre. 
2. Selection of available software tools for scientific data administration. 
3. Examine models for the administration of scientific data centres within the scientific community. 
4. Identification of main problems and their solutions linked to scientific data administration. 
5. Distribution and diffusion of available resources for the international community of Antarctic Data Managers. 
6. Help the regional data managers to solve their problems to establish and operate data centres. 
7. Describe and explain the protocols and standards established to support data centres administration. 
 
After the work of the delegates, a plenary meeting reached the following 
conclusions: 
1. There is interest to proceed to establish Antarctic data centres in all member countries. 
2. The levels of development of data centres for each participant country is not homogeneous. 
3. Some countries have found difficulties with the technical support from ICAIR for the use of tools and the 
incorporation of data to the system. 
4. There is need of technical support and full time personnel for the generation of metadata and incorporation of the 
AMDs to the international system. 
5. There is need to determine time Schedules for AMDs availability and reception notices. 
6. There is need to review the web available document on guidelines for National Data centres. 
7. It is recommended that each country hold a workshop with the scientific community that generates the scientific 
data. 
8. To organise a second Latin American workshop for year 20O1, to evaluate regional progress 
9. It is recommended that each country designates an official delegate and defines its policy for Data Centres 
administration. 
