GATEWAY ANTARCTICA 
 
The University of Canterbury is currently establishing a special centre with an Antarctic focus: Gateway Antarctica: the 
Centre for Antarctic Studies. 
 
It is intended that Gateway Antarctica will be a networking catalyst within the University of Canterbury focussing 
on: Antarctic and Southern ocean scholarship, learning and research Networking internally, nationally and 
internationally with Antarctic stakeholders Adding value to Antarctic stakeholders 
 
This new entity is under the guidance of a Board, including members from both the University of Canterbury and 
wider Antarctic community. Gateway Antarctica is presently advertising for a Director For further information on 
this position please refer to the ICAIR home page: www.icair.iac.org.nz (currently being revised), or see below. 
Under the umbrella of this centre, the International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) will be 
an important linkage mechanism with the Antarctic community. 
 
ICAIR 
 
Tlle International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) was established in 1992 with the purpose 
of providing a Centre of international leadership in the collection, coordination, utilisation and dissemination of 
predominantly scientific and environmental inforrnation on Antarctica and the Southern ocean. 
 
ICAIR was transferred to Gateway Antarctica on 1 January 1999, from the Royal Society of New Zealand. This 
transfer will enhance the capabilities of ICAIR, by providing an extended skills base of the University staff, and 
thus enhancing ICAIR's ability to fulfil its mission as a key international centre for Antarctic information. 
Gateway Antarctica will provide ICAIR with strong leadership and focus while allowing it to return to its original 
Antarctic focus. 
 
Any questions regarding the current status of ICAIR, or its contract work, can be addressed to the Project Manager: 
 
Dr Jane Shearer (member of NZ delegation at Lima ATCM) Research office University of Canterbury Private Bag 
4~0O Christchurch New Zealand earer((iJreg~.callterb~lr~.ac.nz 
New Zealand 
Director of Gateway Antarctica 
Chair in Antarctic and Southern ocean Studies 
 
The Universily of Canterbury has established "Gateway Antarctica: the Centre for Antarctic Studies" and wishes to 
appoint an exceptional person to the continuing position of Director of the Centre. The appointment will be at the 
Professorial level within the fieJd of Antarctic and Southern ocean Studies. A Chair/Professorship is the most senior 
academic rank in New Zealand. 
 
The University seeks someone who has: An academic record of international standing likely to be within any 
discipline or field related to Polar Studies Demonstrated success in operational and team leadership Excellent 
interpersonal, networking and negotiating skills Experience in international research networks. 
 
The successful candidate will be active in research and will contribute to the teaching programme of the Centre. 
She/he will have the vision, breadth of interest and experience essential for establishing and building the Centre's 
credibility and profile, both within the University, throughout New Zealand, and internationally. 
 
Gateway Antarctica will focus on teaching, scholarship and research in the wide variety of disciplines, topics and 
issues related to Antarctica. The Centre will network nationally and internationally with Antarctic stakeholders and 
will work closely with Antarctica New Zealand, the Crown entity responsible for managing Antarctic-related 
activities. Gateway Antarctica has the responsibility for maintenance of the only United Nations Environmental 
Program site in New Zealand and also has other contract work, particularly in the areas of metadata and GIS. 
 
The University of Canterbury has a long history of involvement in Antarctica; currently over 3O staff are active in 
Antarctic-related research, and courses in Antarctic Studies are offered at undergraduate and graduate level. In 
addition, the University has excellent library holdings related to Antarctic Studies. 
 
The University is situated in Christchurch, the largest city in the South Island of New Zealand with a population of 
over 35O OOO. It has excellent cultural, sporting and social facilities. With a temperate climate, it is ideal for 
outdoor recreation, such as climbing, tramping, mountain biking, skiing, white water'rafting, sailing and surfing. 
Christchurch is near the sea and the Southern Alps, where some of the finest ski-fields are found. The quality of life 
is high and good housing is available at a reasonable cost. 
 
Academic enquiries should be made only to Associate Professor Steve Weaver, Chair of the Board of Gateway 
Antarctica s.weaver~geol.canterburv.ac.llz. 
 
Application enquiries must be made only to the Human Resources Department: 
hr.LlcLld.appts(~l regy.canterburv.LIc.llz. Information about the Centre and the University can be accessed at: 
www.calllerbur~u~c.nz. Applications, quoting Position No. GA53, close on 31 July with the Human Resources 
Registrar, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 48OO, Christchurch, New Zealand. 
 
The University has a policy of equality of opportunity in employment. 
