XXIII ATCM/ IP54 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 1  
 
 
  
 
Opening Statement by the 
Representative of Canada 
Submitted by
Canada 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
Opening Statement by the Representative of Canada 
 
 
Mr. Chairman: 
 
 
On behalf of Canada, I am pleased to congratulate you on your election as chairman of this 
meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.  My county also expresses its gratitude to the 
Government of Peru for its hospitality in hosting this meeting and for the excellent arrangements 
that have been made to facilitate our discussions.  Last year we met north of the Arctic Circle to 
discuss the south polar regions; this year we are continuing these discussions not far from the 
Equator.  Surely, there could be no better demonstration of the fact that Antarctica and the 
international co-operation that ensures its governance is important to the whole world! 
 
 
Canada continues its modest, but we hope, constructive involvement in Antarctic affairs.  
This year is a special year for Canada in Antarctica, for it marks the one-hundredth anniversary of 
the first Canadian to spend a year on the Antarctic continent.  Hugh Blackwall Evans, from the 
province of Saskatchewan in Canada, was zoologist and meteorologist on the Southern Cross 
expedition of 1899-1900, the first party to over-winter on the continent.  It was already Evans' 
second expedition to the Antarctic area, and, not deterred by the over-wintering, in 1900 he led the 
first party to travel on skiis inland from the Bay of Whales, where they reached farther south than 
any human had then attained.  Thus, Canadian scientists have a long and proud tradition in 
Antarctica, and we hope that we can continue to justify that tradition. 
 
 
In 1998 Canada established a formal Canadian Committee for Antarctic Research, 
supported by the Canadian Polar Commission, which has both Antarctic and Arctic responsibilities. 
 The formation of the Committee has enabled us to become full members of the ICSU Scientific 
Committee for Antarctic Research, and to appoint Canadian representatives to most of the SCAR 
Working Groups and to COMNAP. 
 
 
Canada is pleased to note that the agenda for this meeting 
again includes an item on "Relevance of Developments in the Arctic 
and the Antarctic".  We look forward to these discussions and hope 
to participate constructively in them, for an increasing number of 
the issues and topics relevant to Antarctica have bi-polar 
significance, and we feel that Canada's north polar experience and 
its bi-polar scientific community can be helpful. 
 
 
Canada has passed the Chair and the Secretariat of Arctic Council to the United States.  We 
continue to participate actively in the work of the Council, and note that both the principle of 
arriving at major decisions in the polar regions by international consensus, and an increasing 
number of scientific and environmental monitoring activities undertaken through the Council, have 
relevance to Antarctic decision-making and science. 
 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
In the past year, Canadians have taken part in a wide range of Antarctic-related activities.  
In addition to our involvement in many activities coordinated through SCAR, Canadians were 
pleased to be represented at the second "Poles Apart" Conference organized by Chile; at the 
IASC/SCAR Symposium on Global Change in Polar Regions; in southern hemisphere permafrost 
and periglacial programmes of the International Permafrost Association; in polar microbiology, 
polar psychology, in studies of adaptation of polar marine organisms, and in planning research 
programmes in polar regions in connection with the Kyoto agreement on activities related to 
climate change.  Our Minister of Fisheries and Oceans participated in the "Ministerial on Ice" 
events organized by New Zealand:- the first Canadian Cabinet Minister to visit Antarctica. 
 
 
The Canada/Antarctic reciprocal scientist exchange programme, through which scientists 
from non-Canadian Antarctic research institutions interested in research in the Arctic are provided 
with support for field work in Canada in exchange for support to Canadian scientists in Antarctica, 
continues to be successful. 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, Canada particularly values the Antarctic Treaty System, not only because of 
its importance and success in managing and protecting a large part of our planet which has many 
issues and challenges similar to our own arctic lands and waters, but also as an example of 
international cooperation and the use and sharing of scientific knowledge as a basis for 
management and protection.  We recognize the central importance of the Protocol for 
Environmental Protection.  Although Canada has not yet been able to ratify the Protocol, for 
ratification on the topics included is a very complex matter in our national federal system, we wish 
to assure delegates that steps are being taken, and that Canada has every intention to act in 
accordance with the provisions of the Protocol. 
 
 
Canada wishes you and all delegates every success in the forthcoming discussions and 
deliberations. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
