
Towards the designation of Antarctic wilderness areas.
				Information paper
4th draft prepared for CEP delegation by H Keys, Department of Conservation, Private Bag, Turangi, 7 May 1999

Introduction
Antarctica is the largest terrestrial wilderness area on earth.  Its remoteness, vast size and frozen nature have limited human encroachment and provide a “natural” protection of antarctic wilderness values.  Wilderness is important to people, societies and to sustainable development of our planet Earth.  However, continued development of Antarctica and an increase in the number and mobility of people visiting the antarctic region means that maintenance of these wilderness values can not be assured in the future without some additional protection.

This paper outlines the legal background on, including an inventory of, the place of antarctic wilderness values in the protected area system of Antarctica and then offers definitions of these values.  Following the recommendation at paragraph 49(i) in the report of CEP 1 (Committee for Environmental Protection 1998), the paper then lists threats to values in the wilderness category and outlines suggested steps towards appropriate designations and management of wilderness areas.  This includes lists of possible aims and objectives of a management plan for an area designated for the protection of wilderness values, guidelines for identifying suitable areas that might benefit from this kind of special protection and criteria for evaluating proposals for wilderness areas.  Some areas that could meet these criteria in Antarctica are suggested.

Legal Background
The Protocol on Environmental Protection specifies that wilderness and aesthetic values are two of the fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Treaty area (Article 3.1).  Activities in the Treaty area shall be “conducted so as to avoid ……  degradation of, or  substantial risk to areas of ...... aesthetic or wilderness significance” (Article 3.2(b), Hemmings 1996).  In Annex V to the Protocol Article 3.1 states that an area “may be designated as an Antarctic specially protected area to protect outstanding aesthetic or wilderness values.”  Article 3.2 indicates that Treaty Parties should seek to identify “(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value” to be included in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) system.  

Annex V is not yet in force which is a significant concern for compliance with protected area obligations.  Annexes I-IV were part of the package adopted under the Final Act to the 11th Special ATCM and came into force with the Protocol.  However Annex V was adopted as Recommendation 10 of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) XVI.  Parties to the Treaty should ratify Annex V and provide notification to the Depository Government that they have adopted it.

Despite the concern with Annex V the Protocol establishes the legal obligation to protect wilderness values if these are likely to be degraded or significantly at risk. Annex V indicates that this shall be done through the designation of wilderness areas as ASPAs.  Although aspects of aesthetic and wilderness values may be amenable to scientific analysis they are not part of traditional “biophysical” antarctic science.  Therefore there will be advantages in drawing on relevant national and international experience (e.g. IUCN) to identify and select them properly.

Preliminary inventories of existing protected areas in Antarctica that might explicitly or implicitly protect aesthetic or wilderness values shows that these values are not yet represented adequately.  Acero’s (1998) analysis showed that management plans of only two Specially Protected Areas (Beaufort Is, Pointe-Geologie Archipelago) refer to aesthetic values and neither SPAs or Sites of Special Scientific Interest referred to wilderness values.  In fact none of the existing formally protected areas appear large enough to protect wilderness areas (see below).  

One additional management plan agreed to at the ATCM XVI in 1991 identifies aesthetic, scenic and wilderness values as reasons for designation.  This area covering approximately 480 km² on the northside of the Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains is designated Specially Reserved Area (SRA) 1.  The SRA category has not been formally approved by the ATCP’s and will be subsumed by Annex V when it comes into force but it is not clear whether this will be as an ASPA or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA).  However its partial adoption indicates that Parties accept the need to protect aesthetic and wilderness values.

Several Parties including New Zealand have domestic legislation on wilderness areas.  Wilderness values are identified under the World Heritage designation of Australia’s Heard and McDonald Islands.  Adams and Disappointment Islands in the Auckland group and the whole Snares archipelago have been given the highest form of legal protection under New Zealand law, and are also World Heritage Areas, as they are among the last substantial land masses in the world with vegetation and ecosystems essentially unmodified by people and introduced species.  These subantarctic islands are remote, undisturbed and wild providing an important link with the wilderness and other conservation values further south. 

What are aesthetic and Wilderness Values and why are they Important?
Aesthetics involve the philosophy or theory of taste or the perception of the beautiful in nature and art (New English Dictionary), knowledge derived from the senses (Oxford English Dictionary) or the science of the conditions of sensuous perception (philosopher Kant).  Aesthetic values are those concerned with beauty and art including inspirational qualities and involve preference, discrimination, judgment and development of taste (Porteous 1996).  Hence they are largely subjective.  Scenic values are effectively a subset of aesthetic values in that they are attributes of fine, attractive, beautiful or otherwise appealing scenery.  In most (but not all) contexts, especially Antarctica, they normally apply to natural landscapes or features with no human influence.

Wilderness values are attributes of wilderness.  Nowadays this is generally regarded as land that is unmodified, wild, uninhabited, remote from human settlement and “untamed”.  Humans can only ever be visitors in wilderness: some wilderness areas  have no visitation but their intrinsic value remains high.  While many parts of the sea, including sea ice and the sea floor are also wilderness (and may help protect terrestrial wilderness values) they are not the main consideration here.  Excluding marine aspects here simplifies the issues and focuses the discussion onto terrestrial values.

Wilderness and wilderness values are intrinsic, recreational or “experiential” and cultural concepts, which embody remoteness, solitude, freshness, “unspoiled” and “raw” nature, discovery and challenge.  In previous ages (eg 17th and 18th centuries in Europe) wilderness areas were often viewed very negatively as hideous, evil places which were “the enemy of civilised life”.  Now they are seen much more positively. They have important “existence” value to people who will never directly experience them.  Wilderness is seen as fostering self-reliance and empathy with wild nature and as an antidote to modern urban pressures.  Part of this includes sensory pleasure via vision, smell, sound and tactility.  Wilderness visitors travel on foot (or ski) at nature’s terms normally utilising a variety of modern camping gear and clothing but no motorised equipment.  

Numerous laboratory and field studies have shown the therapeutic and life-enhancing value of contact with nature and the restorative value of aesthetics (Porteous 1996).  Research has involved groups differing widely in social and recreational activity levels in both western and more traditional societies.  Passive contemplation of nature is seen as the most widely appreciated value of scenery and aesthetic values and studies have shown that even non-users of national parks and wilderness feel better knowing these areas exist.  Physiological processes and levels of response suggest the human immune system benefits from people’s contact with nature, leading to the so-called nature tranquillity hypothesis.  Research on actual wilderness experience has shown that it produces strong or deep feelings of “wholeness” and “oneness” such as rapture, awe, more alive feelings including improved concept of one’s self and a higher state of consciousness.

Wilderness is also an important part of sustainable development of our planet.  The dominant place of economics and materialism in modern developed societies increasingly needs to be tempered with more emphasis on environmental protection and social equity.  This needs to be promoted from “the top down” by wise institutions and policies and from “the bottom up” by millions of individuals.  The Antarctic Treaty system and Parties to it have a global role to play in achieving a world order that is ecologically, socially and economically balanced and sound. 

Antarctic wilderness values include those of remoteness, few or no people, an absence of human made objects, traces, sounds and smells, and untraveled or infrequently traveled terrain.  This implies remoteness from permanent or semi-permanent habitation (not merely an absence of it), an absence of related human artifacts, (e.g. tracking) and disturbance and an absence of motorised transport.  Given the unpopulated and other special characteristics of Antarctica, wilderness values there should connote more remote, unpopulated and “wild” feelings than wilderness values elsewhere.  

Wilderness areas can be described as wild lands designated for their protection, managed to perpetuate their natural condition and suitable for wilderness experience either directly or vicariously.  A working definition of antarctic wilderness relevant to Antarctica is given below.  The rest of this paper focuses on wilderness values and areas.  Protecting these will protect many aesthetic values.

Size of the present Antarctic Wilderness
Most of Antarctica is still wilderness in that the region is large in relation to the combined area of intense (for Antarctica) human activity.  This is generally confined to within 100-200 km of larger permanent bases or clusters of bases but probably less from smaller isolated stations.  Excluding these areas and those areas 100 km from major air or surface transport lines as “non-wilderness” leaves about 80-85% of “terrestrial” Antarctica.  Probably at least 75 percent of this wilderness is ice sheet or ice shelf without any rock features leaving perhaps up to 25% or some 2 million km2 as potentially containing a high percentage of high quality wilderness values with good diversity and complexity of landscape and landform.  This figure could be improved for scientific purposes (e.g. monitoring) but it gives an indication of the total area of high quality wilderness.  There are also generally smaller areas of wilderness nearer bases and transport routes but since the rates of human visitation or passage nearby and the likelihood of anthropogenic effects will be higher there these will generally be lower quality wilderness.

Threats to Antarctic Wilderness
If human activity in Antarctica continues, expands and grows in intensity the effective area and quality of antarctic wilderness will certainly decrease.  The CEP 1 report noted that threats to the different categories of protected areas should be identified and taken into account (CEP 1998 (49)(i)(a)).  Table 1 lists some current human activities and process which are diminishing the area of wilderness in Antarctica.  Permanent or semi-permanent bases, some remote automated equipment and deep field research and most tourist adventure activity is focused in coastal areas (including inshore waters) and those with ice free terrain, including mountains.  Human impacts are often long lasting in these areas and many are cumulative in terms of effects on wilderness values.  Longer term processes (Table 2) suggest pressures on antarctic wilderness is likely to grow rather that diminish in future.  

Different perspectives or understandings of how valuable antarctic wilderness values are, and effects of humans on them may be one of the largest threats or obstacles to long term protection of wilderness values.  This paper aims to improve our understanding of the value of wilderness in Antarctica.


Table 1.  Some Current direct pressures on Antarctic Marine and Wilderness values


    1. Unregulated and illegal fishing on antarctic continental shelf plus regulated fishing in some areas.
    2. Major and unsustainable non-target impact on seabirds (with some species being more impacted that others).
    3. Increased accessibility of Antarctica, including more ships, yachts and aircraft available for scientists, tourist and adventurers, hence more people.
    4. Continued growth in numbers and/or size of bases or semi-permanent field camps or depots.
    5. Increased accessibility of places within Antarctica, due to greater availability of small aircraft for research, tourism etc, hence potential for impact on more places
    6. Rapid increase in numbers of tourists and adventurers not all of whom have appropriate environmental awareness.
    7. Insidious nature of cumulative human pressure in Antarctica particularly in those areas where disturbance is easy and/or the environment is slow to revert to the undisturbed status.

    8. Increased impacts especially on ice-free coastal, island and remote mountain areas.

    9. Global change (including ozone deletion and climate change) increasing environmental disturbance and potentially causing significant changes in primary productivity and diversity in the marine environment.



Table 2.  Strategic Threats to Conservation including Wilderness Values in Antarctica (adapted from Tetley 1998)


    1. Reduced supply of seafood on global markets due to major fisheries collapse and reduced access to EEZs’ (as well as depletion of known antarctic-Sub antarctic stocks).

    2. Ongoing capitalisation of fishing industry and improved technology.

    3. Management failure of fisheries leading to emphasis on short term gains rather than long term sustainability.

    4. Too slow adoption of techniques and systems proven to allow sustainable human activities with minimal impact.

    5. Increased awareness of scientific, ecotourism – adventure, educational, political and commercial opportunities.

    6. Increased size of eco-  and adventure tourism market.

    7. Increased commercialism of Antarctica as it enters it third age – ‘The Age of Commercialisation’.

    8. Difficulty of achieving an effective governance structure, including enforceability of rules and the will to enforce them.
    9. Delay in ratification and implementation of Annex V (Area protection and management)

    10. Different perspectives on use of the antarctic and its resources by Antarctic Treaty nations and operators, including different standards of environmental protection and potential for increased conflict between different value systems.
    11. Declining position of science as an exclusive activity in Antarctica and increased number of support operations contracted out.  
    12. Increased potential for “rogue” operators and non-sustainability managed activities.

    13. In the rest of the world, continuing environmental degradation, increasing wealth and poverty, increased environmental awareness, urban pressures and a rise in corporate relative to government power.

Management of threats to wilderness in Antarctica
The Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection give general protection to the whole of the Antarctic.  ASMAs perhaps with smaller ASPAs nested in them would provide the mechanism for further protection through the Treaty system which has not so far actively protected wilderness values very well.  Setting aside such areas would compare with the process in other parts of the world where wilderness values have been protected by setting aside suitable areas of wilderness and managing them as such.  The size of the area will vary from place to place but needs to be relatively large for value protection and to minimise impacts from outside its boundaries.  The areas need to be remote from centres of human activity such as bases, have difficult access or relatively challenging terrain and have no or minimal signs of human development.  Choosing 200 km as a standard distance denoting “remoteness” from centres and routes of human activity would help ensure high quality wilderness is protected.

In practical terms Antarctica is already as conserved as many of the world’s national parks (Holdgate 1998).  Therefore in order to estimate how large ASMA or ASPA wilderness areas should be it may be most appropriate to compare wilderness areas encompassed in national parks.  A guide to the size required in Antarctica may then be obtained through comparison with wilderness areas deemed appropriate and legislated as such elsewhere in the world in conjunction with or contained within national parks.  Equally however Antarctica might in some cases establish its own precedent for the size of wilderness areas.

National parks act as a buffer against human development similar to the way Antarctica and the Treaty instruments do.  In New Zealand an ideal size of wilderness area is regarded as that requiring two days travel on foot to cross it, say 1000-5000 km².  Some individually designated Wilderness Areas in national parks are smaller than this and range in size from 1.4 to 10.8 percent of the area of their park.  The largest true wilderness area in New Zealand is the Glaisnock in Fiordland National Park (12570 km²).  At 1248 km² it covers 9.9 percent of this park.  Elsewhere in the world national parks created to conserve wilderness values outside the polar regions cover 9000 to over 30,000 km² (Holdgate 1998) with the Greenland National Park covering 700,000 km².

Suggested definitions and objectives of management of Wilderness Areas in Antarctica
The following definitions of wilderness and management plan objectives and aims are put forward as a possible framework for protection of antarctic wilderness values.  Concepts in IUCN’s Management Category Ib Wilderness Area (IUCN 1994) are drawn on.

Definition of an Antarctic wilderness area
Large area of unmodified land [not completely ice-covered] with or without adjacent sea retaining its natural character and influence, at least [200 km] from permanent or semi-permanent habitation and major logistic transport routes, which is protected and managed so as to preserve its natural condition as an antarctic wilderness.

Objectives of Management
    • to maintain the essential natural attributes and qualities of the environment over the long term including ensuring the absence of noise generated even transiently by human activity;
    • to ensure that future generations have the opportunity to experience understanding, knowledge and enjoyment of areas that have been undisturbed by human activity over a long period of time;
    • to enable high quality and compelling scientific research not able to be done  elsewhere that is short term, low density and of less than minor or transient impact on wilderness qualities.

Aims of Management Plans
All ASMAs and ASPAs need a Management Plan.  Management of  such Areas designated to  protect wilderness and aesthetic values would aim to:

    • prohibit building permanent or semi-permanent human habitation, other buildings or machinery;
    • prohibit construction of any roads, tracks or trails;
    • prevent any other physical or biological human disturbance other than transitory imprints on snow and ice;
    • prevent vehicles or aircraft entering unless in accordance with a research permit;
    • permit research of a compelling nature which cannot be served elsewhere;
    • permit access by other people and uses at numbers and logistic types which will serve best the physical and spiritual well being of visitors and maintain the wilderness qualities of the area for present and future generations.

Guidelines for identifying areas suitable for special wilderness protection  
Following the protected area workshop in Tromso in May 1998, CEP I set out terms of reference for a second workshop to be held before CEP II.  These included the need to develop guidelines for identifying areas needing special protection [CEP 1(49)(i)(b)].  Drawing on IUCN Management Category 1b (Wilderness Area) suggested guidelines are set out below:
    • large area of unmodified land with or without adjacent sea retaining its natural character and influence, at least [200 km] from permanent or semi-permanent habitation and major logistic transport routes;
    • the area should possess high natural quality, [be governed primarily by the forces of nature] with human disturbance essentially absent, and be likely to continue to display those attributes if managed as proposed;
    • the area should offer outstanding opportunities for solitude, enjoyed (once the area has been reached) by simple, quiet, non polluting and non-intrusive means of travel (i.e. non-motorised);
    • the area should be of sufficient size to make practical such preservation and use;
    • area boundaries should follow natural topographic or glacial features such as coastlines, ice divides, crests of mountain ranges or individual peaks and nunataks.

The CEP when discussing needs for protected areas at its first meeting emphasised that particular attention should be given to identifying “areas kept inviolate from human interference” (CEP I (49)(iii)(a)).  This had already been seen as the top priority in recommendations of the 1998 Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop (Njastad 1998).  Since such areas may well possess significant wilderness values a further guideline also noted at the Workshop could be:

    • the area should be able to be kept inviolate from human interference and comparable to localities that have been affected by human activities so that future comparisons between such areas will be possible.

Several regions have been suggested previously (e.g. Lewis Smith 1992, Holdgate 1998) where new ASMAs or ASPA’s might be designated to protect wilderness values.  These include the Ellsworth-Pensacola Mountains (including the Vinson and Dufek massifs), Shackleton Mountains in Coates Land, Shirmacher Oasis and unspecified nunataks or mountain ranges in Dronning Maud Land, Southern Prince Charles Mountains in MacRobertson Land, Larseman and Vestfold Hills in Princess Elizabeth land, Bunger Hills in Queen Mary Land, nunataks and mountain ranges in Oates Land, La Gorce-Queen Maud Mountains and Lennox King-Beardmore-Axel Heiberg glacier region in the Transantarctic Mountains and mountain and icesheet regions in Edward VII Land, Marie Byrd Land and Western Ellsworth Land.  Some of these areas may now be too close to permanent bases or out-stations (e.g. Larseman and Vestfold Hills) or air transport routes (e.g. Oates Land, Bunger Oasis) to possess or maintain high quality wilderness values.  This is another indication of the extent of encroachment on antarctic wilderness.

Criteria to evaluate proposals for establishing ASPA’s for wilderness protection
CEP I also identified the need to develop criteria for evaluating proposals to establish new protected areas [CEP 1(49)(i)(c)].  Many people working on antarctic protected area topics recognise that development of such criteria should draw on both antarctic and international experience and the CEP I report noted this in paragraph 50.  The following are some suggestions for suitable criteria, building on World Heritage experience (e.g Thorsell 1997), suggestions from the Antarctic Protected Areas workshops in 1992 and 1998 (Lewis smith and others 1994, Njastad 1998) and Porteous (1996):

    1. The area will need to have outstanding international wilderness value warranting further protection afforded through simply being in Antarctica;
    2. The area should satisfy a least one of other criteria of outstanding universal value developed parallel those of the World Heritage Convention (such as unique landforms or outstanding examples of major stages of Earth’s evolutionary history, ecological processes or biological evolutions; superlative natural phenomena, formations, features or areas of outstanding natural beauty);
    3. The area should be able to meet objectives of management of other selected categories of ASPA (including significant ecological, geological, physiogeographic or other features of scientific or educational value) and fill gaps in existing environmental – geographical coverage;
    4. The area should contain all or most key elements of wilderness in their natural relationships;
    5. The area should be large enough to be self-perpetuating as wilderness;
    6. The area should be able to be given adequate long term legal, regulatory or institutional protection ( 4, 5 and 6 are adapted from the World Heritage “Conditions of Integrity”);
    7. In determining the relative importance or merit of a site, quality indicators such as naturalness, remoteness, potential for use by humans, integrity, geographical complexity and diversity, and the challenging nature of the terrain need to be kept in mind (adapted from the World Heritage quality indicators);
    8. Assessments of the consequences for wilderness values in the area if protection is not achieved and of the feasibility of maintaining wilderness values in the face of threats;
    9. The areas should be assessed and evaluated by people with appropriate knowledge of wilderness values as well as those with local knowledge of possible threats to them;
    10.  Evaluation methods and criteria should follow the process defined by the Antarctic Treaty parties under the Antarctic Treaty system for selecting and approving protected areas;
    11. Evaluation criteria should be reliable yet simple and inexpensive;
    12.  The areas will need to have a suitable management plan developed and formatted according to Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol (e.g. detailing values, objectives, boundaries, specifications, responsible agencies etc).

Conclusion
There is a sufficient basis for designating special areas for wilderness protection in Antarctica.  Threats to antarctic wilderness are growing.  While there is a legal system in place (although not yet in force) that allows for the protection of antarctic wilderness values, no area has yet been designated on this basis.  Given the lack of experience within the Antarctic Treaty System, there is strong justification for learning from and using relevant international experience with the World Heritage Convention.  Further discussion, explanation and formal adoption of guidelines, criteria and processes by the ATCPs is still required.  There is however sufficient knowledge and understanding of what is required to begin the identification and evaluation processes in order to commence a more formal protection of wilderness values in Antarctica.  In this way Antarctica will retain its preeminence as containing the largest areas of wilderness left on Earth.  

Acknowledgements
I thank Alan Hemmings and Emma Waterhouse for helpful comments on drafts of this paper.

Selected Bibliography
Acero, J.M. 1998.  Comparison of protected areas in Antarctica, p 20-28 in Njastad (1998)
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) 1998. Report of the CEP I May 25-29, 1998, Tromso, Norway, 95 pages.
Codling, R. 1998.  Wilderness and aesthetic values in Antarctica. XXII ATCM Information Paper No. 2, 4 pages
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 1997.  List of Protected Areas in Antarctica FCO London, and BAS Cambridge, 33 pages.
IUCN 1994.  Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories.  CNPPA and WCMC.  IUCN, Gland Switzerland and Cambridge UK, 261 pages.
Hemmings, A.D. 1996.  Cumulative impact on antarctic intrinsic, wilderness and aesthetic values, p 62-4 in M. De Poorter and J.C.Dalziell “Cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica: minimisation and management”. Proceedings of the IUCN Workshop 18-21 September 1996, Washington DC, 145 pages.
Holdgate, M.W. 1994 International Designations, p 99-104 in Lewis-Smith and others (1994).
Holdgate, M.W. 1998.  The Antarctic Protected Area System in the new millennium, p 8-19 in Njastad (998).
Lewis Smith, R.I. 1992.  Environmental-geographic basis for the protected area system, p 27-36 in Lewis-Smith and others (1994).
Lewis Smith, R.I., Walton D.W.H. and Dingwall, P.R. (editors) 1994.  Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System.  Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas 29 June – 2 July 1992.  IUCN Conservation of the Southern Polar Region No. 1, 137 pages.
Njastad, B. (compiler) 1998.  Report of the Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop 23 May, 1998, Tromso, Norway, 87 pages.
Porteous, J.D. 1996.  Environmental aesthetics. Routledge, London & New York, 290 pages.
Tetley, G. (editor) 1998.  Antarctica 2010 a notebook.  Proceedings of the Antarctic Futures Workshop 28-30 April 1998.  Antarctica New Zealand miscellaneous series 3, 96 pages.
Thorsell, J. 1997.  Natures Hall of Fame; IUCN and the World Heritage Convention Parks v.7(2): 3-7.
