1 
                                                          
Factors Influencing Risk Analysis In Relation To Human Activities In 
Antarctica Based On German Experience With Logistics During German 
Antarctic Research 
1. Introduction 
According to Decision No. 3 of the XXII ATCM, a risk assessment should be carried out as a 
basis for further deliberations about an annex or annexes on liability. 
The following is based on the definition of damage as given in the 8th Offering1 for an annex on 
liability.  This is defined in Article 3, paragraph 1, as follows: 
"For the purpose of this Annex: 
(1) (a) 'Damage' means any harmful impact on the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems, caused by an activity in the Antarctic Treaty area which [is of 
a more than minor and more than transitory nature] [is significant and lasting]." 
According to this definition, damage requires (1) a cause which leads to (2) an impact, and (3) a 
classification of the impact as "harmful", i.e., negative and "more than insignificant"2 or – 
depending on the formulation still to be agreed upon – as "of more than minor and more than 
transitory nature" or as "significant and lasting". 
The individual elements of the definition of damage mentioned above are described below 
(chapters 2 to 4) and preliminary information is given on the cost of environmental damage 
(chapter 5).  The circumstances that led to the individual damage are explained and analysed 
(chapters 6 and 7) on the basis of German experience with logistics during polar research over 
the last two decades.  Several types of environmental damage can be classified (chapter 8). 
2. Causes of environmental damage 
2.1 Chemical causes 
The main sources for chemical environmental impacts are motor fuels, e.g. diesel fuel, kerosene 
(Jet A-1, JP 8), gasoline, and their exhaust fumes.  Waste water and refuse, lubricating oil, 
hydraulic oil, batteries, and various chemicals and materials used for scientific research are also 
sources of environmental damage.  Only small amounts of such chemicals and materials (e.g., 
propylene glycol when drilling to obtain rock samples) are used during expedition works. 
The following factors have to be considered for the determination and assessment of possible 
effects of chemicals:  the chemical behavior and amount of the material under polar climatic 
 
1 A totally new draft of an Annex on liability presented by The Netherlands and other countries in January 1999 
defines the term "damage" in a different way. This definition is ot discussed in this text. 
2 Additional classifications not discussed in this text are described in Article 3, 1b and in Article 3, 1d of th 8th 
Offering. 
2 
conditions, its lifetime in the system, degradability, solubility, pathways in the food chain, 
enrichment at the top of the food chain, toxicity in individual organisms and organism 
associations. 
2.2 Physical causes 
Physical impacts on the environment are chiefly noise and dust (particularly from aircraft, land 
and water vehicles, drilling, and explosions), as well as driving and walking on certain types of 
soils and plants, which cause shearing stress, pressure and heating as well as other direct impacts 
on animals and plants. 
The following factors have to be considered for the determination and assessment of such 
possible environmental impacts:  the amount, properties of the soil or sediment, depth of 
penetration of the impact, vulnerability to erosion, thermokarst, structure and properties (e.g. 
water content) of the substratum. 
2.3 Biological causes/introduction of non-endemic species 
Possible sources of non-endemic plants, animals, fungi, bacteria, and viruses are food residues, 
waste water, or other imported material. 
The following factors must be considered for the determination and assessment of such possible 
environmental impacts:  Introduction of nutrients can increase the persistence of pathogenic 
germs entering the environment via waste water.  The introduction of non-endemic plants, 
animals, fungi, bacteria, and viruses can possibly cause changes in biological associations and 
habitats.  But there is still considerable scientific uncertainty in this field. 
3. Impacts 
3.1 Direct and indirect impacts 
The causes of environmental damage mentioned above could possibly lead to immediate 
environmental changes (e.g. contamination of a lake by motor fuel, destruction of plants by 
driving a motor vehicle over them). 
Direct effects can lead in the long-term to additional indirect or secondary impacts, for example, 
_ soil erosion, 
_ migration of oil from the soil into water, 
_ accumulation of toxic substances in the food chain, 
_ dispersion of waste water in the ocean, transfer of pathogenic germs, 
_ decrease in oxygen content of the water by organic matter introduced into the water, effects on 
marine life. 
Comment [RCN1]: Seite: 2 
amount of what????????????????????? 
3 
3.2 Cumulative impacts 
The environmental impacts mentioned above can also be cumulative.  This is particularly the 
case for sensitive areas such as nunataks and mountain ranges (especially areas with vegetation 
and invertebrates), dry valleys (particularly the ice-covered lakes, sediments, moss and alga mats, 
and soils in these areas), areas with frequent scientific activities and/or tourism, and areas in 
which many species and biological associations, some of them very sensitive, exist (e.g., giant 
petrels, lichen, mosses, and flowering plants). 
4. Classification of environmental impacts as damage 
4.1 General classification criteria 
Whether an environmental impact is classified as damage depends on the criteria used.  The 
alternatives in the 8th Offering of "a more than minor and more than transitory" and "significant 
and lasting" are very indefinite and have to be made more concrete.  This is possible, however, 
only for the individual case and may be controversial in some cases.  But under certain 
circumstances there is agreement that a serious negative effect has to be classified as damage. 
The classification is based on the 
_ kind of impact, 
_ extent and/or intensity of the impact, 
_ duration of the impact 
In implementing these criteria the environmental principles of the Protocol of Environmental 
Protection and the biogeographical habitat are to be taken into consideration. The very decision 
whether an impact constitutes damage is subject to a comprehensive evaluation. 
4.2 What should be protected? 
Article 3, paragraph 1(a) of the 8th Offering states that "the Antarctic environment and the 
dependent and associated ecosystems " should be protected.  This broad formulation is in 
agreement with Article 2 of the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  In 
addition to the ecosystems and the components of the environment (e.g., water, ice, glaciers, soil, 
air, climate, flora and fauna) "the intrinsic value of the Antarctica and its value as an area for the 
conduct of scientific research" have to be taken into account. Other objects to be protected are 
mentioned in Annex II of the Protocol, which contains regulations aimed at protecting plants and 
animals in Antarctica. 
The vulnerability of these protected objects can be judged only for each individual case.  It is not 
possible to classify the sensitivity of the components of a specific habitat or related groups of 
4 
species because the classification of individual ecosystems or species on the basis of the causes 
of environmental impacts is still very controversial. 
Antarctica offers unique opportunities for scientific research. The Protocol of Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctica Treaty protects the intactness of Antarctica because of the 
importance of certain areas for scientific research.  Particularly the analysis of background 
concentrations of anthropogenic chemicals, which have not been emitted in Antarctica, demands 
high standards of purity of the sample, e.g. air, snow, ice, or biota, which should be free of 
contamination.  This is also important for microbiological analysis.  However, these standards 
should not be interpreted in such a way that scientific research cannot be carried out, because 
these standards are set up for the purpose of scientific research.  But anyone who is involved in 
research activities should take care that the wilderness character of the investigated area is not 
significantly impaired. 
In relation to  objects to be protected, areas of wilderness character play a special role.  Article 3, 
paragraph 2b vi of the Protocol of Environmental Protection prohibits "degradation of, or 
substantial risk to" such areas.  If such areas are degraded, restoration or cleaning is impossible 
today. 
4.3 Overview of biogeographical factors 
Besides the protected object, the habitat is important for an evaluation of an environmental 
impact.  Depending on the biogeography, there are different factors that have to be considered for 
an evaluation of the impact of the causes mentioned in chapter 2.   The characteristics of the 
individual habitats in Antarctica are given in the following table. 
 
Habitat 
Components 
Ecology 
Special effects 
terrestrial 
ecosystems 
rock, gravel, sand, 
clay, 
soil; 
flora, 
fauna, 
microorganisms 
in 
the soil 
Extreme temperature variations; severe, stormy 
winters; cold, humid summers; poor mineral soil, little 
and patchy formation of humus; vegetation grows 
slowly, vegetation often limited to wind protected and 
humid sites, high degree of endemism, only ground-
nesting birds 
Permafrost causes vertical and horizontal 
movement of the ground leading to local 
redistribution of toxic substances, which are 
also 
distributed 
widely 
by 
wind, 
biodegradation rates are very slow, lichen 
and mosses are sensitive to atmospheric 
depositions 
(e.g., 
heavy 
metals),  
accumulation of toxic substances in fatty 
tissue of terrestrial vertebrates 
dry 
valleys, 
nunataks, "oases" 
rock, talus, gravel, 
sand, mineral soil 
Extremely dry climate, cold, windy, mostly no snow 
cover; 
highly 
adapted 
microorganisms, 
microorganisms in the rocks, extremely slow growth, 
freshwater lakes with primitive organisms 
Already small disturbances can lead to 
irreversible damage 
coastal regions 
rock, 
boulders, 
gravel and sandy 
beaches, mud; flora, 
fauna 
Moderate temperatures, few coasts free of ice, 
seabirds nest on cliffs and hills, breeding grounds of 
seals along narrow beaches, shallow shore zones and 
tidal pools with variable salinity 
Lichen 
and 
mosses 
are 
sensitive 
to 
atmospheric depositions (e.g., heavy metals), 
accumulation of toxic substances in fatty 
tissue of terrestrial vertebrates 
marine 
ecosystems 
coastal shelf, ocean 
Water temperature relatively constant; growth not 
limited by insufficient oxygen, mostly short food 
chains in pelagic regions, large variety of benthic 
species, many sessile animal species, circumpolar 
distribution, slow growth, long periods between 
generations, longevity longer than normal 
Accumulation of toxic substances in fatty 
tissue of marine vertebrates, high sensitivity 
to oil 
sea ice 
fast ice near the 
coast, pack ice off 
the coast 
Seasonal sea-ice cycle, ice movement causes breaking 
of the ice, wind, water currents, melting, brine in ice 
pores, specially adapted biological associations 
Accumulation 
of oil 
and other toxic 
substances under the ice, bioassociations in 
the ice are sensitive to disturbances 
 
5
6 
4.4 Possibility of clean-up and restoration as an assessment criterion 
Another assessment criterion could consists in the sometimes given possibility of restoring 
changes. Strictly speaking, such a criterion can only serve to determine the severity of the impact. 
But the possibility to reverse adverse changes in the environment does not mean that these cases 
are no longer classified as damage, i.e., below the threshold for such a classification.  Only when 
the protected object has completely been restored, the impact cannot be classified as damage. It is 
also possible that in favorable cases the changes remaining after a thorough but incomplete 
restoration can be considered insignificant. 
The following table shows the range of possibilities for restoration and cleaning of the various 
Antarctic ecosystems, including areas with different physical states of water, as well as those 
with no snow cover.  
Possibilities for cleaning up in the latter case include, for example, using steam or simply 
gathering up the contaminated material.  However, cleaning or restoration of the impacted biota 
cannot be totally achieved.  Only periods of recovery without any further disturbances can 
possibly lead to a regeneration of the affected area. 
 
Relatively 
good 
possibilities 
for 
cleaning 
Some 
possibilities 
for cleaning 
Slight 
possibilities 
for cleaning 
Relatively 
poor 
possibilities 
for 
cleaning 
snow 
shelf ice, sea ice, 
fresh water 
salt water, fresh water 
sediments 
marine sediments 
rock 
gravel, sand 
soil without flora 
soil with flora,  
rock with flora 
restoration possible 
by removal 
limited possibilities 
for restoration is  
very 
limited 
possibilities 
for 
restoration 
no 
restoration 
possible 
sand, gravel 
rock without flora 
soil without flora 
soil with flora,  
rock with flora 
 
4.5 External influences on Antarctic ecosystems 
A not negligible aspect (which is difficult to measure) is the influence of events north of 60°S, 
the northern extent of Antarctica as defined in Article 6 of the Antarctica Treaty.  More severe 
than a large-scale oil spill is the depletion of the ozone layer and the resulting increase in harmful 
UV radiation.  Phytoplankton, which depends on sunlight for photosynthesis, lives in the upper 
levels of the ocean and therefore is exposed to UVB radiation.  A 6 – 12 % decrease in the 
7 
growth of phytoplankton has been determined since the discovery of the "ozone hole".  
Phytoplankton is at the base of the food chain.  A lowered supply of phytoplankton would effect 
the entire food chain, e.g., krill, fish, birds, seals, and whales.  The ecological significance of this 
reduction in plankton growth is a subject of discussion among scientists at present.  The effects of 
UVB radiation on fish and larvae that live near the surface are unknown; an additional negative 
effect on the food chain can be expected. 
Consequently, for questions of liability, a clear distinction must be made between global and 
local causes of damage in Antarctica. 
5. Costs 
The cost of environmental damage in Antarctica can be subdivided into 
_ the cost of measures for limiting the damage (e.g. installation of oil barriers), 
_ the cost of cleaning and restoration of the affected environment, and 
_ the financial compensation for damage that could not be repaired by cleaning and/or 
restoration. 
The cost of limiting the extent of environmental damage can be assessed relatively exactly using 
plans for emergency response or restoration.  The cost of cleaning and restoration can be roughly 
estimated on the basis of experience.  The costs of cleaning up after an oil spill amount to US$ 
150 per gallon according to figures published by the US Coast Guard, but the difficult conditions 
in Antarctica are not considered in these figures.  The cost of compensation for environmental 
damage can only be estimated approximately and is, therefore, considerably uncertain. 
6. Logistic activities for German Antarctic research 
The logistic activities conducted for the German Antarctic expeditions can be used to illustrate 
the above comments.  The circumstances which led to the individual environmental impacts are 
described and analysed to highlight different types of environmental damage.  Only those 
impacts caused by materials taken to the Antarctic are described. 
6.1 Sites of German activities 
The scientific expeditions require logistic activities.  One of the criteria for an assessment of risks 
for the environment is the type of landscape in which research is conducted.  Different risks are 
associated with the same logistic activity depending on the type of landscape.  This requires a 
separate assessment for each of the following types of landscape: 
_ ice shelves (Ekstrøm Ice Shelf, Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf, Ross Ice Shelf) 
_ inland ice sheet (Dronning Maud Land, George V Land) 
8 
_ coastal regions with ice shelf, sea ice areas (Northern Victoria Land, Oates Coast, Marie Byrd 
Land, Ekstrøm Ice Shelf, Ronne Ice Shelf) 
_ ice-free mountains (Kottas Mountains, Transantarctic Mountains, Shackleton Range, 
Dronning Maud Land) 
The logistic operations include the following activities: 
_ operation of permanent and summer stations, 
_ depots and camps, 
_ traverses, 
_ aerial operations, 
_ marine operations 
_ loading and unloading at the margin of the shelf ice, 
_ other activities. 
6.2 Operation of summer and permanent stations 
Accidents may occur during operation at permanent stations, summer stations, and base camps,.  
An example of the maximum risk potential consists in a complete leakage of 20,000 L oil tanks.  
The risk of oil spills or leakage is very low because the tanks are installed in retaining basins and 
the containers used for transport are checked regularly.  It is not clear how serious an oil spill or 
leak in the inland ice and shelf ice areas would be.  From experience it can be expected that 
probably no permanent damage would occur. 
6.3 Depots and camps 
Fuel depots have been set up at selected sites.  They are necessary for aerial operations and trips 
on the inland ice, and to supply the stations.  There is sufficient fuel at these depots not only for 
the research activities but also for emergencies.  No impairment of the environment has been 
observed at the depots.  The theoretical risk at these depots derives from the large amounts of 
fuel stored there (e.g. Neumayer depot:  nine containers, each containing 20,000 L Arctic diesel). 
Camps are used only for short periods (several weeks).  In contrast to the depots, no fuel is left at 
the camps.  So there is only a risk due to the fuels used when the camps are in operation (usually 
several 200-L drums) or in the case of a skidoo accident (up to 50 L). 
6.4 Traverses 
Traverses cross the shelf ice and the inland ice.  All transport along these traverses has totaled 
about 45,000 km since 1981. During this period two accidents occurred without causing an 
environmental damage.  The maximum risk (leakage of a maximum of 15,000 L fuel) depends on 
the volume of the containers. 
9 
6.5 Aerial operations 
A distinction must be made between the use of helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft for aerial 
operations.  Both types of aircraft are used for both logistic and scientific purposes.  Helicopters 
can be operated from both ships and field camps. 
More than 10,000 flight hours have been flown during two decades of German Antarctic 
expeditions.  During about 8200 helicopter flight hours in this period, there were four accidents 
but no environmental damage occurred as a result.  There has been one fixed-wing aircraft 
accident since 1990 during 1200 flight hours.  This accident was also not accompanied by any 
environmental damage.  The damaged aircraft was taken back to Germany. 
The maximum risk of aerial operations derives from the amount of fuel carried with the aircraft. 
6.6 Marine operations 
One ship has been lost (the Gotland II, 1981) during Antarctic expeditions.  However, because of 
several favorable circumstances, no environmental damage was observed as a result.  The diesel 
(which was stored in the ship's bunkers) and kerosene (which was stored in drums) did not leak 
immediately and any oil that may have been released accumulated beneath the pack ice and 
drifted northwards with the ice.  So the oil did not impair the coast, which is protected by the fast 
ice and favorable ocean currents.  The loss of the ship would have been avoided if the captain had 
followed basic rules of seamanship.  As a consequence, attention is now paid not only to the ice 
class of the ship, but also the ship's captain has to have many years of experience in Antarctic 
waters. 
General risks connected with the sinking of ships are described in Section 7.1.1. 
6.7 Loading and unloading operations at the margin of the shelf ice 
Unloading operations are necessary to supply the stations and base camps and to establish field 
camps.  Large amounts are unloaded from the ship onto the shelf ice.  About 150 t of load are 
needed annually to supply Neumayer Station for example.  No oil spills have occurred during 
loading and unloading operations for Neumayer Station.  Two accidents have occurred during 
transport between the unloading site and the station but did not cause significant environmental 
damage. 
Accidents may occur during loading and unloading operations at the margin of the shelf ice, 
during which fuel can run directly into the sea.  Any spilled oil (up to 10,000 L) can be removed 
from the water or ice using equipment available on the RV Polarstern and similar vessels. 
10 
6.8 Other activities 
During all logistic activities, minor accidents involving the environment may happen, e.g. 
spilling of several liters of fuel.  Usually such damage can be restored immediately, so the risk of 
a long-lasting impact can be excluded. 
7. Definition of damage groups 
Environmental impacts resulting from human logistic activities in Antarctica can be subdivided 
into three groups: 
_ accidents, 
_ cumulative damage, 
_ damage caused by intentional non-compliance with the Protocol of Environmental Protection. 
7.1 Accidents 
7.1.1 Sinking of a ship, oil spills 
Many factors affect the extent of environmental impact resulting, for example, from an oil spill.  
Whether the sinking of a ship results in an environmental disaster depends on numerous factors: 
_ location and distance to the coast 
_ character of the coast (rocky coast or margin of the shelf ice:  only 1660 km (= 5 %) of the 
total length of the  
  coast (31,876 km) is a rocky coast)  
_ wind direction (seaward winds are favorable because they keep the oil away from the coast) 
_ ocean currents (can carry the oil away from the coast) 
_ waves (a stormy sea can prevent the use of a skimmer) 
_ ice conditions (oil can fill cavities on the bottom of the ice and then be carried northwards 
when the ice breaks  
  up) 
_ the speed with which the accident is reacted to 
_ and especially:  the presence of sublitoral/litoral fauna and flora, for example, bird or seal 
colonies in the area. 
7.1.2 Crash of a helicopter or fixed-wing aircraft, accidents during loading and unloading 
operations, or along traverses (medium-scale accident, up to 15,000 L kerosine) 
There is limited environmental impact when an aircraft crashes on ice (because no damage to 
fauna or flora is expected), especially when the ice flows to the ocean. 
But environmental damage will occur if an aircraft crashes into a breeding colony and kill 
numerous animals or the breeding place is made unusable by leaking or burning kerosine.  In this 
11 
case the cost of restoration can be extremely high if the soil has to be excavated and removed by 
helicopter. 
Damage: 
local to regional 
Cost: 
can be roughly estimated for cleaning activities but not for permanent environmental 
damage 
Risk: 
low (because crashes seldom occur and there is a ban on flights over animal colonies) 
Persons responsible: can be definitely determined. 
7.1.3 Limited spills of fuels or lubricants 
Limited spills of fuels and/or lubricants (up to several liters) can be immediately cleaned up; thus 
there is practically no risk of a permanent impact. 
Damage: 
local 
Cost: 
low for environmental damage, can be estimated for clean-up activities 
Risk: 
can be estimated on the basis of previous experience 
Persons responsible: can be definitely determined. 
7.2 Cumulative damage 
7.2.1 Station operations 
Environmental contamination from waste gases; spillage during refueling of skidoos, helicopters, 
etc.; waste accumulation and dispersal by the wind. 
Damage: 
local to regional 
Cost: 
not easily estimated due to the variety of causes 
Risk: 
low 
Persons responsible: can be definitely determined if damage can be attributed to a specific 
expedition, organization or country. 
7.2.2 Tourist groups 
In principle, the same risk potential exist as for the operation of a station.  However, in the case 
of tourist groups it is particularly those objects that need protection the most that are the main 
destinations of tourist excursions:  seal and penguin colonies and particularly scenic parts of the 
coast.  On the other hand, short visits by tourists will be only a transitory disturbance, if at all.  
Any impact is cumulative and cannot be clearly attributed to any one person. 
Damage: 
local 
Cost: 
can be estimated 
Risk: 
low to moderate (owing to possible cumulative impact) 
12 
Persons responsible: can be definitely determined only if damage can be attributed to a specific 
expedition, tourist operator or country. 
7.3 Damage caused by intentional non-compliance with the Protocol of Environmental 
Protection 
It is possible, for example, that refuse is disposed of in the Antarctic instead of being taken 
outside the Antarctic Treaty area or that live poultry or sledge dogs are taken to Antarctica in 
spite of the ban.  Infectious diseases could be introduced with these animals that could infect 
whole seal or penguin colonies. 
Damage: 
local to regional 
Cost: 
cannot be estimated 
Risk: 
low 
Persons responsible: cannot always be determined and then only with considerable effort and 
expense. 
Summary 
Pursuant to the conclusions drawn by the Group of Legal Experts on Liability, only those impacts 
on a protected object would be considered as "damage" which are "more than minor and more 
than transitory" or " significant and lasting".  
The decision whether an impact can be considered as a damage is subject to a comprehensive 
evaluation. In this context, the sensitivity of the environmental components, which depend, inter 
alia, on biogeographic factors, play a role.  
The cost of environmental damage consists in the cost of limiting the extent of the damage, 
clean-up, and restoration on one side and the cost of compensating for a remaining environmental 
damage on the other side. The possible human impacts in the Antarctica can be classified as 
follows: 
13 
 
Type of impact 
Extent 
Probability 
Restoration 
Large-scale 
accident 
(release of > 20,000 L 
fuel 
into 
the 
environment),  
e.g., sinking of a ship  
or an oil spill 
local to regional 
very low 
only partially possible 
Medium-scale accident 
(release 
of 
up 
to 
20,000 L fuel into the 
environment), 
e.g., 
aircraft 
accident, 
accident 
along 
a 
traverse, 
accident 
during unloading or 
loading 
local to regional 
very low 
regularly possible 
Small-scale 
accident 
(several liters), e.g., 
spillage 
during 
refueling 
local  
probable 
regularly possible 
cumulative impact 
local to regional 
low to medium 
difficult to determine 
intentional 
non-
compliance with the 
Protocol 
local to regional 
very low 
uncertain 
 
It is very important that the type and extent of impacts considered as "damage", as well as the 
clean-up and restoration measures that might be necessary will clearly be defined in the annex or 
annexes on liability.  The related costs and, therefore, the insurance premiums are determined to 
a large degree by these definitions.  The monitoring programs described in Article 3, paragraph 
2d of the Protocol of Environmental Protection could also contribute to estimating the damage 
potential.  
