Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

                                       XXIII ATCM/ IP 121
                                       May, 1999
                                       Original: English/Spanish

Agenda Item 13


Large Scale Antarctic Tourism


Submitted by
ASOC
ANTARCTIC LARGE SCALE TOURISM:

WHERE IS IT GOING?

Introduction

The scale of Antarctic tourism - once the domain of small-scale specialist operators -
seems to be on the brink of a further substantial increase with some planned expeditions
set to increase well above the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators'
(IAATO) present self-imposed 400 passenger limit. This development of the industry is
made possible by the use of very much larger vessels than those that have generally been
employed to date.

Three large corporate operators are planning to conduct tourist expeditions in the
1999/2000 season. In November 1999, World Cruise Company of Canada will use the
850-person Ocean Explorer; in December 1999, Marine Expeditions Inc. (MEI), also of
Canada will use the 830-person Aegean , and in early 2000, the U.S.-based Holland
American Line Westours, Inc., will use the 1,600-person Dutch-flagged MS Rotterdam.
All three vessels will be in Antarctica for the first time.

These three vessels will be the largest passenger, and amongst the largest vessels of any
type ever to have sailed in the Antarctic treaty area. Until recently, Antarctic tour vessels
have usually carried between 100 and 200 people.

Bigger ships...bigger risks?

P potentially greater environmental risk resulting from the scale of the proposed
activity

The large size of these operations may be reflected in greater environmental risk than in
the case of the smaller vessels presently in use. Aside from their higher carrying
capacity, these vessels are not always adequately ice-strengthened. These cruises have the
potential to add substantially to human impact near and on the ecologically significant
Antarctic Peninsula.

ASOC is concerned that large tour ships pose particular threats to the Antarctic
environment, both during their "normal" operation and in the event of any misadventure -
which their size and absence of ice-class may make more likely. In considering the
consequences of misadventure, quite aside from any environmental impact, there arises
the question of the capacity of local resources available to mount rescue efforts.
Furthermore, in the absence of any systematic investigation into the likely consequences 
of the use of large vessels in Antarctic waters, their use adds a new level of uncertainty to 
both the preparation of particular environmental evaluations and their assessment. The 
Protocol requires planning and conduct on the basis of information sufficient to allow 
prior assessment of, and informed judgements about their possible impacts (article 3.2(c))

The Canadian problem

As Canadian-based operators, MEI and World Cruise Company have not been subject to 
regulation under the Protocol. Canada is a signatory to the Protocol, but it has not yet 
ratified the Protocol and it does not have any current domestic legislation that requires 
Canadian operators to conduct prior EIA for activities in the Antarctic Treaty area

However, pending its ratification of the Protocol, Canada is still required to enforce its 
provisions under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (to which it is a party). 
The Vienna Convention clearly establishes that once a country has signed a treaty, it 
bears a legal obligation to enforce its provisions until ratification is complete.

ASOC has written to the Canadian government to urge ratification of the Protocol and 
enactment of implementing legislation and urges other Parties to assist Canada in any 
way possible. These laws should establish national regulations for tourist operations 
based in Canada.

Application of EIA instruments

Holland America has prepared an IEE, and submitted it to the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, which oversees implementation of Annex I to the Protocol for private 
U.S. operators. In the IEE, Holland America states that it will only be in the Antarctic 
Treaty area for 72 hours, and does not plan any landings. However, in its transmittal 
letter, it reserves the right to load passengers into motorized tenders (although without 
landings). The IEE will be amended if a positive decision is taken to allow this activity.

In a recent meeting, The Antarctica Project (ASOC Secretariat) was assured by 
representatives of Holland America that the cruise company will follow the highest 
environmental standards. These representatives asserted that, in some cases, Holland 
America's standards will go beyond the Protocol's.  Nevertheless, ASOC is very 
concerned about the precedent Holland America's cruise might set. The MS Rotterdam 
is a very large ship, with twelve decks, a draft of 8.1 meters, a length of 238 meters, and a 
width of 32 meters.

The EIAs prepared for such an activity should, accordingly evaluate all possible 
alternatives to the planned activity, including the possibility of not proceeding. The EIA 
process should be used to identify the future environmental consequences of a proposed 
activity, and to call for precaution where the evaluation reveals uncertainties or lack of
information. It is not the purpose of EIA to merely rubber-stamp activities that will 
proceed anyway because of commercial momentum.

The issue here is not specifically Holland America. Even if they do not land passengers in 
this case, a precedent may be established so that we see other proposals involving vessels 
of this size (or other sorts of large scale tourism), which may involve landings.

EIA AS A GATEKEEPER FOR ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES

The Protocol represents a new departure for the Antarctic Treaty System in part because 
of its generic application across a broad range of human activities in Antarctica.  It 
applies its obligations not only to national Antarctic programs and their associated 
logistics and infrastructure support, but to commercial tourism, private expeditions and 
activities by non-profit organizations.

The principal tool employed to secure environmental protection, and the environmental 
principles of article 3, is prior environmental impact assessment (EIA), established by 
Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol. In fact, EIA has become the sole "gatekeeper" for 
access to Antarctica. Many activities may still proceed without any (or adequate) prior 
EIA, but increasingly Parties require their nationals to meet this Protocol obligation. The 
question here, however, is whether EIA on its own is a sufficient basis for adjudicating 
the acceptability or desirability of activity in Antarctica, even where it is fully and 
properly employed.

This concern arises particularly in the context of a rapidly expanding and diversifying 
Antarctic tourist industry, and indications of other commercial exploitation, although in 
the longer term other sorts of activities (including research) may also warrant similar 
attention. It reflects a concern that given the increasing level of activity we are now 
seeing in Antarctica, we appear to have provided ourselves with no basis for constraining 
activity apart from on grounds of environmental impact.

Antarctic tourism is already growing faster than tourism anywhere else in the world. The 
number of tourists visiting Antarctica has ircreased 133% from 4,800 in 1990/91 (the 
year the Protocol was signed) to about 11,200 in 1998/99. The three expeditions noted 
above would alone take 3280 people to Antarctica – 29% of the 1998/99 figure.

Under the present system, any activity may proceed subject only to satisfactory EIA, and 
all activities are treated as of equal validity. The corollary of this is that "value 
judgements" about the desirability, and hence acceptability, of any activity are entirely 
removed.

In the Antarctic EIA operates in an entirely different context to the way in which it 
generally operates domestically. The problem lies not with EIA per se, but with the 
absence of any of the other components of review, scrutiny and decision-making which 
normally provide the context within which EIA operates – i.e. a cultural-historical-ethical
background in which some form of social assessment (not necessarily explicit or legally
codified) provides mechanisms for ascertaining and giving expression to the
community's interest.

The reasons for the absence of comparable components in Antarctica are clear, and
hardly surprising. Hitherto it has hardly mattered that such components are missing;
activities in Antarctica were essentially at a low level and almost entirely under the direct
control of governments. The national program was controllable through various means -
government policy, budgetary limits, general public norms and expectations and more
recently by public opinion and resulting political pressure.

The appearance of commercial operators on a large scale in Antarctica over the past
decade (small -scale Antarctic tourism goes back to the 1960s) has introduced a new
element to the situation. These operators are under much less strict controls than those
applied to national operators, and they moved into an Antarctic regulatory environment
that was virtually non-existent by comparison with the domestic environment. They have
to meet domestic safety, maritime and other operating standards, and industry-wide
standards have emerged, but the only specifically Antarctic hurdle they face is EIA.
Furthermore the EIA structure has essentially evolved to deal with national program
activities - activities subject to other forms of control.

Market controls

THE LAW OF OFFER AND DEMAND IN ANTARCTICA

The Antarctic tourism industry is largely regulated by the market, which determines
growth trends and the need or otherwise to expand the number of destinations and new
"products". The price signals are assumed to reflect the social value of the resources (the
willingness to pay by consumers). The system is self-enforcing with the actors obeying
the signals out of self-interest. In theory, the accelerated growth of Antarctic tourism
should be stabilized by the market, as there is a limited demand or number of people
willing to pay a relatively high price to travel to a cold and remote place.

But the problem is that the market itself is not stable. The introduction of large ships is
not only a response to the demands of the market but itself creates a further market. A
similar situation took place in the early 1990s following the collapse of the Soviet Union,
when an increase in the availability of icebreakers resulted in a major expansion of the
tourist industry. The inevitable result of the introduction of large-capacity tourist ships in
the Antarctic will be to boost once again the number of tourists going to the region.

Unlike most other operations in Antarctica except commercial fishing, the fundamental
consideration of the tourism industry, as for any commercial enterprise, is to maximize
profit. Profit making may pose conflicts with the fundamental purposes of the Protocol,
namely protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems. As far as the business side of the industry goes, the environment is an
externality (in that it is not considered in, for instance, a cost and benefit analysis),
although it does have an instrumental value -- the tourist appeal of its fauna and flora, and 
wilderness and aesthetic values.

To date, commercial operators have been able to operate under a minimal interpretation 
of EIA obligations. This has been a consequence of the six-year gap between adoption 
and entry-into-force of the Protocol coinciding with the major period of expansion of the 
Antarctic tourist industry. In addition, many parties have lacked the means or willingness 
to ensure the interim application of the Protocol to and by their commercial operators that 
has been required (albeit in a variable manner) of their national programs. Although 
some operators have produced IEEs these have varied in quality. There is considerable 
opposition-in-principle within the tourism industry to the production of CEEs - 
presumably because of the perceived risk from the international scrutiny and 
authorization required at that level.

In short, even to the degree that the EIA process has been implemented by the tourist 
sector, it has not necessarily contributed to enhance environmental protection in 
Antarctica.

Conclusion:

ASOC believes that the Antarctic Treaty System needs to re-examine the propriety and 
effectiveness of regulating Antarctic activities solely through EIA. The Antarctic should 
not be closed to a diverse range of legitimate activities (and these include tourism); but 
neither should it be open to any activity that anyone can dream up, and at any (and 
invariably increasing) level.

As the level of human activity in Antarctica grows a mechanism for making basic value 
judgements about the desirability of proposed activities, types and scale of activities is a 
necessary companion to the evaluation of environmental impacts. There is no a priori 
reason why consideration of values could not be built into EIA processes. However, such 
thinking has not been evident in any Antarctic EIA to date, and no basis for it exists in 
the EIA obligations as presently drafted. The large ship proposals noted here suggest that 
this is not about to change without conscious effort on the part of Treaty Parties.

ASOC suggests that a more strategic, value-based, form of assessment should be applied 
to proposed new activities in Antarctica before they become established. A strategic 
impact assessment should look beyond the short term and consider the integrity of natural 
ecosystems as well as a wider public good than immediate financial benefit to the 
commercial sector. It should include broad environmental and societal concerns in 
decision making alongside the immediate justification for an activity (e.g. scientific, 
commercial, etc.) argued by its proponent.  It should be carried out in advance of the 
commencement of individual activities, consider the scale and purpose of the proposed 
activities and consider the effects of these activities on Antarctic values.  It should also 
be open to public scrutiny.
In addition, ASOC encourages the Antarctic Treaty to support the passenger limit currently established (by IAATO) for all tourism activities in Antarctica, and to maintain this limit as a precautionary measure until the impacts of tourism and the cumulative impacts of all current Antarctic activities are better understood.

There should be confidence in saying that Antarctic futures will be arrived at through positive and proactive choice, not by drift or late reaction. We should also recognize that laissez-faire threatens the special values we have already acknowledged in Antarctica. Failure to act would eventually kill the hope that on this continent we can avoid at least some of the
- environmental damage that has been created elsewhere on the unrealistic pursuit of limitless growth.
- Environmental irrationality / absurdity that has been created elsewhere on the questionable pursuit of limitless growth.
