


Joint Inspection in Eastern Antarctica conducted in 1999 by Belgium and France
 under article VII of the Antarctic Treaty



1	The importance of exercising the rights of inspection provided for in the Antarctic Treaty is regularly emphasized by the ATCM. This exercise ensures that the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty as well as its provi­sions and related recommendations are fully implemented. The inspections contribute therefore to demon­strate the transparency of the Treaty. As added value, inspections provide an outstanding opportunity to exchange informa­tion, experience and ideas about activities taking place in the Antarctic.

	From a practical point of view, the ATCM encourages the organisation of joint inspections conducted by two or more Con­sultative Parties in order to reduce the high costs involved and increasing the effective­ness. The Madrid Protocol, in its article 14 - §1, also mentions joint inspections. Furthermore, inspections organized on an international basis can but reinforce the transparency of the Treaty. On the other hand an imbalance exists between the number of inspec­tions carried out so far in the Eastern and Western parts of Antarctica.

2	In this context, Belgium and France agreed to carry out, during the 1998-1999 austral summer, a joint inspection of scientific and logistic facilities in Eastern Antarctica. As far as we know this is the first inspection since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol.

	The observer appointed by Belgium was Mr Eric Donnay (Manage­ment Unit of the North Sea Mathe­matical Models, Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences) acting on behalf of the Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic ‑ OSTC.

	The observer appointed by France was Dr Jean‑Claude Duplessy (Centre des faibles radioactivités, Laboratoire mixte CNRS CEA) acting on behalf of the Institut Français pour la Recherche et la Technologie Polaires.

	Pursuant to article VII of the Treaty, the names of the two observers together with their coordinates were circulated to all the Consultative Parties by way of the appropriate diplomatic channels on 24 February 1999. 

3	The logistics were arranged during the inspection by the Australian Antarctic Division who kindly hosted the inspection team on board RSV Aurora Australis during “Voyage 6” (departure from Fremantle on 8 March 1999, arrival at Hobart on 21 April 1999). The main purpose of this voyage was to resupply the three Australian Antarctic stations (Mawson, Davis, Casey) and one Australian sub-Antarctic station (Macquarie Island).

    4 The facilities inspected in the Antarctic Treaty area are the following :



NAME
OPERATOR
DATE    OF INSPECTION
Stations :
Mawson 
Australia
21 - 24 March 1999

Davis 
Australia
26 - 28 March 1999

Casey
Australia
5 - 7 April 1999
Abandoned station :
Wilkes
Australia (& USA)
6 April 1999
Ship :
RSV Aurora Aus­tra­lis
Australia
8 March till 21 April 1999

The inspection was carried out by referring to the checklists recommended by Resolution 5(1995).


5	Given the date on which the inspection was completed, the report could not be finalized before this ATCM. As provided for in article IX of    the Treaty and article 14 of the Madrid Protocol, the inspection report will be submitted for comments to the Parties whose facilities are covered by the report, then circulated to the CEP and all the Parties to the Protocol before presentation at ATCM XXIV and thereafter made publicly available.

	Without prejudice of the conclusions of that report, one can already say that the inspection made it possible to state that all the visited facilities are operated in compliance with the objectives and provisions of the Antarc­tic Treaty System. In particular, the Australian operators of these facilities are paying special attention to measures aiming at the protection of the Antarctic environ­ment and its ecosystems. However, the situation of the abandoned station of Wilkes and adjacent old tip site raises the question of the cleanup of contaminated sites and removal of old facilities from the Antarctica Treaty area as provided for by the Madrid Protocol. 
 
The joint Belgian-French inspection was carried out during the resupply operations of stations. This arrangement proved to offer excellent conditions for carrying out such inspection in an efficient and very cost-effective way compared to similar operations relying on the use of dedicated vessels and aircraft. This positive experience should encourage other Consultative Parties to undertake future inspections in that way. 
	
At all visited places, the inspection team was warmly welcomed. The observers were granted complete freedom of access to all facilities in the stations as well as on board the vessel and received detailed answers to all their questions.

    6 Belgium and France wish to thank the Station Leaders and staffs of the stations visited for their excellent collaboration, which largely contributed to the success of the mission. The same thanks are addressed to the crew of the RSV Aurora Australis whose skills and courtesy were very much appreciated. Finally, Belgium and France express their gratitude to the Australian Antarctic Division for all the support provided on the occasion of the inspection.
