Mr Chairman, 
 
The Australian delegation is delighted to come to Peru for the 23rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We look 
forward to our two wee~;s in this historic city of Lima where we will celebrate the ~()th anniversary of the Treaty. 
As one of the original signatories to lhe Treaty, Australia looks back with great pride over 4() years of cooperalion 
in An~arctica. 
 
This anniversary year is an opportunity to reflect on the achievements of the last 4() years, and to look forward to 
the future. The Treaty was a turning point in the way the world considers a whole continent. We set it aside for 
peaceful co-existence and scientific cooperation. Despite turbulent times in other parts of the world, and growing 
pressures on the the world's environment, we have, as we intended, kept Antarctica essentially undisturbed by 
events elsewhere. 
 
When the Treaty Parties celebrated lhe 30th anniversary of the entry into force of the Treat~, we declared 1991 to 
2()()() to be a decade of scientific cooperation. Australia is pleased to note that over that period we have succeeded 
in meeting our objective of forging stronger links between Treaty partners to undertake research that is answering 
critical questions about not just the Antarclic but also the global environment. 
 
Mr Chairman, 
 
The Madrid Protocol is, without doubt, one of the greatest achievements of the Treaty Parties. It is ten years since 
we embar};ed on the mission to put in place a comprehensive environmental protection regime for the Antarctic. It 
was a great challenge for the Treaty Parties to respond to the demands being placed on us for greater environmental 
protection of the Antarctic. The shift in attitude to Antarctica that was marked by the subsequent adoption of the 
Protocol was a landmark in the history of the frozen continent and a landmark in global environmental protection. It 
is now over a year since it entered into force, and we can all be proud of the fact that the Protocol has made a 
positive difference to the environment and how we conduct ourselves in Antarctica. My delegation is, however, 
concerned that we have outstanding business. 
 
Firstly, we are concerned that the Parties are no closer to meeting the obligation contained in Article 16 to elaborate 
rules and procedures relating to liability for environmental damage. My delegation recognises the complexity of the 
issues before us and we do not underestimate the difficulties of finding common ground on a problem that we have 
been grappling with for many years. Nevertheless, we have shown before that it is possible to compromise in the 
interests of achieving agreement on an issue that is important for the environment. We believe that such a time has 
come again. 
 
With that in mind, my delegation is proposing that we focus our debate on the core issues that must be addressed in 
a liability regime. In addition, we believe that it is important to set ourselves a target date for completing the 
negotiations and we would propose the year 2001- the 10th anniversary of the adoption of the Madrid Protocol as 
the target date for adopting the liability regime. Meeting this deadline will require commitment and compromise by 
all Parties. 
Secondly, Annex V, whicll provides for an improved protected area system, is not yet in force. We strongly urge 
Parties that have not yet approved Recommendation XVI-I() to do so as soon as possible so that this important part 
of the Protocol can be given full effect. 
 
Mr Chairman, 
 
We are all aware of the continuing problem of illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing in the Southern ocean. 
While we recognise that this is primarily a matter for the Commission on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources, as Consultative Parties we have a legitimate concern. If the problem remains unchecked it has the 
potential to impact on the Antarctic environment and, ultimately, to discredit the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
The immediate challenge before us is to ensure that the next meeting of the Commission adopts strong measures to 
ensure that trade in toothfish deals only with fish caught in accordance with CCAMLR requirements. Australia is 
keen to work with CCAMLR partners to finalise the hard work of the recent CCAMLR inter-sessional meeling in 
Brussels to develop a trade documentation regime for Pa~agonian toothfish. 
 
Mr Chairman, 
 
Australians have been active in scientific research in the 1()() years since all Australian scientist first wintered in 
Antarctica in 1~99. Since then we have come a long way in science and technology, but the isolation and physical 
challenges of Antarctica have not changed. This was felt acutely by Australian expeditions over the last few 
months. In the depths of the winter pack ice our research vessel caught fire. We were remote from help and our 
expedition staff and ship's crew were forced to rely on initiative and courage to bring the vessel safely home. The 
words of encouragement from our colleagues in other countries provided a great sense of support in a time of crisis. 
 
on a subsequent voyage the vessel became caught in thick pack ice with a damaged propeller. on that occasion our 
Japanese friends came to our rescue without hesitation and towed our ship into safer waters. While our research 
program was seriously disrupted for the season, the experience resoundingly reminded us of the geniune spirit of 
cooperation that is enjoyed under the Antarctic Treaty. My delegation would like to take this opportunity to again 
thank Japan, and other parties that offered assistance, for their generosity. 
 
Mr Cl..airman, my delegation looks forward to working with our colleagues in Lima in further developing the 
Treaty and ensuring continued cooperation in Antarctica. 
