Opening Address by the Head of the Delegation of the Republic of 
Korea 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
On behalf of the Korean delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election as 
Chairman of the XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. My delegation is confident 
that under your able guidance, this meeting will succeed in making substantial progress in 
major tasks before us. May I also take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to 
the Government of Peru for its warm hospitality, as well as for its excellent preparation for 
this meeting. In particular, we welcome the establishment of XXIII ATCM Homepage as a 
virtual secretariat that electronically distributes documents and information. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
We are at the threshold of a new millenium. In the last century, Antarctica was discovered 
and landed by humans. Putting the conflicting sovereignty claims behind, we cherish this 
pristine continent devoted to peace and scientific research as stipulated in the Antarctic 
Treaty. For the last four decades, international cooperation on Antarctica has met and 
survived many challenges. ATCM has successfully kept its role as the coordinator of a 
wide range of values and expectations in regard to Antarctica. The recent introduction of 
comprehensive environmental protection regime for Antarctica is its notable achievement. 
Thus, peace, science and environmental protection have been the three pillars of Antarctic 
governance. My delegation believes that this meeting in Lima is a golden opportunity for 
us to assess thc past and present, and to chart the future of thc Antarctic Treaty System that 
will be timely and appropriate to thc new millenium. In this regard, my delegation should 
acknowledge lhe significance of the initiative of New Zealand for organizing the 
invaluable  ministerial visit to Antarctica in January of this year. 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
At this critical juncture in the history of Antarctica, there are many unfinished tasks before 
us. The first priority for this meeting is to make tangible progress toward the establishment 
of a liability regime. The key policy issues identified in the final work of Legal Experts 
Group wait for new approaches and conceptions for early solution. My delegation fully 
supports the idea that practical understanding of risks in Antarctica should be the basis of 
our discussion, thus a liability annex should reflect the real necessity of liability regime in 
Antarctica. At this stage, my delegation welcomes contributions made by a certain Parties 
to reorient liability discussion to sort out least common denominator by which we may 
move forward to consensus. 
 
Another important task before us is to address the question of the permanent secretariat. 
My delegation urges the Parties not to let this issue continue to be a stumbling bloc to the 
efficient operation of Antarctic Treaty System. Given the urgency and significance of this 
question, my delegation sincerely hopes that substantial progress will be made during this 
meeting in a spirit of cooperation and compromise. 
 
Another critical task on our agenda is to streamline the role and organizational aspects of 
the CEP and to help the CEP get started on its work at the earliest possible time. My 
delegation is of the opinion that this issue should be considered from the perspective of 
efficiency and future consideration. In light of the importance of priority works currently 
before the CEP such as the Environmental Impact Assessment, the State of Antarctic 
Environment Report and Protected Areas, this restructuring of ATCM needs to bc finalized 
at this meeting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
Regarding Article 6 of the Protocol, the Republic of Korea has endeavored to promote 
collaboration with other Parties in scientific research and other related activities ever since 
it became a Consultative Party in 19S9. During thc 1 99S/99 season, Korea conducted a 
field survey jointly with Uruguay to monitor the ice-cliff retreat in the Marian Cove where 
the King Sejong station is located, and a geological survey jointly with Bulgaria on 
Livingston Island. On 18-19 May 1999, Korea hosted the sixth 
International Symposium on Antarctic Science in an effort to promote international 
cooperation and exchange of scientific information. 
 
The Environmental impacts of human activities at Antarctic bases have been a growing 
concern. Mindful of this, an environmental monitoring program at the King Sejong station 
has been implemented. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
The Republic of Korea will remain committed to making continuous efforts in cooperation 
with other Parties to keep Antarctica a continent devoted to peace and science. Let me in 
conclusion assure you of my delegation’s full commitment to ensuring the success of this 
meeting under your chairmanship. 
 
Thank you. 
