Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII Réunion consultative
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

XXIII ATCM/ IP 125
May, 1999
Original: English

Agenda Item 15


Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes
and Climate

Submitted by
SCAR
Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate
                                    ASPeCt

Information Paper submitted by SCAR to XXIII ATCM

Agenda Item 15

The SCAR Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic (GLOCHANT) has developed a science and implementation plan for its programme of multi-disciplinary Antarctic sea ice zone research called Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt). A leaflet describing the key scientific questions of the programme is attached to this paper.

The full text of the ASPeCt Science and Implementation Plan is published on the SCAR Global Change Programme web site at:

http://www.antcrc.utas.edu.au/scar/

In addition, the ASPeCt programme has developed a guide for observing and recording data on sea ice type and distribution in the Southern Ocean. A draft version of this guide entitled

Observing Antarctic Sea Ice: a practical guide for conducting sea ice observations from vessels operating in the Antarctic pack ice

is available on CD-ROM for inspection at this meeting.  Those persons who wish to preview this guide should contact Peter Clarkson (SCAR).
There has been a growth of activities in global-
change research in the Antarctic, both from 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) programmes and from other 
international programmes, such as those of the 
International Geosphere Biosphere Programme
(IGBP) and the World Climate Research 
Programme (WCRP). Deficiencies in our 
understanding and lack of data from the sea ice 
zone have been identified as key issues.
Important problems remaining to be adequately 
covered by Antarctic research programmes 
include:

1. The statistical characterization or 
'climatology' of sea ice physical characteristics

2. Processes such as ice formation; water mass 
modification; the maintenance of polynyas, ice 
edge and coastal fronts; gas exchanges; and air-
ice-ocean interaction

3. Modelling sea-ice processes in coupled 
atmosphere-ice-upper ocean models and linking 
scales from local to regional to global scales in 
models

SCAR-GLOCHANT has established 
the programme of multi-disciplinary 
Antarctic sea ice zone research 
called Antarctic Sea Ice Processes 
and Climate (ASPeCt)













































                        ASPeCt





                Antarctic Sea-
Ice Processes 
and Climate







































The full text of the ASPeCt Science and 
Implementation Plan is published (May, 1999) 
on http://www.antcrc.utas.edu.au/scar/
The major focus of the ASPeCt programme is physical
sea ice processes and ocean-atmosphere interaction in
the sea-ice zone. As a SCAR programme, ASPeCt is
focused towards the role of the unique regional
environment of the Antarctic sea ice zone, but it is
essential that this is closely linked to international
global change research. Hence the inter-disciplinary
components of ASPeCt are designed to contribute to,
and to extend, other international climate, ocean and
biology programmes

The ASPeCt programme will build on existing and
proposed research efforts, and the shipping activities
of National Antarctic operators. It will also include a
component of data-rescue of valuable historical sea
ice zone information.  The ASPeCt programme will
achieve its aims by:
  Standardizing and using a system of
quantified shipboard observations that provide
statistical ice and snow thickness distributions
(1998-2008)
  Providing data rescue and quantification
of historical sea ice zone information (from 1980 to
1997)
  Conducting ship-based process
experiments on 
  ice edges
  interior pack ice zones
  coastal polynyas
  Providing validation and input data on ice
properties and processes for coupled models
  Integrating ASPeCt observations and
experiments with complementary efforts in: data
buoys, upward looking sonar, satellite records and
physical oceanography

ASPeCt KEY SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS

What are the broad-scale time-varying
distributions of the ice and snow-cover
thickness, ice composition and other
physical characteristics in the Antarctic
sea ice zone?

What are the dominant processes of ice
formation, modification, decay and
transport which influence and determine
ice-thickness, composition and
distribution?

What is the role of coastal polynyas in
determining total ice production, heat,
salt and biogeochemical fluxes, and
water mass modification?

What are the processes that control the
ice-water interactions at the ice-edge,
and their seasonal changes?
