 
 
Inventory of Locations of Past 
Scientific Activities of Germany in 
Antarctica 
 
 
 
 
1. Background 
 
The Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) entered into 
force on 14 January 1998. As a consequence, the Contracting Parties are now obliged to 
implement the provisions of the Protocol including the preparation of an inventory of past 
activities in Antarctica. Article 8, paragraph 3 of Annex III of the Protocol reads:  
 
 
Each Party shall, as far as it is practicable, also prepare an inventory of locations 
of past activities (such as traverses, fuel depots, field bases, crashed aircraft) before 
the information is lost, so that such locations can be taken account in planning 
future scientific programmes (such as snow chemistry, pollutants, in lichens or ice 
core drilling). 
 
 
Under Article 9, paragraph 1, reporting of the inventory should be included in the annual 
exchange of information. Article 9 - Circulation and review of waste management plans - states 
in paragraph 1: 
 
 
The waste management plans prepared in accordance with Article fl reports on their 
implementation, and the inventories referred to in Article 8 (3), shall be included in 
the annual exchange of information in accordance with Articles III and VII of the 
Antarctic treaty and related Recommendations under Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty. 
1 
 
2.  Aim 
 
As outlined in Annex III (Art. 8; para. 3) the inventory should build a basis in the planning of 
future scientific programmes (relating, e.g., to snow chemistry, pollutants, lichens or ice core 
drilling). 
 
Contracting Parties are required to prepare such an inventory of past activities and to include 
this information into the annual exchange of information (Art. 9, para 1, Annex III). 
 
This paper summarises the results of a project to develop an inventory documenting locations 
of former German scientific activities in Antarctica. The project was initiated in 1998. 
 
Information has been compiled for an inventory with respect to the following questions: 
 
• Where and when have permanent or temporary stations, field camps, fuel depots or other 
logistic equipment been established? 
 
• Which have been the areas primarily investigated in Antarctica? 
 
• Which kind of transportation has been used to reach the areas? 
 
• How many people have been involved and which kind/ size of machinery/equipment has 
been used at different locations? 
 
• Are there known chemical contaminations (effects) and deposits (e.g. aircraft wreckages, 
waste depots) as a result of the activity and what is there magnitude? 
 
 
3. Methods and Materials 
 
In order to realise the aim of the inventory a stepwise hierarchical procedure was chosen to 
handle the information available. The procedure comprises a first preliminary, a second 
principal and a third follow-up documentation period (figure 1). The upper box in this figure 
indicates the current stage of realisation. 
 
The first step in this preliminary documentation period has been to define the priority of 
features to be integrated in the inventory. Permanent scientific activities and activities resulting 
in chemical (material) or physical stress to the Antarctic environment have been given the 
highest documentation priority. In addition, further focus was given to gather as much as 
possible meta-inforrnation about past German activities in Antarctica. 
2 
 
The inventory has been designed as a combination of text report, database and Geographical 
Information System (GIS). The aim has been to realise an easy-to-use desktop application that 
fulfills the needs of further usage of the inventory (e.g. by the Federal Environmental Agency 
or other institutions). This Antarctic Location Information System (ALIS) comprises GIS 
ArcView® and Microsoft Access®, which are dynamically linked. 
 
3 
 
The documentation methods applied have been restricted to literature and WWW search so far. 
Intensive personal contacts during the whole project contributed to the proper usage of the 
information available. Main contact partners in this process have been the institutions co-
ordinating German Antarctic research activities - the Alfred-Wegener-Institute of Polar and 
Marine Research (AWI) in Bremerhaven and Potsdam, and the Federal Institute for Geoscience 
and Natural Resources (BGR) in Hannover. 
 
In order to guarantee the demands of international information exchange, the documentation 
results were classified according to the Antarctic Digital Database (ADD). In parts it has been 
already necessary to extend the existing ADD classification system. 
 
4. Results/Content 
 
At the present state the geographical database of ALIS contains all recent and historic 
permanent scientific stations, including additional logistic information. In total, the inventory at 
present contains 38 scientific stations and 36 further locations visited by German scientists 
(such as fuel depots, camps, air craft wreckage etc.), which were classified with high 
documentation priority. ALIS also contains all Antarctic cruises of the research vessel, RV 
Polarstern" with detailed information about research topics, logistics etc.. As an example some 
locations of icecore drilling (samples) of the EPICA project are integrated in ALIS (see figure 
3). 
 
The main body of ALIS consists of meta-data stored in the MS Access® database. All German 
research campaigns (191 in total) and related meta-information are documented in ALIS. The 
campaigns are classified into vessel, aircraft and terrestrial campaigns. Furthermore, about 
1.5OO projects listed in the German SCAR Reports also have been integrated into the database. 
 
An important part of relevant information in ALIS are addresses of German principal 
investigators and research institutions that formerly worked in Antarctica. The institutions 
comprise federal research coordinating institutions, national research centres and departments 
and logistic companies. 
 
The campaigns and projects are attributed by about 1OO major geographical regions. The aim 
is to geocode these in the GIS database as has already been done for the. Polarstern cruises. 
 
Another important aim was to receive information about known environmental pollution and 
stress in Antarctica. The available information for German research location surroundings is 
quite sparse. One known problem has been the waste management of former German 
Democratic Republic research stations. By carrying out a more then 1,5 Million $US 
4 
costing ecology programme, the most problematic site, the Georg-Forster-Station and its waste 
disposals, were fully removed and cleaned up. 
 
5 
6 
5. Discussion and further suggestions/Proposal 
 
As expected, the study has shown that the documentation level of locations of former activities 
in Antarctica is quite different (disperse). On the one hand detailled information is available on 
permanent locations as e.g. scientific stations, waste disposal etc., on the other hand detailled 
information on temporary locations of e.g. field camps of biological or geological 
investigations is sparse. To build up a comprehensive inventory it is necessary to explicitly 
define priorities for further data acquisition in the main documentation period. After all, it is 
clear that there is a limited temporal and spatial precision in locating research activities. In 
many cases it will not be possible to give more than even vague specifications of what has been 
done where and when, but in other cases we have enough information. 
 
The applied methodology has proven to be appropriate and successful. Especially the 
hierarchical procedure as outlined in fig. 1 is suggested for international application. 
 
It should be noted that an optimal use of the information of the inventory for future research 
activities can only be realised if the inventory is extended and linked with inventories of other 
Antarctic Treaty Parties. The development of ALIS is providing an operational technical 
framework for international information exchange. In parts it has been already necessary to 
extend the existing ADD classification. Therefore, it is suggested to ask SCAR to set up a 
working group to elaborate an extended ADD classification. 
 
In personal communications with several German scientists it was pointed out that an 
international inventory would be of high scientific interest. An inventory containing 
information of international research activities, which could be used by all Contracting Parties, 
would be of great scientific value. For that goal it would be necessary for the national 
inventories of past activities to be compatible. To realize this, a co-ordination of technical 
properties as well as regards content of such inventories would be appropriate at an early stage. 
 
6. Action requested 
 
ATCP's are invited 
 
1. to take note of the information to the ,,Inventory of Locations of Past Scientific Activities of 
Germany in Antarctica". 
 
2. to discuss the possibilities of international co-ordination of technical properties as well as 
the content of such inventories at an early stage to improve the international information 
exchange. 
 
3. to discuss whether the technical framework of the database and GIS (ALIS) could be used 
as a operational basis for the development of other national inventories. 
 
4. to ask SCAR to deal with the elaboration of an extended ADD and set up a working group 
for this issue. 
