XXIII ATCM/IP59 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 1 
 
 
 
Opening Address of the Head of the 
Italian Delegation 
Submitted by 
Italy 
 
Opening Address of the Head of the Italian Delegation 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
 
On behalf of my Government I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of 
this XXIII meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Parties. 
 
Our delegation also expresses its gratitude to the Peruvian Government for hosting this 
meeting in the historical city of Lima, one of the oldest in the American continent, and for 
the excellent facilities, which have been prepared for our meeting. 
 
Italy gives great importance to the research activities in progress in Antarctica and the 
Italian Antarctic Programme is now in its 15th year. At the same time we give great 
attention to the fact that Antarctica is the only continent where a great experiment in 
international and peaceful administration is in progress. Last year the entry into force of the 
Madrid Protocol has been a new important step in this experiment. Given the great 
importance of Antarctica as a huge laboratory where the answers to many global 
phenomena can be found, it is fundamental that this "experiment" may continue in the 
future. 
 
Many important issues will be discussed in the meeting. Among them the Liability Annex, 
to be developed under Article 16 of the Protocol:. Under the thoughtful leadership of Prof. 
Wolfrum much useful work has been done; we look forward now for further progress. As a 
matter of fact, the text of this Annex should be adopted as soon as possible, and hopefully 
enter into force so as to give timely compliance to art. 16, as an essential element for the 
proper implementation of the Protocol. We believe that it would be useful to establish a 
deadline for the final negotiation of the text. 
 
Another important issue, which has been dragging on for almost a decade, is the institution 
of a permanent Secretariat. 
 
The adoption in 1991 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
and its entry into force in 1998 has brought new arguments in favour of the establishment 
of a centralised Secretariat: Indeed, the Protocol has increased the complexity and scope of 
Antarctic regulation and management. It has led to the establishment of a new permanent 
institution, the Committee on Environmental Protection. It has introduced new 
requirements of communication and circulation of documents, especially with regard to 
environmental impact assessment and, in the future, these requirements may be extended to 
liability for environmental harm. This new situation requires continuity between ATCMs 
and timely circulation of documents, which a permanent Secretariat would be better suited 
to ensure than the present decentralised system. 
 
 
1
 
2
The Italian delegation, for its part, is keen to do what it can to assist member countries to 
reach an agreement on this issue as soon as possible. 
 
Another question that shall deserve special attention during this meeting is illegal fishing in 
the CCAMLAR area. This question is being discussed at length in the CCAMLR meetings; 
however some discussion during the ATCM under agenda items 4 or 5 could be useful. A 
trade certification scheme for the toothfish has been proposed and such solutions might be 
discussed. 
 
The operation of the CEP goes now in its second year. Much useful intersessional work has 
been performed by contact groups via e-mail. However the question of how the CEP should 
deal with draft CEE should be discussed at the meeting. 
 
The start of CEP operations should bring about an analysis of the roles of the Working 
Groups, in particular of WG 2. This analysis could bring about a more rational organisation 
of the work of the ATCM. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
Italy has been a member of the Antarctic Community for more than eighteen years. We 
remain fully committed to the Antarctic Treaty and we hope that this meeting under your 
leadership will mark further steps forward in the life of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
 
 
