OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION 
 
Mr Chairman 
 
On behalf of the South African delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of 
this, the Twenty Third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Through you sir, I wish also to thank the 
Government of Peru for hosting this Meeting in the fortieth anniversary year of the Treaty, The hospitality and 
kindness of the people of Peru and Lima are deeply appreciated. 
 
Mr Chairman 
 
My delegation is heartened by the progress being made by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). We 
are gratified to see that the Committee is now well established and malking good progress in the important task of 
ensuring that the obligations of the Madrid Protocol are effectively met. We believe that the steps taken by the CEP 
to develop a process to handle comprehensive environmental assessments (CEEs) in a consistent and objective 
manner represents a major step forward. 
 
We are a!so encouraged by the progress being made on the question of liability. However, we remain concerned 
that efforts to deal with this complex issue continue to be painfully slow and appcar hampered by the approach that 
only an elaborate and all-embracing system of liability for environmental damage under the Protocol is acceptable. 
While the reasons for such an approach are appreciated, South Africa is ready to join with other Parties seeking to 
develop a system to deal with liability which is both practically and realistically based. We sincerely believe that, 
with the goodwill which has been a key feature of the negotiations to date, a framework agreement on liability is 
achievable within the next year or so. Such an agreement could then serve aS a basis for further development and 
expansion taking into accoulll practical experiences gailled by thc agreement s application in the field. 
 
South Africa (along with many olher Treaty Parties) views the illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing in both 
Ihe Treaty Area and in that lor which CCAMLR is responsible as a challenge to lhe integrity of the Antarctic Treaty 
System as a whole. As a party to both the Treaty and CCAMLR, South Africa calls on all nations in a similar 
position to do all in their power to meet their obligations under the latter instrument, thereby ensuring that illegal, 
unregulated and unreported fishing do not compromisc the future sustainability of the fragilc ecosystems which are 
a feature of the Antarctic. 
 
Finally, Mr Chairman 
 
Wc are .somewhat discouraged by the continued lack of agreement on the seat of a Treaty Secretariat, despite the 
obvious technical and administrative advantagc such an institutioll ca 
ofler. Soulh Africa remains committed to seel;ing a solution to lhis potentially divisive issue and urges all Parties to 
apply themselves to this end. Furthermore, given the urgency of the matter, South Africa intends to exploit every 
opportunity to expedite the SecreLIriat bccoming a reality. We sincerely believe that this will be in the interests of 
the Treaty as we enter a new millineum. 
 
Thank you Mr Chairman 
