 
XXIII ATCM/ IP65 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 18 
CEP II Agenda Item 9 
 
 
Australia's Approach to 
Resolution 4 (1998) 
 
 
Submitted by   
Australia 
 
 
AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH TO RESOLUTION 4 (1998) 
 
 
 
Background 
 
1. 
Resolution 4 (1998) called for: 
 
(a) 
Parties, who have not yet done so, to establish National Antarctic Data 
Centres and link these to the Antarctic Data Directory System managed by 
the Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management of SCAR and 
COMNAP; 
 
(b) 
Parties and their National Antarctic Data Centres to encourage their 
scientists, through a process of education, support and the development of 
policies and procedures, to provide in a timely manner appropriate 
information to their National Antarctic Data Centres for distribution through 
the Antarctic Data Directory System. 
 
(c) 
Parties to give priority consideration as to how the requirement for freedom 
of access to scientific information, in accordance with Article III(1)(c) of the 
Treaty, is achieved within their national data management systems. 
 
Australia's progress 
 
2. 
This paper outlines Australia's progress since 1998. 
 
3. 
The Australian Antarctic Data Centre (AADC) was established in December 1995 
and now comprises 3.4 permanent and three temporary staff.  The Manager of the 
AADC is currently the Chief Officer of the Joint Committee on Antarctic Data 
Management (JCADM). 
 
4. 
The AADC has been fully endorsed by Australia's principal Antarctic science 
policy advisory committee, the Antarctic Science Advisory Committee, to use 
whatever means are appropriate to address XXII ATCM Resolution 4 (1998) - to 
ensure that Antarctic scientific data and metadata are lodged with the AADC.  
Principal Investigators are required to discuss data management issues with the 
AADC before research proposals are accepted.  The updating of project metadata 
records created automatically from approved research proposals is a mandatory 
component of annual reporting on all scientific research projects. 
 
5. 
On completion of a research project, the Principal Investigator is required to make 
all appropriate datasets available to the AADC.  These data are placed on the 
Internet for searching, viewing and downloading in accordance with Article III.1.c 
of the Antarctic Treaty (see http://www-aadc.antdiv.gov.au).  There are currently 
more than 450 metadata records held by the AADC and more than 100 datasets 
currently on-line. 
 
1
