Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

XXIII ATCM/IP 67
May, 1999
Original: English/Spanish

Agenda Item 17

Activities to commemorate the
40th Anniversary of the
Signature of the Antarctic Treaty

Submitted by
Chile
Activities to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the signature of the 
Antarctic Treaty

1. In order to appropriately commemorate the four decades in existence of the Antarctic 
Treaty, signed in Washington D.C. in December 1959, the Chilean Antarctic Institute 
(INACH) has developed a programe of activities intended to convey to all interested 
segments of public opinion the relevance of such instrument and the significance of the 
Antarctic Treaty System, including in particular  the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

2. Among those activities, a seminar has been scheduled for October 1st 1999, as a 
preparatory exercise to a larger symposium on the scope and content of the Chilean 
Scientific Programme, 2001-2005; special editions of the scientific series published by 
INACH with the results and the papers of the RAPAL Seminar on Antarctic dependent 
and associated ecosystems (Concepción, 1998) and on the Arctic-Antarctic connection 
("Poles Apart?", Punta Arenas, 1998); and a number of exhibits, lectures and 
presentations in universities, research centres and civic organizations throughout the 
country.

3. A key element of the above mentioned programme, because of its importance as a 
symbolic hommage to the 1959 Treaty and as a form of compliance with the 1991 
Protocol has been the erection of a monument in the vicinitv of the dock at Fildes Bay, 
King George Island, South Shetlands (62° 12' S; 58° 58' W) adjacent to the Escudero 
and Frei Stations. The monument was designed and built by an American citizen, Joseph W. 
Pearson, as a personal expression of  thanks for the support he received from the 
Antarctic comunity at the time of a failed maritime expedition to Antarctica and of his 
admiration for the spirit of international cooperation nurtured by the Antarctic Treaty 
System.

4. In full,compliance with the Madrid Protocol and the provisions of its Annex I, an Initial 
Environmental Evaluation whose executive summary is appended to this information 
paper was carried out by the Chilean Antarctic Institute. The evaluation concludes that 
the installation of the structure and its future use imply a minimal cummulative impact 
but stresses that a monitoring programme should be implemented to identify potencial 
indirect and synergy effects derived from the presence of the monument.

5. The monument was initially intended to be inaugurated by the Heads of State of Chile and 
Argentina, Presidents Frei and Menem, who had to cancel their trip to Antarctic due to 
uncertainties in metereological conditions and other reasons. The Government of Chile 
would wish that the monument, once it has been officially inaugurated, be recognized as a 
historic site, under the terms of the existing recommendations and of Annex V to the 
Madrid Protocol.

1
Installation Of A Monument To Commemorate The 40" Anniversary Of The Signature Of 
The Antarctic Treaty, King George Isl. Stations Julio Escudero and Eduardo Frei 
Montalva.

Initial Environmental Evaluation - Executive Summary.

This document was prepared to comply with the regulations established in Annex 1 of the 
Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

The Chilean Government accepted the donation of the monument designed and built by he 
American citizen Mr Joseph W. Pearson a College Professor at Benicia, California.

The site selected for the installation of the monument, is in the vicinity of the dock at Fildes Bay, 
King George Island, South Shetland (62°12'S; 58° 58'W) and is adjacent to the buildings of 
E.Frei Station of the Chilean Air force and J.Escudero Station of the Chilean Antarctic Institute.

A pyramid of twelve sides made of copper and brass is the support for an Earth Globe of 27 
inches diameter made of 48 hand laminated copper plates. The ensemble is 3.3 m high and 3.4 m 
in diameter. The pyramid has inscriptions with the names of the 12 original signatory countries 
and the dedication: "In honor of the Antarctic Treaty and those who support it who have so 
successfully cooperated in the study and preservation of Antarctica as a world treasure" 1959 - 
1999, in the four languages of the A.T.

The site selected for installation of the structure has been heavily intervened by human activities 
during the last 34 years. Fauna and flora are very scarce, and therefore the effects of this 
construction will be mainly on the use of the territory and quality of life.

Impacts identification was made using a matrix of activities and environmental parameters, 
which may be potentially modified by the construction and future use, and activities in the area.

Our hypothesis derived of this exercise is that the installation of the structure and future use 
implies a minimal cumulative impact. Visitors flux ta this area is periodical during spring and 
summer and from then on the effect will be seasonal and chronic.

Ta avoid undesirable environmental deterioration it is essentiel that a monitoring programme is 
implemented ta identify potential indirect and synergy effects derived from the presence of the 
monument.

2
