IMPLEMENTATION BY THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA THE PROTOCOL ON 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
On May 21, 1998 the Republic of Bulgaria has acceded to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. By its Decision N 11 of March 16, 
1998 the Council of Ministers assigned to the competent ministries and institutions 
the task to prepare for adoption legislative and administrative measures necessary 
to ensure the implementation of the Environmental Protocol. 
 
The Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources has already prepared two 
draft documents: 
- The Amendments to the Law on the Protection of the Environment (Annex 1); 
- The Regulations on the Protection of the Environment in the Antarctic (Annex 2). 
Both documents are now under the consideration by the relevant ministries and 
bodies. Upon the completion of this procedure the drafts should be submitted to 
the Council of Ministers for a final adoption which is expected to be done by 
September this year. 
 
Both drafts are attached to this paper for information of delegations participating in 
XXIII ATCM. 
Annex 1 
THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA 
THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
DRAFT AMMENDMENTS TO 
THE LAW ON THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
Promulgated in the Official Gazette, issue 86 of 18 October 1991, amended, issue 
9O of 1991, revised, issue 9O of 1992, amended, issue 1OO of 1992, issue 31 
and 63 of 1995, issue 13 of 1997, amended and revised, issue 12 of 1999. 
 
1. A new article 4a is created: 
~Article 4a /1/ The Council of Ministers shall adopt the Regulations on the 
Protection of the Environment in the Antarctic. 
/V Conducting an activity in the Antarctic which is a violation of the provisions of 
the Regulations on the Protection of the Environment in the Antarctic represents a 
violation according to Article 32, and in case of proceedings for imposing 
administrative sanctions Article 35 is applied.' 
 
This Law is adopted by the XXXVI National Assembly on ....... 1999 and is affixed 
with the official seal. 
 
President: 
Annex 2 
 
THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
 
DRAFT DECREE No......... 
of................... 
for the adoption of Regulations on the Protection of the 
Environment in the Antarctic 
 
THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
ENACTED 
 
The following single article. The Regulations on the Protection of the Environment 
in the Antarctic are hereby adopted. 
 
The Prime.Minister: 
The Minister of State Administration: 
 
DRAFT REGULATIONS 
ON THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN THE ANTARCTIC. 
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Article 1. These Regulations determine the conditions for planning and conducting 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area in the cases when these activities are 
organised by or with the participation of Bulgarian physical or juridical persons. 
 
Article 2. The conditions for any ac~ivities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be 
implemented through: 
1. the assessment of the effects on the environment; 
2. the issuing a permit for carrying out an activity; 
3. the protection of native flora and fauna and prohibition for introducing 
non~native species, parasites and diseases. 
4. the prohibition for introducing dangerous or poisonous substances; 
5. the obligation to eliminate the waste; 
6. the obligation to inform the public; 
7. the determination of the safety rules. 
 
ASSESSMENT OF THE EFFECTS ON THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
Article 3. According to their character the activities in the Antarctic are subjected to 
the following procedures for assessment of the effects on the environment:                                  
1. preliminary assessment of the effects on the environment; 
2. initial assessment of the effects on the environment; 
3. overall assessment of the effects on the environment; 
 
Article 4. Preliminary assessment of the effects on the environmentis required in 
the cases when activities with less or insignificant influence on the environment 
are planned, such as: 
1. small scientific projects with light equipment using tents; 
2. flying or landing operations for which unprepared iCV or snowy surfaces are 
used for landings; 
3. small tourist and scientific expeditions with light equipment using tents; 
4. sailing with small vessels, e.g. yachts. 
 
Article 5. Initial assessment of the effects on the environment is required in the 
cases when activities with insignificant or transitory influence on the environment 
are planned, such as: 
1. building new equipment or building equipment at the place of already existing 
equipment or enlargement and/or extension of already existing equipment: 
2. tourist expeditions when tourists move by air to more than two places; 
 
Article 6. Overall assessment of the effects on the environment in the cases when 
activities with more than insignificant or transitory influence on the environment are 
planned, such as: 
1. building and exploitation of new statTons; 
2. construction of stone /concrete/ landings for aircraft or construction of stone 
/concrete, asphalV roads; 
3. bigger drilling projects using drilling solutions; 
 
Article 7. The organiser of the activity submits to the Minister of the Environment 
and Waters a request for a preliminary, initial or overall assessment of the effects 
on the environment according to the character of the activity which requires an 
assessment. 
 
Article 8. The request for a preliminary assessment of the effects on the 
environment should include: 
1. description of the planned activity which includes: 
a. purpose of the planned activity; b. place of the planned activity; c. duration of the 
planned activity; d. intensity of the planned activity; 
2. Iegalised declaration of the organiser of the planned activity stating that he 
considers the planned activity as having very small or non~durable impact on the 
environment; 
3. Iegalised declaration stating whether another Party to the Antarctic Treaty has 
made a request or is in a process of making a request for an assessment of the 
effect on the environment for the activities mentioned in Annex I to the Protocol on 
Environment al Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; 
4. the full name and address for a contact in the Republic of Bulgaria of the person 
organising the activity; 
5. the number of people who are going to carry out and/or participate in the 
activity; 
6. date and place of leaving for the Antarctic; 
 
Article 9. The request for an initial assessment of the effects on the environment 
shall contain data and documents specified in Article 8, paragraphs 1 and 3-6, as 
well as the following information: 
1. description of the potential effects of the planned activity, including direct, 
indirect and accumulating impact on the environment; 
2. alternatives of the planned activity, including changes in the route, the places 
planned to be visited, the number of passengers and the used vessels; 
 
Article 1O. /1/The request for preliminary and initial assessment of the effects on 
the environment shall be submitted to the Minister of the Environment and Water 
Resources in duplicates. 
/V Fourteen days after receiving the request, the Minister of the Environment and 
Water Resources can require from the organiser of the activity more detailed data 
for the planned activity. 
/3/ One month after receiving the request or fourteen days after receiving the 
additional data according to the preceding paragraph, the Minister of the 
Environment and Water Resources passes a decision giving negative or positive 
assessment to the impact of the planned activity on the environment. 
/4/ The decision according to paragraph 3 is communicated to the organiser of the 
activity and it may be appealed at the Supreme Administrative Court within 
fourteen days after the announcement. 
Article 11. /1/ The request for overall assessment of the effects on the environment 
shall be submitted to the Minister of the Environment and Water Resources in as 
many copies as the Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty are, plus one more copy for the Committee for Environmental 
Protection, not later than 15O days before 1 April of the next year. 
/V The request for overall assessment of the effects on the environment should 
contain all data and circumstances specified in Article 3 /V of Annex I to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
/3/ The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources shall send a copy of the 
request to each one of the Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty not later than 12O days before 1 April of the next year. 
/4/The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources shall publish an 
announcement, at least, in one national daily newspaper about the submission of 
the request for an overall assessment of the effect on the environment according 
to these Regulations by indicating when and where the interested persons may 
examine the request, the period of time within which the interested persons may 
make objections and remarks and the address to which written remarks and 
objections can be sent. 
/5/ The announcement envisaged in the preceding paragraph, shall pointed out 
that everyone may examine the request and the enclosed data and documents. 
The interested persons shall have at their disposal at least 3O days to look 
through the documentation and to submit objections and remarks as of the date of 
the announcement. 
/6/ The remarks and objections made by the interested persons, as well as by the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and by the Committee for Environmental 
Protection held during the current year, are enclosed in the request. The organiser 
of the activity is informed about the remarks and objections that has been received, 
and he shall have 6 days to supplement the request for overall assessment of the 
effects on the environment by responding to those remarks and objections. 
n/The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may give the organiser of 
the activity an opportunity to supplement his request, in case the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting delay the elaboration of its position and decide that the delay 
is not justified. 
/8/ The organiser of the activity shall submit again the supplemented request for 
overall assessment of the effects on the environment to the Minister of the 
Environment and Water Resources. 
/9/ The Minister of the E~vironment and Water Resourcesshall state an opinion 
about the request in compliance with the conditions in Article 10 of these 
Regulations. 
 
ISSUING A PERMIT FOR CONDUCTING AN ACTIVITY 
 
Article 12 /1/ Regardless the existing positive assessment of the request for 
preliminary, initial or overall assessment of the effect on the environment, the 
organiser shall apply for issuing a permit for conducting an activity by indicating: 
1. the name, address, respectively his department's main office and address; 
2. full name, ID number and address of the physical person, indicated by the 
organiser of the activity when he is a juridical person, who will bear the 
administrative and criminal responsibility for not observing the conditions of 
activity; 
3. the full names and nationalities of the participants in the activity; 
4. initial date and duration of the activity; 
5. description of the activity; 
6. description of the supposed waste caused by the activity; 
7. description of the measures which the organiser intends to take in order to 
reduce, prevent or control the impact on the environment; 
8. means of a communicative link with the Ministry of the Environment and Water 
Resources in cases of unforeseen circumstances; 
/VThe request shall be accompanied by: 
1. a legalised declaration by the organiser of the activity when he is a physical 
person or by a physical person indicated by the organiser of the activity stating that 
he is acquainted with the restrictions of the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection and the present Regulations; 
2. a legalised declaration by the organiser of the activity confirming that the rest of 
the participants in the activity are acquainted with the restrictions of the Antarctic 
Treaty, the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the present Regulations; 
3. decision for a positive assessment of the effect on the environment; 
4. fee for issuing the permit. 
 
Article 13 /1/A foreign person, organiser of the activity shall make a request in 
accordance with Article 12, when a Bulgarian ship, as defined in Article 28 of the 
Merchant Maritime Navigation Code, takes part in planned activity. 
/V In the cases of the preceding paragraph, to the documents shall be attached a 
certificate issued by the Navigation State Inspection to the Ministry of Transport for 
the correspondence of the ship with the provisions of Annex IV to the Protocol on 
the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
Article 14./1/The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources, within 
fourteen days after receiving the request for issuing a permit for conducting an 
activity, states an opinion by issuing the requested permit or by refusing to issue it. 
/V The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may set up terms for 
conducting the activity in the requested permit if such terms are necessary for the 
protection of the environment. 
/3/ The decision of the Minister of the Environment and Water Resources is 
subject to appeal at the Supreme Administrative Court within fourteen days after 
its issuing, respectively within fourteen days after the expiry of the time limit for 
pronouncement in the cases of silent refusal. 
 
Article 15. The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may terminate 
the issued permit if the circumstances around its issuing have considerably 
changed and this change gives reasons to suppose that the planned activity will 
damage the environment. 
 
Article 16 /1/ In case that unforeseen circumstances may lead to violation of the 
terms under which the permit has been issued, the organiser of the activity is 
obliged to inform immediately the Ministry of the Environment and Water 
Resources by means envisaged in Article 12, paragraph 8 of these Regulations. 
/V The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may impose some 
additional terms for conducting the activity which are communicated to the 
organiser and which represent an integral part of the permission. 
/3/ The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may not, on the basis of 
the preceding paragraph, impose conditions which are not connected with 
unforeseen circumstances and with the violation of the terms of the permissTon. 
 
PROTECTION OF NATIVE FLORA AND FAUNA AND PROHIBITION FOR 
INTRODUCING NON~NATIVE SPECIES, PARASITES AND DISEASES 
 
Article 17. Within the limits of the permission issued in accordance with Article 12 
and the following ones, the Minister of the Environment and Water Resources may 
permit taking species from the Antarctic Treaty area and introducing non-native 
species in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
Article 18. Permits according to Article 17 are issued on the basis of Articles 3 and 
4 of Annex ll to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
PROHIBITED PRODUCTS 
 
Article 19. In the Antarctic Treaty area it is prohibited to introduce: 
1. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs); 
2. Polystyrene packages; 
3. Pesticides other than those which are necessary for scientific, medical or 
hygiene purposes. 
 
OBLIGATIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
 
Article 2O. /1/ The organiser of the activity, respectively the person indicated by 
the organiser of the activity in accordance with Article 12, paragraph 1, 
subparagraph 2 of these Regulations is obliged to ensure the removal of the 
following kinds of waste from the Antarctic Treaty area: 
1. already used radio active materials; 
2. already used electrical batteries; 
3. already used liquid and solid fuel and lubricating oils; 
4. waste containing heavy metals and highly toxic or harmful resisting components 
in dangerous concentrations and quantities; 
5. already used fuel cylinders; 
6. solid, incombustible waste, other than those indicated in subparagraphs 1~5; 
7. PVC, polyurethane and polystyrene foam, rubber, natural materials like wood, 
processed by means of chemical substances or some other materials which can 
cause discharge of harmful substances when burnt out; 
8. any kind of plastic waste, not mentioned above, except for the polythene bags if 
containers for burning out the waste are used for their disposal; 
9. solid substances formed by the burning of waste according to Article 21; 
1O. remains from animal corpses brought to the Antarctic; 
11. Iaboratory culture of micro~organisms and plant pathogens; 
12. any liquid waste not mentioned in the preceding subparagraphs, except for 
those indicated in Article 22. 
/V The waste mentioned in subparagraphs 1O and 11 of the preceding paragraph 
shall be burnt or deferred in a way which does not harm the environment. 
Article 21 /1/ Other waste, apart from those indicated in Article 2O should be burnt 
in incinerators if they are suitable forthat or they should be carried outside the 
Antarctic Treaty area. 
/V Burning out the waste should cause the least possible damage to the 
environment. 
 
Article 22. Household liquid waste caused by the research station in the Antarctic 
Treaty can be deferred in a pit dug in a glacier if there is not any other way for their 
removal. The pit cannot be situated in proximity to the places of ice melting which 
are in a direct contact with land not covered with Tce or in places characterised 
with a high level of ablution /washing away/. 
 
Article 23. Waste which has not been disposed in accordance with the provisions 
of Articles 2O and 21 of these Regulations should be transferred to a base station 
or on the board of a vessel with a view to being disposed according to the 
prescribed order. 
 
Article 24. All waste which is disposed or transferred to the Antarctic Treaty area 
should be deferred in such a way so that they are not dispersed in the 
environment. 
 
OBLIGATION TO INFORM THE PUBLIC 
 
Article 25. Within sixty days after concluding the stay in the Antarctic, the organiser 
of the activity is obliged to submit to the Ministry of the Environment and Water 
Resources a report containing: 
1. description of the regions where the activity is conducted, of the regions which 
have been visited by indicating the place of stay; 
2. description of the waste generated by the activity and the way of storing and 
disposing it; 
3. description of the negative effects of the activity on the environment; 
4. description of the measures taken to fulfil the conditions laid down in the permit 
for conducting an activity; 
 
Article 26. The report is submitted in duplicate ~ one in English and 
the second in Bulgarian language. 
 
Article 27. The Report is at the disposition of all the interested 
persons who would like to consult it or take some notes. 
 
DETERMINATION OF SAFETY RULES 
Article 28. The Minister of the Environment and Water Resources determines the 
safety rules in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
1. For the purposes of these Regulations: 1. ~organiser of an activity~ means a 
Bulgarian physical or juridical person who intends to organise an activity in the 
Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS 
 
2. These Regulations are issued on the basis of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Official Gazette, N 1998) and of Article 4a of the 
Law for the Protection of the Environment. 
