 
 
Exchange of information: Environmental Aspects of Energy Use in the 
Swedish Antarctic Program 
 
 
Submitted by Sweden 
 
 
In order to minimise environmental impacts caused by human activities within 
SWEDARP (Swedish Antarctic Research Program) Sweden is putting a lot of effort 
into using environmentally friendly techniques. In this Information Paper we will 
highlight some main points. 
 
 
Background information – Wasa station (Dronning Maud Land) 
 
The station Wasa is located on the nunatak Basen, 120 km inland in DML. Wasa is 
possible to use as a year round station, even though the station so far has never been 
occupied during the winter season. There are beds for twelve people in four sleeping 
rooms. Wasa has a washing machine, two showers, sauna, dry toilet, and a modern 
kitchen including a large living room. 
 
 
Electricity and heating 
 
Wasa is equipped with 32 solar panels, which will be extended to 48 next season 
(each 55W, 12V). Under normal conditions these panels generates sufficient amount 
of electricity. The electricity produced by the solar panels is stored in a battery unit 
(1200 Ah, 24V), and the electricity is then transferred to 12/24V and 220V, 50 Hz, 
4400W maximum. 
 
There are two diesel and two LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) generators at Wasa. The 
diesel generators belong to “the past” and are nowadays mainly used as a backup sys-
tem. The LPG generators are used only when needed, e.g. running freezing containers 
and help loading the battery unit. 
 
One diesel generator consumes c. 120 litres per day (without load), while one LPG 
generator consume 24 kg per day. It is easy to appreciate what this means in terms of 
transporting fuel for the generators. 
 
Wasa is heated by LPG heaters (100% efficiency), but there is often no need for heat-
ing. Wasa is well insulated and painted in dark red with black roof, and the absorption 
of solar heat is usually more than enough. There are electrical radiators as well, but 
only used as a backup. 
 
Wasa is furthermore equipped with a heat exchanger system (85% efficiency), where 
heat from the kitchen, sauna, etc. is re-circulated. 
 
 
Vehicles 
 
Sweden has always used track vehicles for transports in DML. The season 1996/97 a 
new type of track vehicle was introduced – Hägglund TL4. The TL4 was developed in 
a co-operation between Swedish Polar Research Secretariat (SPRS), Hägglunds and 
Berco. The TL4 consumes c. 1.7 l/km and is capable to tow c. 20 t. This is about half 
the fuel consumption and double the strength compared to the track vehicle used ear-
lier (Hägglund BV206). This means that the amount of fuel needed for transports has 
decreased significantly. 
 
The season 1997/98 two modified Toyota Landcruiser were operated in SWEDARP 
97/98. These were used for scientific as well as logistic tasks. The Landcruiser con-
sumes 0.47 l/km and since they were primarily utilised for tasks where track vehicles 
normally are used, the amount of fuel consumed became much lower. 
