XXIII ATCM/ IP 135
June 1999
English
Original: Spanish

Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting
Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative
Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva
Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

Agenda Item 1

Message from
the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Poland
to the Delegates at the Twenty-third
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Submitted by
Poland
MESSAGE FROM
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND
TO THE DELEGATES AT THE TWENTY-THIRD ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates and Special Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen:

Allow me to begin by extending a very warm greeting to the participants at this
Twenty-third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This meeting holds special
significance for us in that it marks the fortieth anniversary of a historic event: the signing
of the Antarctic Treaty in Washington - an event which represented a crucial step
towards strengthening and preserving world peace.

Without a doubt, the Antarctic Treaty is a shining example of what can be
achieved when we leave international conflict aside and focus on international
cooperation for the benefit of all humankind. Ever since the signing of the Treaty,
Antarctica has been an area of peace and harmonious cooperation among countries that
share a set of common objectives.

Poland attaches great value to participating in this important forum here in Lima
and welcomes the progress made in the area of environmental protection in Antarctica. In
this connection, I would like to mention our deep satisfaction with the expansion of the
Treaty through the protocol on protection of the Antarctic environment. Once the
necessary regulations are implemented and the text is finalized for the annex on liability
for damage caused to the Antarctic environment, we will have an important body of
international instruments to ensure appropriate protection of this region.

Poland intends to support actively all efforts geared towards defining the
principles of liability so that negotiations on this matter can move forward successfully.

Poland's scientific activity in Antarctica bears witness to its commitment in this
area. Indeed, the role of Polish scientists, to whom we owe so much, is well known and
has been acknowledged by the international community.

We are especially pleased to share with you the progress made by Poland's
activities in this region, most recently the investments made in the Polish research
station, as well as the increase in the importance and usefulness of this work for Poland
and others.

Distinguished delegates:

Antarctica is and will continue to be cause for special interest on our part. The
international community should make every effort to protect and preserve this area for
the benefit of all humankind.
2

There is no doubt in my mind but that the present Consultative Meeting will 
constitute an important contribution towards strengthening the Antarctic System.

I would like to convey my sincere thanks and esteem to the Government of Peru 
and the organizers of ATCM XXIII for making it possible to hold this event in Lima and 
for the excellent organization of the meeting. My country of Poland looks forward to 
being able to host the distinguished representatives of Antarctica at an upcoming 
meeting.

I wish you every success in your work here.

Bronislaw GEREMEK
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland

Warsaw, 1 June 1999
