Annual report on the implementation of the Protocol on 
 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treatv. in its Article 17  requires each Party to 
report annually on the steps taken to implement the Protocol which include the adoption of domestic laws, 
regulations and administrative actions in compliance with Article 13 of the Protocol. 
 
Brazil ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1975 and became a Consultative Party in 1983 after setting up the 
Brazilian Antarctic Programme (PROANTAR) in 1982. Brazil participated actively in the discussions for 
the adoption ofthe Protocol in Madrid, in October 1991, and ratified it in 1995. 
 
PROANTAR is progressively implementing regulations and procedures to meet the Madrid Protocol 
requirements and has established, in 1996, an Environment Evaluation Group (GAA n) to deal exclusively 
with environmental assessment of all Brazilian projects involving activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
This Group's tasks are to: 
 
a. assess the adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems 
caused by any scientific, tourist and logistic activities or any other activity, governmental or 
non-governmental, including changes caused by activities in progress. 
 
b. indicate ways to prevent, minimize or avoid adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment; 
 
c. suggest modification, suspension or cancellation of any activity which may or has the potential to 
impact adversely on the Antarctic environment; 
 
d. establish a systematic environment monitoring program for the protection of the Antarctic environment; 
and 
 
e. identify needs to implement studies to improve the knowledge ofthe Antarctic environment. 
 
Measures taken by PROANTAR in accordance to the Madrid Protoco/ 
 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area of Admiralty Bay 
 
Admiralty Bay is the first ASMA designated under the Madrid Protocol. This ASMA was proposed by 
Brazil and Poland and is now coordinated by Brazil. The proposed ASMA was agreed to by Equador, 
Peru and USA  which also have stations or refuges in the area. This ASMA was designed taking into 
account Article III of the Madrid Protocol and the procedures set by its Annex  V. The Admiralty Bay 
ASMA was approved in the X,Y ATC.~/I (Uthecht, Netherlands, 1996). In 
XXII ATCM a progress report on the implementation of this ASMA was presented (document IP37). 
 
Gathering information on proposed activities 
 
The PROANTAR has introduced logistic and scientific questionnaire forms, which allow all activities to 
be assessed on their potential impacts that may be caused by Brazilian activities in the Antarctic area. 
Both forms provide detailed information on each planned activity. The information is then used for 
planning and assessment on the environment impact of the proposed activity. These forms also provide 
the opportunity for the proponent to be familiar with the environmental requirements to conduct any 
activity in Antarctica. The forms require: 
 
a. a description of the proposed activity including objectives, location, duration and intensity; and 
 
b. a description of feasible alternatives and whether the activity might reasonably be expected to have a 
significant impact and an estimation of any accumulative impact; 
 
Oil spill contingency plan according to the Article 15 
 
Both the Brazilian Station Comandante Ferraz (EACF) and the oceanographic and Supply Ship Ary 
Rongel have oil spill contingency plans in place since 199S and 1998, respectively. 
 
Waste management program 
 
PROANTAR has adopted the policy to return all waste generated by its station and ship in the Antarctic 
Treaty area. This policy is in place since the first Brazilian expedition, in 1982, and reflects 
PROANTAR's concerns with waste management which is now subject of AnneX III of the Madrid 
Protocol. 
 
The station and the ship have selective waste collection. Incineration is conducted under low pressure and 
in temperatures between 4SOo and 6~Oo C. This process, known as pyrolysis, inhibits generation of 
dioxins, halogens and furans and prevents residues of heavy metals from oxidation. The ashes and all 
solid waste such as plastic, glasses, papers are packed and returned to Brazil. 
 
The Station is fitted with an efficient sewage system for up to 6O people. The system has four steel septic 
tanks, two anaerobic filters, two decanting tanks and two intercepting tanks. The system treats the sewage 
water and domestic liquid wastes separately. A serial of septic tanks decants the sewage before reaching 
the anaerobic filters. All the solid wastes from the septic tanks are then retrieved and incinerated. The 
domestic liquid wastes go to the decanting tanks where all solids and suspended matters are decanted 
before reaching the anaerobic filters. The water resulting 
from this process is discharged inshore below the low tide line. Through chemical analysis, the quality of 
the discharged waters was considered within satisfactory levels. 
 
oil supply and storage 
 
The oil used in the Brazilian Station is stored in 17 double skinned wall steel tanks. Maintenance is 
conducted periodically to ensure their safety conditions as established in the oil spill contingency plan. 
 
oil is transferred from Ship to land by oil barges which are also fitted with double skinned wall and a safe 
valve system to prevent oil spill. 
 
Field training 
 
During the 2O day field training prior to travel to Antarctica, all participants attend several lectures on 
protection on the Antarctic environmental when they become familiar with the requirements of the Madrid 
Protocol and its annexes. 
 
Reduction of gas emission on the generators and alternative energy 
 
The main power to the Ferraz Station is provided by five generator systems which can generate up to 48O 
kW of power. Each system is fitted with catalysed filters that reduce drastically gas emission. Carbon 
monoxide is reduced by 95%, ashes by 90%, formaldehydes by 8S%, nitrogen oxides by IO% and noise 
by SO%. 
 
Solar and wind energy have been used, in a pilot project, to provide power to sensitive instruments in the 
geomagnetism lab. 
