 
 
 
ANTARCTIC HISTORIC RESOURCES 
 
New Zealand Information Paper 
 
Purpose 
 
This paper informs Parties to the Antarctic Treaty of New Zealand initiatives to 
preserve and protect Antarctic historic sites in the Ross Sea region, and invites further 
contact from those Parties with an interest in the restoration, preservation and protection 
of Antarctica’s human heritage. 
 
Background 
 
In 1961, at the first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Parties 
recommended that action be taken to protect any tombs, buildings or objects of historic 
interest and that Treaty nations should consult together on their restoration and 
preservation.  Subsequent meetings have reinforced the importance of protecting the 
human heritage of Antarctica.  The Environmental Protocol (Annex V) recognises the 
importance of sites of recognised historic value. 
 
In 1997, at ATCM XXI in Christchurch, Scott's 1910-1913 hut at Cape Evans was 
designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) no. 25.  This was the first historic site to 
receive formal protection within the new provisions of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection.  Subsequently at ATCM XXII in Tromsø the three remaining hut sites in the 
Ross Sea region -- Shackleton’s 1907-09 hut at Cape Royds, Scott’s 1901-04 hut at Hut 
Point and Borchgrevink’s 1898-1900 hut at Cape Adare -- were designated as SPAs 
nos. 27, 28 and 29 respectively.  These huts are premier artefacts from the “heroic age” 
with international significance. 
 
The New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT) 
 
In 1987 a charitable trust, the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust, was formed to 
provide a coordinated approach to addressing Antarctic heritage issues in the Ross Sea 
region.  The AHT has effectively undertaken responsibility for the restoration, 
preservation and protection of the historic sites of the Ross Sea region on behalf of the 
international community. 
 
In consultation with a specialist Conservation Advisory Group, the AHT has produced a 
Heritage Management Plan to provide the principles, policy and operational basis for its 
work programme.  Each summer the Trust arranges for specialist field parties to secure 
and maintain the structural integrity of the historic sites in the Ross Sea area.  The AHT 
oversees a programme of conservation of over 8,000 artefacts within the huts.  Many of 
these relics are being returned to New Zealand for conservation treatments and to halt 
serious deterioration. 
 
1 
The AHT has developed a Code of Conduct, which is issued to all prospective visitors 
to the huts, along with a briefing where possible, in an attempt to minimise visitor 
impacts.  The New Zealand Antarctic Institute, Antarctica New Zealand, provides 
logistic and administrative support to the AHT, coordinating access to the huts and 
issuing permits where appropriate. 
 
The AHT is funded by private international donors and by a grant from the 
New Zealand Government.  Tour operators also contribute financially and the AHT has 
developed a cooperative relationship with companies which operate in the area to 
ensure that all visitors are supplied with suitable interpretive information, are properly 
briefed on the Code of Conduct, and are adequately supervised. 
 
International Collaboration 
 
Trustees of the AHT include government representatives from New Zealand, the United 
Kingdom and the United States, representatives from Antarctic agencies, heritage 
protection professionals, and independent specialists.  A closely associated Trust has 
been formed in the United Kingdom (UKAHT). 
 
In association with the UKAHT, the AHT has created an umbrella organisation, 
“Heritage Antarctica”, to facilitate the exchange of information, ideas and expertise on 
the preservation and protection of Antarctica’s human heritage.  “Heritage Antarctica” 
is an informal organisation, which does not seek to direct or control the activities of 
participating agencies. 
 
In October 1998 the Antarctic Heritage Trust hosted interested agencies at an 
international workshop to consider a number of issues associated with improving the 
effectiveness of future heritage protection activities in Antarctica. 
 
Future Issues 
 
The issues associated with the restoration, preservation and protection of the historic 
sites are complex and often unique to Antarctica. 
 
Stewardship and the responsibility for management and resources.  New Zealand 
and the AHT have accepted the mandate to continue the present work programme.  
Trustees currently include government representatives from New Zealand, the United 
Kingdom and the United States but support and resources from other Treaty nations 
would be welcome. 
 
Visitor policies.  There is a delicate balance between conflicting objectives of access 
and preservation.  Management plans now place a limit on visitor numbers. This limit 
exceeds current visitor levels but a rationing procedure may become necessary as visitor 
numbers increase. 
 
 
2 
3 
Management policies for structures and artefacts.  Restoration, modification, 
replication, and reserve collection policies are currently defined by AHT Trustees in 
accordance with internationally accepted principles of historic heritage protection.  
Further input to this would be welcome. 
 
Networks and information-sharing processes.  To avoid unnecessary duplication of 
research and to maximise information exchange between interested agencies, the AHT 
promotes the concept of “Heritage Antarctica”.  This will enable improved 
opportunities for research and more effective implementation of polar/Antarctic 
conservation activity.  In addition, the AHT posts relevant information on its web site: 
http://www.heritage-antarctica.org. 
 
Heritage protection issues within the Treaty system.  Recently adopted procedures 
promote the role of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) in providing 
advice to the ATCM on issues pertaining to historic sites.  The AHT and “Heritage 
Antarctica” are ready to make input to this process.  One further option to consider may 
be to form links with the International Charter for the Conservation and Restoration of 
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS).  ICOMOS is a special committee of UNESCO and 
the establishment of a “Polar Sub-committee,” or similar group, might be encouraged. 
 
 
New Zealand and the AHT seek support for their activities and wish to encourage 
Treaty Parties with an interest in the issues associated with the restoration, preservation 
and protection of Antarctica's human heritage to communicate their views by 
contacting: 
 
The Executive Officer  
    or 
 
Head, Antarctic Policy Unit 
Antarctic Heritage Trust 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
Private Bag 4745 
 
 
 
 
P O Box 18-901 
Christchurch  
 
 
 
 
Wellington 
New Zealand  
 
 
 
 
New Zealand 
Fax : 64 03 358 0211  
 
 
 
Fax : 64 04 494 8507 
Email: aht@antarcticanz.govt.nz 
 
 
Email: felicity.wong@mfat.govt.nz 
