THE 1998 ANTARCTIC oZoNE HoLE 
 
ozone hole variabilit~l and stratospheric meteorolo~ 
 
Stratospheric clouds, which are crucial to the mechanism of ozone depletion, are likely to be present when 
the temperature is below -8OoC, and may persist while the temperature is below -7SoC. Accordingly, 
balloon-borne radiosonde ascents can measure stratospheric temperatures at the I OO hPa level ( I Skm 
altitude) near the peak concentration ozone (maximum partial pressure - see Figure) in the ozone layer 
over Antarctica, can be used to reflect changes in amounts of total column ozone. 
 
The ozone hole is defined as that area where total ozone is less than 22O Dobson Units. The 1998 
Antarctic ozone hole was broadly similar to those seen in recent years, although a little larger and a little 
longer lasting. 1t reached its maximum extent of 2S million square kilometers in october 1998, and 
follows a sequence of ozone holes that for the last six years that has exceeded 2O million square 
kilometers. 
 
The colour - enhanced image attached was made up from data received from NOAA polar orbiting 
satellites operated by the USA and it is the composite made from several satellite passes. The 1998 
ozone hole was distin~uished by a rapid and early formation within a colder than normal Antarctic 
circumpolar vortex. The polar vortex was also larger than normal when it came to peak development in 
October. The unusually large vortex was the main reason for the hole's record size. The hole was deep, 
with total column ozone at the centre of about 9O Dobson Units according to satellite derived 
measurements. Nearly all of the ozone in the lower stratosphere (below an altitude of about 22-km) was 
destroyed. Approximately a third of the total amount of ozone was left largely unaffected in the middle 
stratosphere due to temperatures being above -8O"C, as is usual above an altitude of 22km in the 
stratosphere over Antarctica. 
 
Southern Hemisphere ozone depletion 
 
There has been an observed long-term depletion of total ozone over most of the Southern Hemisphere. 
The depletion has been stronger nearer the Antarctic Continent. over Australia the trend in ozone 
depletion per decade (based on data from 1979 to 1998) has been 1% to 2% above Brisbane, 2% above 
Melbourne, 3% to 4% above Macquarie Island and up to IO% per decade over Antarctica. 
 
Increasin~ UV radiation 
 
There has been a corresponding increase in W reaching the earth's surface with a consequent increase in 
the component of this radiation responsible for skin reddening (erythemal). The trend in the 
erythemally-active part of the UV spectrum has been about 3% per decade in Melbourne and 6% at 
Macquarie Island. 
StratosPheric chemistry 
 
Chlorine, an agent for ozone destruction, will reach a maximum concentration in the stratosphere by about 
2OOO and then slowly begin to decline. It may ta~;e until 2OSO to return to pre-ozone hole amounts of 
chlorine. Bromine is another ozone destroying chemical that will possibly take longer than chlorine to 
start to decline in the stratosphere, depending on future emission rates from some countries. 
