XXIII ATCM/ IP43 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 5b) 
 
 
 
COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIII 
Submitted by 
COMNAP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
COMNAP Report to ATCM XXIII 
  
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
This report provides an overview of the activities of the Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) during the 12 months ending April 1999.  
 
2. 
COMNAP was established in 1988 to provide a forum to facilitate the exchange of views 
and experience between directors and logistics managers of national Antarctic agencies and to 
improve the effectiveness of our operations in Antarctica. COMNAP has a permanent Standing 
Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) and various task-oriented working 
groups. 
 
3. The work of COMNAP is undertaken through: 
 
• 
annual meetings of national representatives;  
• 
biennial symposia on Antarctic logistics and operations;  
• 
technical workshops on topics of interest to member agencies (e.g. Antarctic Environmental 
Impact Assessment – Bologna 1991, Over-snow Traverse Technology – Washington DC 1994, 
Antarctic Air Transport Networks – Washington DC 1995) 
• 
working groups assigned to particular issues such as contingency planning, Antarctic tourism, 
environmental monitoring, air operations, etc;  
• 
close cooperation and joint activities with SCAR. 
 
4. 
Over the past 12 months the secretariat and working groups of COMNAP have worked on a 
number of issues where ATCM XXII asked for COMNAP input.  Papers have been provided to 
ATCM XXIII on Assessment of Environmental Emergencies, Environmental Monitoring, 
Emergency Contingency Planning, Training Requirements and Navigation/Communications 
Requirements for Antarctic Ships, Characteristics of Antarctic Vessels Used by National Operators, 
Education and Training, Information Exchange.  This has stretched the resources of COMNAP and 
drawn attention to the need to seek appropriate timeframes and use, where necessary, external 
resources in developing responses to ATCM requests 
 
5. 
Besides Antarctica operations, the national Antarctica agencies represented in COMNAP 
are also variously involved in developing science strategies and conducting research, public 
awareness and education activities, and interacting with Antarctic tourist interests.  The use of 
networks established by COMNAP has greatly enhanced the exchange of information.  An 
attachment to this paper provides the current membership of the COMNAP Executive and the 
committee and working group structure. 
 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
CURRENT OPERATIONAL ISSUES/MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES 
 
6. 
The COMNAP report to the ATCM XXII noted that COMNAP members are increasingly 
supporting integrated research projects focussed on global issues, and looking to technology 
developments to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of Antarctic science.  These continue to 
be key issues.   
 
7. 
Involvement in global research such as ozone depletion, ice sheet changes, 
paleoenvironmental records, sea level and climate change, sea ice zone dynamics and ecology, 
ocean circulation and biodiversity.  The COMNAP forum continues to facilitate international co-
operation in the provision of logistics support for inter-disciplinary and international research, 
consideration of opportunities to improve and collaborate on air access to the Antarctic, and 
exchange of information on new technology for science and operational support. 
 
8. 
International programs supported by logistics co-operation include EPICA (European 
Program for Ice Coring in Antarctica), Vostok ice coring, the Cape Roberts Project, Concordia 
Project and International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE).  Establishing logistics 
support for international projects is a complex process requiring integration of science and logistics 
approval and planning processes of different countries.  A joint SCAR/COMNAP forum during the 
SCAR and COMNAP meetings in Concepcion in 1998 considered these issues, and further 
consideration is needed of mechanisms to improve linkages between international science planning 
and logistics support requirements.   
 
9. 
Consideration of air linkages into East Antarctica and increased use of air access between 
South Africa and the Antarctic continent is continuing. 
 
10. 
The ratification of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol in January 1998 has shifted 
environmental compliance from responsible management to legal imperative.  The Antarctic 
Environmental Officer’s Network (AEON) under the umbrella of COMNAP is addressing 
environmental monitoring and environmental impact assessment to provide support for individual 
members activities in these areas. The potential impact of a liability annex to the Environmental 
Protocol on international co-operation is another area of concern in the environmental area. 
 
11. 
The Antarctic environment continues to provide operational challenges and risks despite 
modern technological developments.  It is sad to record that a number of expeditioners died as 
result of accidents or medical conditions while on service in Antarctica.  Three French personnel 
lost their lives when a helicopter crashed during resupply operations at Dumont d’Urville. One 
Chilean scientist died and another was injured as a result of a crevasse accident when conducting 
research in the Peninsula region.  A Chilean member of the 1999 wintering party recently died in a 
vehicle accident.  An Indian expeditioner was evacuated with the assistance of several national 
programs when he had suffered an illness while on a resupply vessel but later died.  A German 
expeditioner at Nuemayer Station and a Russian expeditioner at Progress died as a result of 
illnesses.  Members of the international Antarctic community would undoubtedly wish to extend 
their sympathy to the family and friends of the deceased. 
 
KEY ACTIVITIES IN 1998/99 
 
 
COMNAP 1998 Meeting in Concepcion 
 
12. 
The tenth annual meeting of COMNAP and SCALOP was held in Concepcion, Chile from 
20-26 July 1998 in conjunction with the SCAR XXV.  Fifty-nine representatives from the Antarctic 
operating agencies of  twenty-five countries attended the meeting.  A representative from IAATO 
 
2
 
 
 
and the International Hydrographic Organisation participate in as invited observers during relevant 
agenda items and working group discussions. 
 
13. 
The Seventh SCALOP Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations was conducted 
over a period of one and a half days, however, the number of papers submitted for presentation was 
significantly lower than in previous years.  The relatively poor response was discussed by 
COMNAP members and the Symposium Working Group was asked to consider the following 
suggestions: 
 
• 
opening up the presentations to outside expertise; 
• 
perhaps holding the symposia less frequently, for example, every four years; 
• 
interfacing with other organisations, for example SCAR; 
• 
inviting presentations on collaborative projects; 
• 
combining the symposium with workshops; 
• 
including by-polar topics; and 
• 
asking a few SCAR Chief Officers to present the highlights of their work. 
 
COMNAP affirmed its support for continuation of the symposium series, which provide a valuable 
means of exchanging information on developments in polar technology and logistics. 
 
14. 
Two days of the meeting were devoted to working group discussions that included 
consideration of ATCM XXII requests to COMNAP for information on a range of topics.  A joint 
SCAR/COMNAP Workshop on Facilitating International Science Projects was held to discuss: 
 
• 
COMNAP’s role in facilitating international science projects; 
• 
procedures used by different national programs to assess and approve proposals;  
• 
future inter-actions between SCAR and COMNAP and procedures for facilitating international 
science projects. 
 
15. 
A workshop was held at Concepcion on “The Conceptual Structure of Associated and 
Dependent Ecosystems”.  The objective of this workshop was to promote the analysis of and 
discussion on the juridical and implications of the application of this concept within the Antarctic 
Treaty System.  Members of COMNAP and SCAR presented different points of view during the 
workshop and a full report, including the texts of oral presentations, will be published by Chile. 
 
 
Assessment of Environmental Emergencies 
 
16. 
Following discussions ATCM XXII on the Liability Annex to the Madrid Protocol, the 
meeting requested COMNAP to undertake an assessment of risks of environmental emergencies 
arising from operational activities in the Antarctic.  Seventeen of COMNAP’s twenty-nine member 
countries responded to survey questionnaire and reported a total of 117 incidents over the last ten 
years.  Six countries reported no incidents whatsoever.   A comprehensive paper analysing the 
results of the survey has been presented as a Working Paper to ATCM XXIII (WP16).  Based on 
the results of the survey it is concluded that: 
• 
there are minimal environmental impacts resulting from ground or air transport incidents; 
• 
the most common incidents with the potential to cause the greatest environmental impacts are 
fuel spills; 
• 
most fuel spills in Antarctica are likely to be small and confined to a station or base or the 
adjoining waters and are unlikely to threaten wildlife; 
• 
fuel spills in the marine environment have a low probability of occurrence but pose a greater 
magnitude of risk to wildlife than terrestrial or ice sheet spills; and 
 
3
 
 
 
• 
because fuel spills have greatest potential to cause environmental impacts, spill prevention 
strategies are the most effective tool to minimise potential environmental impacts, followed by 
emergency preparedness and response. 
 
 
Environmental Monitoring 
 
17. 
At the first meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) held in Tromso 
during ATCM XXII, the meeting requested COMNAP and SCAR to present a report to CEP2 on 
the current status of work on environmental monitoring.  COMNAP/SCAR have submitted a joint 
working paper to CEP II (WP4) which reviews progress on implementing the four 
recommendations that were contained in WP20 to ATCM XXI dealing with: 
 
• 
the preparation of a technical handbook of standardised monitoring techniques; 
• 
a review of existing data and key research issues; 
• 
the processing of data for comparative purposes; and 
• 
the coordination of environmental monitoring activities. 
 
18. 
COMNAP and SCAR recommend that the ATCM (through the CEP): 
 
• 
endorse the work being carried out by COMNAP and SCAR following the workshops and 
previous recommendations reported to the ATCM; 
• 
encourage COMNAP and SCAR to focus on ensuring comparability of environmental 
monitoring data so that evaluation of the data for management purposes may be simplified and 
thus useful for management decision making; and 
• 
request COMNAP and SCAR provide CEP3/ATCM XXIV with an information paper on then 
status of their work on environmental monitoring. 
 
 
Emergency Contingency Planning 
 
19. 
Resolution 6 (1998) of ATCM XXII requested COMNAP to formulate additional steps in 
relation to emergency response action and contingency planning for incidents other than oil spills 
and to review and revise, if necessary, the COMNAP/SCALOP guidelines on oil spill handling and 
contingency planning.  In addition, COMNAP had previously been asked by the ATCM to review 
the consistency of existing oil spill contingency plans and develop, where feasible, regional 
contingency plans. 
 
20. 
COMNAP has submitted a Working Paper on Emergency Contingency Planning to ATCM 
XXIII (WP3), which recommends that: 
 
• 
contingency plans be developed by national programs to take into account general incidents and 
disasters, oil spills, chemical spills, and response to international incidents and disasters; 
• 
the COMNAP guidelines relating to oil spill handling, storage and contingency planning be 
reviewed during the next 12 months; 
• 
in the light of Resolution 6 (1998), COMNAP need no longer undertake a review of the 
consistency of existing contingency plans with the 1992 COMNAP Guidelines; and  
• 
the sub-groups established by COMNAP to develop and implement Regional Oil Spill 
Response Contingency Plans for the north-west Antarctic Peninsula, Prydz Bay and Ross Sea 
areas, progress this work in accordance with a framework developed by COMNAP. 
 
 
 
 
4
 
 
 
Training Requirements and Navigation/Communications Requirements for Antarctic Ships 
 
21. 
Following discussions at ATCM XXII on the development of the Polar Code Shipping, the 
meeting proposed that COMNAP members should brief their national IMO representatives on the 
desired requirements for the training of ships’ officers and navigation/communication requirements 
for Antarctic vessels.  The meeting requested COMNAP to circulate draft proposals on these topics 
to members prior to the next meeting of the IMO Sub-committee on Ship Design and Equipment.  
A copy of the information circulated to national operators has been provided as an information 
paper to ATCM XXIII. 
 
Characteristics of Antarctic Vessels Used by National Operators 
 
22. 
Under the discussions on the “Safety of Operations in the Antarctic, ATCM XXII requested 
that COMNAP compile information on the current standards of shipping used by national Antarctic 
operators.  The results of the survey have been presented to ATCM XXIII as an information paper.  
The ice class, length, breadth, year of build and displacement of 40 vessels used by national 
Antarctic programs is given. 
 
Education and Training 
 
23. 
At ATCM XXII COMNAP advised its intention to hold a Forum on Education in 
conjunction with its annual meeting in Concepcion during July 1998.  The aim of the Forum was to 
consider the findings of a survey on education and training that was presented to ATCM XXII in 
Information Paper 5.  COMNAP was asked to report to ATCM XXIII on the outcomes of the 
Forum. 
 
24. 
The report on the Forum is presented in an information paper submitted to ATCM XXIII.  
As a result of the Forum COMNAP has established an Antarctic Information Officers Network and 
an Antarctic Training Network.  List servers have been established through the COMNAP 
Secretariat to facilitate e-mail communication between the members of both networks that will 
facilitate the coordination and exchange of relevant information. 
 
Information Exchange 
 
25. 
As a result of a discussions at ATCM XXII on the rationalisation of data exchange within 
the Antarctic Treaty system it was agreed that this issue would be include on the agenda of ATCM 
XIII.  COMNAP has submitted a working paper to the ATCM (WP17) that describes its process of 
exchanging operational information and the extent to which this duplicates information circulated 
through the diplomatic channels.  The paper notes that COMNAP has moved to exchange 
operational information via e-mail attachments that have greatly improved the efficiency and 
timeliness of the process.  COMNAP is also redeveloping its Home Page to include operational 
information that is best stored and accessed centrally. 
 
26. 
COMNAP concludes that there is some duplication of operational information exchanged 
largely because of the delay in receiving data through the official diplomatic process and 
recommends that the ATCM: 
• 
consider the potential of using the facilities of the COMNAP Home Page to store operational 
information that is best stored centrally thereby eliminating the need to provide this information 
through the formal Antarctic Treaty exchange process; 
• 
encourage national agencies to make available up-to-date operational information through the 
formal Antarctic Treaty information exchange process; and 
• 
encourage Contracting Parties to use the INTERNET for the formal exchange of information 
under the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
6
27. 
SCAR and COMNAP have established a Joint Committee on Antarctic Data management 
(JCADM) which met in Concepcion in conjunction with the SCAR and COMNAP meetings.  The 
group is continuing to pursue Antarctic Treaty objectives for data management as requested under 
Resolution XXII-4 (1998).  It was agreed to convene a workshop in Chile with Latin American 
experts to promote the establishment of National Antarctic Data Centres (NADCs) in each country.  
Participants from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay attended the workshop during 15-16 
April 1999. 
 
 
PLANNED ACTIVITIES FOR 1999/2000 
 
COMNAP 1999 Meeting in Goa 
 
28. 
The eleventh annual meeting of COMNAP will be held in Goa, India from 20-24 
September 1999.  The SCAR Executive plan to meet in conjunction with the COMNAP meeting 
which facilitate a meeting of the both Executive Committees to discuss items of mutual interest. 
 
Workshop on EIAs and Environmental Monitoring 
 
29. 
COMNAPs Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) will be holding a 
Workshop on  Environmental Monitoring and EIAs in conjunction with the Goa meeting.  The 
objectives of the meeting are to: 
 
• 
provide an opportunity for environmental officers to exchange information on current 
environmental initiatives within their Antarctic programs; 
• 
evaluate the effectiveness and functioning of AEON into the 21st Century including specific 
aspects of the operation of AEON such as the WWW homepage, the email network and 
coordination of work in the future.  The interface with COMNAP and the ECG will also be 
discussed;  
• 
review membership of the Steering Committee and elect new members, if appropriate; 
• 
identify AEON initiatives for 1999/2000 and assign responsibilities for coordination and 
• 
identify potential future initiatives for COMNAP consideration. 
 
 
 
Attachment 
 
 
COMNAP Terms of Reference, Committees, Working Groups 
and Networks 
 
 
 
 
Terms of Reference of COMNAP 
 
• 
To review, on a regular basis, operational matters and to facilitate regular exchanges of 
information; 
• 
to examine, discuss and seek possible solutions to common operational problems; 
• 
to provide a forum for discussion in order to frame in a timely, efficient and harmonious 
manner: 
- 
responses to common issues directed to Antarctic Operators, in particular requests from and 
Recommendations of the ATCM, and 
- 
appropriate 
input 
to 
SCAR 
responses 
to 
questions 
involving 
science 
and 
operations/logistics 
• 
to provide, in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the 
appropriate forum for discussions on international collaboration in operations and logistics. 
 
 
COMNAP Executive (EXCOM) 
 
 
Ms Gillian Wratt (NZ)  
Chairperson 
 
Dr Carlos A Rinaldi (AR) 
Member 
 
Mr Dirk van Schalkwyk (SAF) Member 
 
Mr Patricio Eberhard (CH) 
SCALOP Chairman 
 
Mr Jack Sayers (AU) 
 
Executive Secretary 
 
 
COMNAP Secretariat 
 
 
Mr Jack Sayers 
 
COMNAP Secretariat  
 
 
Suite 25 
 
 
GPO Box 824 
 
Salamanca Square 
 
Hobart 
 
Tasmania 7000  
 
Tasmania 7001 
 
AUSTRALIA  
 
AUSTRALIA 
 
Tel: 
+61-3-6233 5498 
 
Fax: 
+61-3-6233 5497 
 
E-mail: jsayers@comnap.aq 
 
 
Committees 
 
 
Executive Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
EXCOM 
 
Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Opertaions 
SCALOP 
 
SCALOP Planning and Coordination Committee  
 
SPAC 
 
Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management (with SCAR) 
JCDADM 
 
Finance Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
FICOM 
 
 
 
Working Groups  
 
 
Air Operations WG 
 
 
 
 
 
AIROPS 
 
Environmental Coordinating Group 
 
 
 
ECG 
 
Education and Training WG 
 
 
 
 
EDAT 
 
Electronic Information WG 
 
 
 
 
ELINF 
 
Emergency Response and Contingency Planning WG 
 
EMRAC 
 
WG to Monitor the Liability Annex 
 
 
 
MOLIBA 
 
Ship Operations WG 
 
 
 
 
 
SHIPOPS 
 
Symposium WG 
 
 
 
 
 
SYMP 
 
Tourism and NGOs WG  
 
 
 
 
TANGO 
 
 
 
Networks 
 
 
Antarctic Managers Electronic Network  
 
 
AMEN 
 
Antarctic Environmental Managers Network 
 
 
AEON 
 
Information Officers Network  
 
 
 
INFONET 
 
Training Officers Network 
 
 
 
 
TRAINET 
 
 
 
 
Notes: 
 
 
• A comprehensive list of COMNAP and SCALOP members and the membership of  
various committees, working groups and networks may be found on the COMNAP 
Home Page at URL: 
 
 
http//:www.comnap.aq 
 
• Please note that a revised version of the COMNAP Home Page is available for 
preview at URL: 
http://preview.comnap.aq/ 
 
ATCM XXIII delegates are encouraged to view this site before or at the meeting. 
The revised page will be further developed and made public by late June 1999 at URL 
http//:www.comnap.aq 
 
