OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY 
HEAD OF DELEGATION oF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
I would like to congratulate you on your election to the Chair of this 
meeting. It is a great pleasure to have an individual of your knowledge and 
experience to lead us through our work. 
 
On behalf of my delegation, I want to thank the Government of Peru and the 
City of Lima for the warm hospitality which has been shown to us during this 
XXIIIrd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We are delighted to be here in 
this capital of our pan-American neighbor. 
 
In this fortieth anniversary year of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, it 
is appropriate to look back at the successes we have achieved together. 
Antarctica has remained a continent dedicated to peace and to the advancement 
of science. Its environment and dependent and associated ecosystems are 
protected to promote peace and scientific research. We look forward towards 
the continuation of this uniquely successful system of international 
cooperation in overseeing activities in Antarctica. 
 
This fortieth anniversary meeting offers the opportunity to initiate an 
evaluation of how our consultative mechanism is operating. We continue to 
believe in the need for a modest, cost-effective Secretariat to assist the 
work of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism. We reiterate our support 
for its location in Buenos Aires. Mr. Chairman, while we await agreement on 
the modalities of the establishment of a Secretariat, we believe that we 
could usefully revisit the functions a Secretariat should perform. For 
example, the development of the Internet and other electronic means of 
information may result in the need for a different approach to information 
exchange. Further, we should examine the ways in which the Secretariat could 
provide a means for addressing the increasingly heavy burden of supporting 
meetings of the Treaty Parties. 
In this regard, now that the Protocol on Environmental Protection is in force 
and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) provided for in the 
Protocol is up and running, we believe that we should examine the timing, 
organization and frequency of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings with a 
view to improving the methods and quality of our collaborative work. 
 
Turning to other items, we look forward to progress on work with respect to 
liability. At Troms0, the Meeting adopted Decision 3(1998), agreeing that 
work on liability should continue at ATCM XXIII based on the report of the 
Group of Legal Experts; the emergency response work undertaken based on the 
resolution agreed at ATCM XXII; advice from the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
and others on risk assessments; and other pertinent advice. While our 
approach, put forward first in Utrecht, remains on the table, we look forward 
to working with other delegations to a find a third way to bridge the 
differences that clearly have divided delegations. 
 
We are confident that the Committee for Environmental Protection will 
continue its work to provide advice and formulate recommendations to the 
Parties at the Consultative Meeting. We welcome the work of the Committee, as 
the scientific advisory body of the Treaty, in furthering the objective of 
protecting Antarctica as a natural reserve dedicate~d to peace and science. 
 
In conclusion, I want to thank again our gracious Peruvian hosts who have 
arranged for us to meet in this wonderful conference center here in San 
Isidro. 
 
Thank you very much. 
