Antarctic Treaty                                                
XXIII Consultative Meeting                                   
Traité sur l'Antarctique                                        
XXIII  Réunion consultative                                   
Tratado Antártico                                              
XXIII Reunión Consultiva                                       
Договор об Антарктике                                          
XXIII Консультативное Совещание                               

                                           XXIII ATCM/ IP105
                                           May, 1999
                                           Original: English

                                           Agenda Item 16

Operational meteorology and sea
ice information services

Submitted by
WMO
To undertake scientific work
of practical and /or economic significance

The surface weather observing and upper air-sounding networks organized by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) are an example of work of practical and economic importance. The analyses of operational Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models are increasingly being used to define fields of climate information, processed from the real time input of weather observations in recent decades. We can no longer distinguish between NWP and climate models. Also the raw climate data that is formed by automatically archiving routine weather data from specific observation sites is of long term strategic importance as reference climate data. It can be used to validate the output of processed climate fields from models. The consequential historical data bank is fundamental to our understanding of the global climate system and detection of climate change. Substantial meteorological work is required to support human activities in the Southern Ocean and Antarctica. Managers of national Antarctic programs require weather services to make their shipping and aviation operations effective. Six Antarctic Treaty Parties have seen the need to establish Antarctic Meteorological Centres at Casey, McMurdo, Marambio, Mirny, Frei and Rothera.

WMO's WORLD WEATHER WATCH ACTIVITIES
THAT ARE RELATED TO ANTARCTICA

Some improvement has been achieved in the implementation of observing and telecommunication networks in the Antarctic, but some significant deficiencies still exist. The number of upper-air stations is decreasing and there are still delays between the time of observation and insertion of the data into WMO's Global Telecommunications System (GTS).

It is important for WMO to define the Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network (ABSN) and then encourage Member nations to implement it for the purposes of coordinated real time weather analysis and prediction on a global scale. Routine operational weather data from specific observation sites are then compiled by National Meteorological Services and research institutes into basic climate databases. These activities have led to the specification of the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) for collection of long term reference climate data. The ABSN and the Antarctic component of GCOS are vital if Antarctica is to be adequately represented in global weather and climate analyses and prediction systems.

The Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network

Despite the hostile weather conditions and the problem of logistics, the Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network is well implemented and the percentage of reports received at the main centres of WMO's telecommunication network is close to the global average.

There were 42 staffed stations of SCAR nations operating in the Antarctic (south
2
of latitude 60"S) in 1998. Some 37 staffed stations were providing routine coded surface 
synoptic weather reports - see Figure 1. There were over 50 separately located Automatic 
Weather Stations (of which 37 were operated by the USA. 12 by Australia and 3 by 
Germany). There were 14 staffed stations (including 4 Russian, 3 Australian and 2 USA) 
that were providing upper-air soundings of meteorological variables at 12 or 24 hours 
intervals - see Figure 2, with vertical profiles up to altitudes of 25-35 km, in the lower 
stratosphere.

Surface synoptic meteorological data are required on the GTS organized by 
WMO, at 3 or 6 hourly intervals with a minimum of delay (no more than 3 hours). Upper 
air soundings of pressure, temperature, moisture and wind velocity at 00 GMT and 12 
GMT are needed on the GTS within three hours of launching the balloon. Accordingly 
the upper air profile data are then assimilated into operational global models before the 
initial cut off times.

In view of the importance of long-term series of data for climate monitoring, the 
WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology issued the Catalogue 
of Antarctic Climate Data. This catalogue has been used to establish the Antarctic Data 
Directory System (ADDS) developed by SCAR Planning Group on Data Management. 
The reliability of real time Numerical Weather Prediction analyses has become important 
from a climate point of view because ECMWF and NCEP/NCAR have embarked on re-
analysis projects, that are designed to produce definitive climatogical fields for the last 
40 years.

Drifting buoys

The impact of meteorological data from buoys, drifting in the seasonal sea ice 
zone of the Southern Ocean, on the accuracy of automated analysis systems in global 
models has been larger in high southern latitudes than at any other single data point in the 
world.

Automatic weather stations

There are few real time SYNOP messages emanating from the staffed stations in 
the continental interior of Antarctica (South Pole and Vostok) that are being ingested into 
global numerical weather prediction models. As a result the continental interior of 
Antarctica (an area twice the size of Australia) has a very sparse real time data reporting 
network. Automatic Weather Stations are being used to extend the surface-observing 
network into the continental interior of Antarctica.

Automatic geophysical observatories

The networks of Automatic Geophysical Observatories (AGOs) operated by the 
USA and UK provide very useful climate data from the interior of the continent. 
However the data are not yet available within three hours at major analysis centres 
around the world via WMO's Global Telecommunications System. 
                                                                                                                         3
Representation of the atmosphere over the Southern Ocean

The Sub-Antarctic Macquarie Island (near latitude 55°S, longitude 150°E) is a 
unique site for monitoring weather and climate, atmospheric chemistry, as well as ozone 
and UV radiation measurements. There is no other site from which upper air soundings 
and surface observations are continuously made in the latitude band from near 45°S to the 
Antarctic coast and stretching from the central Indian Ocean to South America and the 
Antarctic Peninsular. The French Island of Kerguelen located near 50°S & 70°E has a full 
meteorological observations program. At the other extremity of this data sparse sector are 
the Chilean station at Punta Arenas and the Argentinean station of Marambio on the 
northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsular. Both have surface and upper air meteorological 
observations programs. This sector spans some 220 degrees of longitude with Macquarie 
Island located in the middle. Satellite remote sensing, occasional shipping voyages and 
aircraft flights are the only other means of obtaining weather and climate information in 
this scientifically important part of the world. Data from a long term, high quality, 
ground-based observatory are of more use in environmental monitoring than sampling, 
because continuity in time and fixed location allows more comprehensive and accurate 
analyses.

Atmospheric re-analyses projects

The ECMWF Re-Analysis (ERA) project produced a validated 15-year data set 
that was assimilated for the period 1979-1993. The data sources were the real time WMO 
World Weather Watch data from ECMWF's archive which has a 3-day cut-off, 
augmented by additional data not available in real time.

In the USA, the National Centre for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) commenced in 1991 a Reanalysis 
Project of data for the 40 years 1957-96 and completed it in 1997. The effort involved 
recovering land surface, ship, rawinsonde, pibal, aircraft, satellite, and other data. NCEP 
plans call for an updated reanalysis using a state-of-the-art data assimilation system every 
five years or so.

Operational weather forecasting in Antarctica

During the 1990's modern communications such as geostationary satellites have 
made possible a new standard of meteorological services in Antarctica. There has been a 
gradual improvement in the representation of Antarctica in global numerical weather 
prediction models over the last decade. Remote sensing of atmospheric variables and sea 
ice from polar orbiting satellites has become more sophisticated. As a result it is now 
possible to specify a new meteorological standard with respect to the provision of 
operational meteorological services. Increasingly, we can no longer distinguish between 
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and climate prediction models. The analyses of 
NWP systems are being used to define fields of climate parameters for recent decades

    4
With meteorology we must not focus exclusively on the high tech aspects of research, such as numerical modelling, at the expense of the more routine, but still very important, monitoring programmes. We must bridge the fields of operational meteorology in the Antarctic (dealt with by WMO) and the research community, with which SCAR is largely concerned. This subject has been increasing in importance within SCAR via the First Regional Observing Study of the Tropophere (FROST) project and the Antarctic Weather Forecasting Handbook (which has come out of the forecasting workshop held in Hobart last year). John Turner, Chairman of the SCAR Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere (PACA) Working Group believes that this area of development is of great importance and one that is well fitted for support. We need an inter-disciplinary approach to much of the atmospheric science work. For example, climate studies invariably involve interactions between the atmosphere-ocean-sea ice.

WMO's Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology,
7th Session, Hobart, Australia, 7-11 September 1998.

The Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology comprises representatives of 23 WMO Members who are Antarctic Treaty Parties. There were 11 participants representing 10 Member countries at the 7th Session of the Working Group held in Hobart. In addition Jack Sayers, Executive Secretary of COMNAP, John Church, representing the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and John Turner, Chairman of the SCAR PACA Working Group also contributed in a meaningful way to the proceedings.

The Hobart meeting provided an opportunity to review how the activities of the Working Group would cope with existing needs and future developments. The Working Group should consider further development of observing and telecommunication systems in the Antarctic to meet growing requirements for the World Weather Watch, the Global Climate Observing System and other WMO Programmes. The Working Group should play a leading role in the co-ordination of these activities and continue close collaboration with other international bodies related to the Antarctic.

First International Symposium on Operational Weather Forecasting in Antarctica

WMO, SCAR, Australian Bureau of Meteorology, BAS, American Meteorological Society (AMS) and the Australian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society (AMOS) sponsored the First International Symposium on Operational Weather Forecasting in Antarctica, held in Hobart from 31 August - 3 September 1998. There were 40 participants at the Symposium from Australia, Brazil, China, France, Italy, Russia and the UK.

International Handbook on Weather Forecasting in Antarctica

Congress XIII of WMO in May 1999 considered the proposed International Handbook on Antarctic Weather Forecasting, emanating from the recent International Symposium on Operational Weather Forecasting in Antarctica. WMO and SCAR are
                                                                                                                         5
sponsors of this project. A draft copy of the handbook will be submitted to WMO 
Executive Council in May 2000. WMO's Secretariat has agreed to publish the handbook 
and give it wide distribution.

Sea ice information services

It is imperative that Antarctic vessels have weather and sea ice information 
providing suitable cloud and sea ice discrimination. Recent improvements in obtaining 
real-time satellite imagery have made a marked difference in the productivity and 
effectiveness of polar-class research and re-supply vessels. For many years the goal had 
been simply to construct vessels with sufficient power and unique hull design to go 
through sea ice. However it is always safer to go around, rather than through sea ice. 
Avoidance limits damage to propellers, shafts and rudders, saves fuel and time, and 
reduces stress on crew members by limiting the fatigue associated with the constant 
movement and noise associated with ice breaking.

The twelfth session of the WMO Commission for Marine Meteorology (CMM) 
Havana, March, 1997, expressed a requirement for the review and updating of the WMO 
publication "Sea-ice Information Services in the World" (WMO-No 574). It requested its 
SubGroup on Sea-Ice (SGSI) to update and issue a new version of this publication during 
the inter-sessional period.

At the informal session of the SGSI (Copenhagen, September 1997) it was 
decided that it would be best to update the publication on the basis of material from the 
marine meteorological services involved in sea-ice activities. Dr J.E. Lundqvist was 
asked to complete the new version of the publication, which will be issued by the WMO 
Secretariat.

Contributions to the new version of the "Sea-ice Information Services in the 
World" were to be sent (diskette or e-mail) to Dr J.E. Lundqvist by the end of December 
1998 to the following address:

Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI)
Marine Services
S-601 76 Norrkoping
Sweden
Telephone: +46-11 495 84 00
Telefax: +46-11495 84 03 00
E-mail: jan-eric.lundqvist@smhi.se

                                                                                
6
Figure 1

SPECIFIC MONITORING OF THE EXCHANGE OF ANTARCTIC DATA
(1-15 February 1998)
SYNOP reports


Percentage of reports received from stations comprising the Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network for main synoptic hours
  • 50% to 100% (68)
  o 1% to  49% (6)
  Silent stations (15)

WMO Secretariat
Figure 2

SPECIFIC MONITORING OF THE EXCHANGE OF ANTARCTIC DATA
(1-15 February 1998)
TEMP reports Part A

The 14 stations comprising the Antarctic Basic Synoptic Network are presented into three following groups
in accordance with the precentage of reports recieved for 00 and/or 12 UTC

■ 75% to 100% twice per day  (8)
● 75% to 100% once per day  (4)
⊕ 1% to 50% once per day  (2)

WMO Secretariat
