OPENlNG STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR OSCAR PINOCHET  DE LA BARRA 
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHILE 
 
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Delegates: 
 
The XXIII ATCM takes place after 4O years of the signature of the international instrument that gave 
birth to one of the most creative and boldest initiatives of international policy of the XX Century. 
 
The Antarctic Treaty system has evolved since then and has grown including important new initiatives. 
The first I would like to underline is the Madrid Protocol for the protection of the Antarctic environment. 
All of these efforts were directed to achieve and maintain peace in that region of the world, something like 
a permanent International Geophysical Year. Today we have the difficult responsibility of keeping the 
Antarctic free of any kind of pollution. We now have a new organism to achieve that goal that is the 
Committee for the Protection of the Environment CEP. 
 
The Chilean Delegation is very pleased that this ATCM venue is Peru, a brother country that has taken the 
Antarctic research with great interest, a country owner of remote seafarer traditions and is convinced that 
under the wise guidance of Chairman Ambassador Carlos Alzamora it will be an important step forward 
in our labours. I would also like to give relevance, in addition to the environmental issues, to the difficult 
question of Liability and that of the creation of the Secretariat. 
 
The world focus its sight, more than ever on the South Polar Region at the end of the Century and close to 
the third millennium. It seems that from now on Antarctica will be one of the most visited tourist locations 
of the planet. This fact will increase our concerns and responsibilities on environmental protection matters 
and the application of the regulations of the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially 
Mana8ed Areas, giving special attention to the last to avoid distortions of the principles supporting them. 
 
Mr Chairman 
 
This may be the last opportunity that I will participate in an ATCM . Then, I would like to reiterate my 
deep faith in the Antarctic Treaty System, of whose birth I had the privilege to attend in 1 9S9. I would 
also like to leave testimony of my wishes that these efforts are crowned by success in an enterprise that 
involves the management and protection of a whole continent, a feat without parallel in the history of 
mankind. 
