 
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
This report is presented in compliance with article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which requires each Party to report annually on the steps 
taken to implement the Protocol in domestic law, including laws, regulations,  administrative 
actions and enforcement measures contemplated by article 13 of the Protocol. 
 
 
1.  Italy ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and became a Consultative Party in 1987 
following the launching and development of the Italian Antarctic Research Programme 
(PNRA). In 1990-91 took a very active part in the negotiations and drafting of the Madrid 
Protocol which was ratified by Italy in 1995. 
2.  The process of ratification of the Madrid Protocol involved the adoption of 1) a 
Parliamentary Act authorising the expression of Italy’s consent to be bound by the 
Protocol, in accordance with article 80 of the Italian Constitution; 2) the contextual 
adoption of an “implementation order” having the effect of “incorporating” the Protocol 
within the domestic legal system (ordine di esecuzione); and 3 the ratification of the 
Protocol by the President of the Republic pursuant to article 87 of the Constitution. 
3.  As a consequence of the above three-step procedure the Madrid Protocol forms an integral 
part of the Italian legal system and it can be applied by any relevant public authority and 
can be invoked and actioned by private parties whenever the need may arise. 
4.  Since the order implementing the Madrid Protocol in Italian law has the formal status of 
an Act of Parliament, the rank of the Protocol in Italian law is that of a statutory or 
legislative act. This entails that the provisions of the Protocol may not derogate to the 
Constitution, but will take precedence over executive acts. The relation with other 
legislative acts is one of equal ranking. However, Italian practice and case law tends to 
ensure the applicability of treaty provisions even if they are conflicting with domestic 
Statutes when 1) the treaty is later in time; 2) the treaty can be given precedence because 
of its speciality even if the conflicting statute is later in time; 3) the later statute does not 
contain a precise indication that Parliament wanted to depart from the obligations 
previously undertaken by the treaty. Furthermore, recent case law of the Italian 
Constitutional Court tend to shelter treaties from the risk of being superseded by 
subsequent statutory law by positing the notion that the treaties constitute a “special 
source” of law deriving from international obligations which should not be affected by 
unilateral legislative acts. 
5.  If from a formal-legal point of view the Madrid Protocol can be considered as securely 
entrenched in Italian domestic law, from a substantive point of view it is clear that many 
provisions of the Protocol are not entirely self-executing and need to be implemented by 
more detailed regulation. This has been done by administrative action and will be further 
done in the near future by a gradual programme of implementing legislation. 
6.  As far as administrative action is concerned the following steps need to be noted: 
 
Provisional application of the Madrid Protocol 
 
1
 
After the signature of the Protocol in Oct. 1991 in Madrid, the President of ENEA (National 
Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment) which had been given the task of 
implementing the Antarctic Research programme, ordered that the Madrid Protocol had to be 
applied by ENEA-ANTAR, the ENEA unit in charge of the Italian Antarctic Research 
Programme (PNRA) implementation, before its ratification and pending the preparation of 
national legislation in the matter. 
In the following an outline of the actions taken by ENEA-ANTAR in the implementation of 
the Protocol is given. 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
At the beginning of the Italian research activities in Antarctica in 1985/86 no EIA was 
prepared. Neither the Italian legislation at the time , nor the Antarctic Treaty required it. At 
the XXI ATCM in Christchurch the Italian delegation presented a paper entitled “An 
Environmental Overview of the Italian Terra Nova Station”. This paper was not a formal EIA 
but had been prepared following closely Annex I of the Protocol and its aim was to present 
the efforts made by the Italian Programme in the implementation of the Protocol. 
A formal CEE for the Concordia Project, a joint Italian-French project, was presented at the 
XIX ATCM in Seoul in 1995, during the first meeting of the TEWG, the predecessor of the 
CEP. This CEE was jointly presented by the French and Italian delegations. 
 
Emergency Response Action 
 
The main Italian research station, Terra Nova Bay has a contingency plan to deal with 
emergencies which may have impact on the environment, such as oil spill incidents. There is 
also a fire protection plan and station personnel receive specific training for both types of 
occurrences. Italy is also working with the USA and New Zealand for the development of a 
contingency plan for the Ross Sea Region. Also the vessel used by the PNRA as a cargo and 
oceanographic ship has her own oil pollution prevention and control plan. 
 
Co-operation with other Parties 
 
Art 6 of the Protocol asks Parties to co-operate in the planning and conduct of Antarctic 
activities, also in order to reduce impacts on the environment. Italy has a very wide range of 
international co-operations both in scientific activities and in logistics. In the latter area Italy 
is part of a logistic pool with the USA and with New Zealand, which has contributed to a 
rationalisation of the use of aircraft and has shown its great value in cases of medical 
emergencies. 
 
Waste management 
 
A Waste Management plan as a formal document was prepared in 1991, consolidating 
operating procedures and instructions given to expeditions members since the first campaign. 
The basic objectives are those expressed in the Annex III to the Protocol. The basic policy has 
been that all waste from the Italian Antarctic Programme is removed from the Antarctic 
Treaty area. 
Terra Nova Bay station is also equipped with a sewage treatment system, in operation since 
the second campaign in 1986/87. This plant produces a clean effluent which is discharged in 
the sea and sludges which are transported back to Italy. 
 
2
 
3
 
Environmental Monitoring 
 
The monitoring programme was planned from the first campaign and was started in the 
second, during the construction of the base in 1986/87. The sampling is done for airborne 
particulates and for PAH (Policyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons), characteristic of combustion 
products. 
The data from the monitoring are used for feedback on operations. This is particularly true for 
the monitoring of the treated effluent of the sewage treatment plant. At present there is a set 
of monitoring data which goes back to twelve years. 
 
Fuel Storage 
 
Fuel is stored in three cylindrical steel tanks, with all welds checked by radiography and with 
double skin. This ensures a very high level of safety to the fuel storage, coupled with the 
contingency plan and the good training of the station personnel. 
 
Training of personnel 
 
All personnel going to Antarctica receives training on the environmental aspects of their 
activities there, in particular on the Protocol and its Annexes. This training is going to be 
widened to the Italian relevant legislation as soon as it will be available. 
 
Permits 
 
Permits for access to protected areas, for sampling and for other science activities are given 
on the authority of the Italian Foreign Ministry 
 
7.  As far as future implementing legislation is concerned, Italy has established an “Antarctic 
Unit” at the ministry of Foreign Affairs, comprising members of the same Ministry, of 
ENEA-ANTAR, of the Ministry for Environment, the Ministry for Research as well as 
legal advisers.  
This unit has the task of monitoring the implementation of the Protocol in domestic law 
and of formulating draft legislation to ensure proper implementation of the Protocol in 
areas in which domestic legislation is lacking, is inadequate or needs co-ordination in view 
of securing the effectiveness of the Protocol. 
