SCAR REPORT To XXIII ATCM 
LIMA, PERU 
24 MAY- 4 JUNE 1999 
 
REPORT UNDER RECOMMENDATION XIII-2 
DR ROBERT H RUTFORD 
PRESIDENT 
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
SCAR is pleased to participate in this meeting and looks forward to contributing towards its success. 
 
Since XXII ATCM, the SCAR has held its 4Oth anniversary meeting, ,'CXV SCAR, in Concepci6n, 
Chile, 27-31 July 1998. The Full Membership of SCAR increased at this meeting with the election of 
Canada from Associate Member to Full Member. At the same meeting Professor A C Rocha-Campos 
stepped down as President of SCAR. All those who worked with him owe a debt of gratitude for his 
contributions, not only to SCAR, but to the ATCM as well. 
 
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (CoMNAP) held its 10th anniversary 
meeting (CoMNAP X) in Concepcion during the previous week and this provided an opportunity for the 
two Executive Cornmittees to hold a joint meeting, leading to more effective execution of scientific 
research in the Antarctic. 
 
SCAR continues to be active in initiating, promoting and coordinating a diversity of scientific activities, 
but only a few can be briefly noted here. 
 
The SCAR Clobal Change Programme has reduced the number of constituent programmes to four. The 
other prograrnrnes are now more appropriately located with the relevant Working Croups of SCAR but 
they will continue to provide data on global change as appropriate. The SCAR Clobal Change Programme 
office is hosted by the Cooperative Research Centre for the Antarctic and Southern ocean Studies, 
University of Tasmania, Hobart, with a full-time Prograrnme Coordinator. The Croup of Specialists 
continues to serve as the System for Analysis, Research and Training (START) of the International 
Ceosphere-Biosphere Programme (ICBP) Regional Committee for the Antarctic. 
 
The Croup of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (CoSEAC) met in Basel, 
Switzerland, during September 1998. CoSEAC continues to provide advice to SCAR that is increasingly 
relevant to the Protocol on Environmental PFotection to the Antarctic Treaty. A revised management plan 
for Svarthamaren (SSSI no 23) has been approved by CoSEAC and will be tabled at the meeting of the 
Committee on Environmental Protection this week. 
A new Croups of Specialists on Antarctic Neotectonics (ANTEC) has been established to coordinate 
investigations of the unique geological and geophysical aspects of the Antarctic continent, using 
particularly the new seismic and geodetic techniques that are now available. It held its first informal 
meeting in conjunction with a meeting of the European Union for Ceology. 
 
A SCAR-sponsored workshop will be held in September 1999 to continue the effort to develop plans for 
scientific investigations of Antarctic subglacial lakes in general but with special attention being paid to 
Vostok Lake. Interest in Vostok Lake extends beyond the Antarctic cornmunity with scientists from the 
US National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA) proposing to use the opportunity of Vostok 
Lake as a fore-runner to the planned mission to Europa, the frozen moon of Jupiter. This is a unique 
opportunity for the SCAR and NASA communities to share and develop their relevant expertise for the 
benefit of two widely separated projects. 
 
The Antarctic Master Directory (AMD), hosted by the International Centre for Antarctic Information and 
Research (ICAIR) in Christchurch, New Zealand, is about to undergo major changes to improve its 
operation and accessibility. The SCAR-CoMNAP Joint Cornmittee on Antarctic Data Management 
UCADM) will continue to oversee these developments. However, JCADM has noted that several 
Antarctic countries have yet to designate their National Antarctic Data Centres. 
 
During the past year, cooperative efforts with the Scientific Committee on oceanic Research (SCoR) and 
its programme on Joint Clobal ocean Flux Study in the Southern ocean (So-JCoFS) have been established 
and joint prograrnrne and symposium sponsorship are in progress. SCAR looks forward to renewed 
cooperation and scientific effort in the Southern ocean. 
 
SCAR has established a new site on the World Wide Web and we would encourage everyone interested in 
Antarctic science to visit the site at the following address: http:/ / www.scar.org 
 
~inally I would note that SCAR has initiated a self-study as a result of discussions held at XXV SCAR. 
The study group will be chaired by Mr Phil Smith, formerly Chief Executive officer of the United States 
National Academy of Sciences. This group will meet in mid-August 1999 to continue the begun by 
e-mail. At least three members of the nine-member group are at this meeting and we would welcome 
comments from all of those interested in making contributions to this study. 
 
These are some of the highlights of SCAR's diverse activities. In these and other ways SCAR wishes to 
continue to provide scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty System. 
SCAR REPoRT To x~aII ATCM 
LIMA, PERU 
24 MAY- 4 JUNE 1999 
 
REPoRT UNDER RECoMMENDATIoN XIII-2 
 
1. INTRoDUCTIoN 
 
Since X,YII ATCM in Troms0, Norway, May-June 1998, the X,YV SCAR Meeting was held in 
Concepcion, Chile, during July 1998 in parallel with the tenth annual meeting of the Council of Managers 
of National Antarctic Programmes (CoMNAP X). During these meetings, the SCAR and CoMNAP 
Executive Committees held a joint meeting. The next meeting of SCAR, XXVI SCAR, will be held in 
Tokyo, Japan, 2O-31 July 2000. The SCAR Executive will also meet in Coa, India, during September 
1999 in conjunction with the CoMNAP XI meeting. 
 
At XXV SCAR the application of Canada to transfer from Associate to Full Membership of SCAR was 
discussed and the delegates agreed to admit Canada as a Full Member of SCAR. Membership of SCAR 
now stands at 26 Full Members and 6 Associate Members (see Appendix 1). Elections were held for the 
offices of President and two Vice-Presidents as Professor A C Rocha-Campos completed his ~year term of 
office as President and Professors o orheim and P C Quilty completed their ~year terms of office as 
Vice-President. Dr R H Rutford was elected President, and Dr J Valencia and Professor A D M Walker 
were elected Vice-Presidents. Dr Rutford was already a Vice-President and Dr R Schlich was elected as a 
Vice-President for 2 years to complete Dr Rutford's unexpired term. The membership of the Executive 
Committee is given at Appendix 2. New Chief officers of the Working Croups on Biology, Ceology, and 
Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere were elected during XXV SCAR and a new Chief officer of the 
Working Croup on Glaciology was elected at a later meeting of the group. SCAR Delegates approved a 
proposal to establish a new Croup of Specialists on Antarctic Neotectonics (ANTEC) and a new Chief 
officer of the Croup of Specialists on Seals was appointed. The Subcommittee on Evolutionary Biology of 
Antarctic organisms elected a new Chairman at its meeting during May 1999. The list of Chief officers is 
given in Appendix 3 
 
2. SCAR-CoMNAP CooPERATIoN 
 
SCAR and CoMNAP continue to maintain routine contact through their Secretariats. A joint meeting of 
the SCAR and CoMNAP Executive Committees was held during the XXV SCAR meeting. Among the 
issues discussed were more effective ways of reporting scientific developments to CoMNAP, particularly 
the development of international science programmes, to provide improved advance notice of major 
logistic support requirements. This will 
enable those national programmes taking part in SCAR programmes to structure their logistic facilities to 
provide more effective support for scientific research activities in the Antarctic. The first morning of the 
SCAR Delegates meeting was devoted to a discussion on this topic. 
 
3. ENvIRoNMENTAL AFFAIRS AND CoNsERvATIoN 
 
The Croup of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation held its tenth meeting (CoSEAC X) 
in Basel, Switzerland, during September 1998, and will hold its eleventh meeting (CoSEAC XI) in 
Montevideo, Uruguay, during July 1999. Many topics were discussed, including a new management plan 
for the Svarthamaren, SSSI 23, in Dronning Maud Land. This plan has been approved by CoSEAC and is 
due to be tabled at the CEP II meeting. 
 
other topics included: commercial exploitation of biological resources; environmental monitoring; 
environmental impact of visitors; the state of the Antarctic environment; and the introduction of diseases 
to Antarctic wildlife. A paper entitled "The Monitoring of Environmental Impacts of Scientific Activities 
and operations in Antarctica" will be submitted jointly to the CEP II meeting ~y CoMNAP and SCAR 
(XXIII ATCM WP 4). A paper entitled "Reporting on the State of the Antarctic Environment: The SCAR 
View" will be submitted to the CEP II meeting by SCAR (XXIII ATCM WP 6). 
 
4. ANT~ c DATA 
 
The International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) in Christchurch, New Zealand 
that hosts the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) has recently relocated its premises to the University of 
Canterbury. There have been several staff changes and the operation of the AMD is being reviewed to 
improve and facilitate user access. The SCAR-CoMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
UCADM) is supporting Antarctic data management and the development of the AMD. A separate report 
on "Antarctic Data Management" has been prepared by JCADM and has been submitted to this meeting 
jointly ~y SCAR and CoMNAP (XXIII ATCM IP 8). 
 
5. THEANTARCrlC ANDGLoBAL CHANGE 
 
The Croup of Specialists on Clobal Change and the Antarctic (CLoCHANT) held its seventh annual 
meeting (CLoCHANT VII) in Durham New Hampshire, United States, during April 1999. The SCAR 
Clobal Change Programme office, hosted by the Cooperative Research Centre for the Antarctic and 
Southern ocean Environment at the University of Tasmania in Hobart, Australia, continues to provide 
support for the programme. There are now four individual programmes forming the core of the SCAR 
Clobal Change Programme: 
Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution (ANTIME) 
Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt) 
International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expeditions (ITASE) 
 
Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores (PICE) 
other programmes have been transferred to their parent Working Croups but they will continue to 
contribute data to the Clobal Change Programme as appropriate. The ~iological Investigations of 
Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIoTAS) programme has been terrninated and a new prograrnme is 
being developed. 
 
A separate InforInation Paper on Clobal Change Research in the Antarctic will be submitted by SCAR to 
this meeting. 
 
These changes may involve some changes to the membership of the Croup of Specialists but the Croup of 
Specialists will continue to form the START Regional Committee for the Antarctic. 
 
The symposium on "Polar Aspects of Clobal Change", held in Troms0, Norway, 2~28 August 1998, was 
jointly sponsored by SCAR and the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), together with other 
co-sponsors. This was the first formal international collaboration between SCAR and L~SC. The 
symposium was successful in presenting the latest research findings on the role of the high latitudes in 
climate change, and allowed researchers from SCAR and IASC to exchange information from both polar 
regions. It provided a current assessment of the role of the polar regions in global change and brought 
together researchers engaged in all aspects of the physical biological and social sciences. Papers 
discussing field measurements, remote sensing, numerical modelling and data and information processing 
and analysis in both polar regions were presented in nine major subject areas. There were 240 participants, 
including a few dozen attending the many fringe meetings attached to the symposium, such as the Arctic 
Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). of about 50 oral and 67 poster presentations, 
approximately 40 papers to date have been submitted to Pola1~ Research, the house journal of the 
Norwegian Polar Institute for publication during 1999. 
 
6. ATMo6PHERIc AND SoLAR-TERREsTRIAL SCIENCES 
 
The First Regional observing Study of the Troposphere (FRoST) project has been completed. The analysis 
of Antarctic weather forecasts and monitoring of the ClobalTelecommunications System of the World 
Meteorological organization (WMo) have allowed improvements to be made to weather forecasting and 
data communlcations. 
 
A new development in the measurement of ozone concentrations above Antarctica has been to show a 
winter maximum by using a visible spectrometer to observe sunlight scattered from the overhead sky at 
twilight. This new observation is consistent with the well-known descent of the Antarctic ozone layer in 
winter, causing an increase in total ozone. ozone depletion near the edge of Antarctica may well increase 
in the next century, because increased greenhouse gases act to cool the ozone layer, thereby increasing the 
cloudiness which causes the activation of chlorine from CFCs. This ozone-poor air around the edge of 
Antarctica frequently passes over populated areas of southern South America later in the spring, when the 
mid-day sun is high enough to cause UV damage. 
The Antarctic Ceospace observatory Network (ACoNET) database, hosted ~y Italy, is continuing to 
support the collation and integration of data on magnetometry, riometry, Very Low Frequency (VLF) 
radio waves, and the horizontal vector velocity of the ionosphere. This international programme is now 
providing spatial and temporal information about geospace. The Working Croup is now planning a 
distributed system for the database on the World Wide Web as accessibility of data via the Web 
increases. 
 
7. EARTH SCENCES AND GLAcloLoGY 
 
The Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map (ADMAP) is a joint SCAR and IACA initiative to compile 
and integrate into a digital database all existing nearsurface and satellite magnetic anomaly data collected 
in Antarctica and surrounding oceans south of 6OoS. The ADMAP group is currently working on the 
integration of all available survey data into regional compilations for the Weddell Sea, the East Antarctic, 
~nd the Ross Sea sectors. The production and analysis of these regional compilations will be subject of 
the th*d ADMAP workshop scheduled for May 1999. 
 
The new Croup of Specialists on Antarctic Neotectonics (ANTEC) was proposed jointly by the three 
Working Croups on Solid-Earth Ceophysics, Ceology, and Ceodesy and Ceographic Information. The 
Croup of Specialists will provide international coordination of the new research opportunities arising from 
recent advances in geodetic and seismic instrumentation, such as CPS and broad-band seismometers to 
investigate the intra-plate rifting and aseismicity that are unique aspects of the Antarctic continent. 
 
The Steering Committee for the Antarctic off-shore Stratigraphy (ANToSTRAT) project is continuing to 
provide ~dvice on site selection to the ocean Drilling Program (oDP) for a future drilling leg in the Prydz 
~ay region during January 2OOO and subsequent legs proposed for the offshore Wilkes Land and Ross 
Sea areas. The Steering Committee is also continuing to maintain the Seismic Data Library System 
(SDLS). 
 
The Working Croup on Ceodesy and Ceographic Information has now published the Composite Cazetteer 
of Antarctica (CCA). It has taken six years to produce, and contains 21,552 names representing 16,563 
geographic features, sourced from 2O national Antarctic gazetteers and one international agency. The 
gazetteer will be updated and further developed ~y SCAR, with the addition of new names and sources, 
and descriptions for each name. SCAR gratefully acknowledges the major contribution of Italy's 
Programma Nazionale di Ricerche in Antartide in the production of the first edition of the Cazetteer. An 
Information Paper with an attached flyer will be t~bled at this meeting. The CCA is also available 
electronically on the Internet at: 
 
http:/ /www..pnra.it/SCAR_CAZE 
 
SCAR continues to maintain its interest in the research developments at Vostok Lake. A SCAR 
representative attended the National Science Foundationsponsored workshop in Washington DC during 
November 1998. The workshop was far more focused on establishing if there were any important 
scientific questions to pose rather than simply assuming its scientific value and 
considering how to enter and sample the lake. It was agreed that if possible research should not be limited 
to Vostok Lake but should also include at least one other lake, using the same high level of 
environmental contamination precautions for both systems. The possibility of a rift valley seffing with 
associated ancient rift sediments and possible hydrothermal activity with its potential for supporting life 
make for very exciting research opportunities. However, these possibilities are still very far from proven. 
 
SCAR, with other co-sponsors, will sponsor a workshop to begin developing plans for the scientific 
investigation of subglacial lakes beneath the Antarctic ice sheet. The workshop will be held in Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2~26 September 1999. 
 
8. I~FE SCENCES 
 
The Bird Biology Subcommittee continues to compile data on the breeding distributions and abundances 
of Antarctic and subantarctic seab*d populations. In response to a request from CCAMLR, the 
Subcommittee is convening a workshop in Montana, United States, during May 1999 to assess critically 
the available population data of Southern ocean seabirds. It has also commenced a joint study with 
BirdLife International to determine and describe Important Bird Areas (IBAs) of the Antarctic continent. 
 
The Subcommittee on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic organisms held a workshop during May 1999 to 
develop a science plan for investigating aspects of evolution in various Antarctic animal and plant groups. 
 
The Antarctic Pack Ice Seals (APIS) programme has undertaken field seasons in 1997-98, 199~99 and is 
planning a third season in 1999-20OO. In addition to coordinating the census of pack ice seals, data on ice 
characteristics and other biological components of the ecosystem are being collected. A workshop on data 
management for the programme is planned for 1999. 
 
The Working Croup on Human Biology and Medicine has dual roles of research and medical practice. 
Although there are no specific Antarctic health disorders, the Working Croup has an operational role in 
liaising with polar medical groups to improve Antarctic health care services. These includes Arctic 
medical practitioners, the International Union for Circumpolar Health (IUCH), and the International Arctic 
Science Committee (IASC). Current research includes investigating hormonal adaptation to the cold and 
light, psychology and behavioural adaptation, microbiology, changes in the immune response, nutrition, 
telemedicine, epidemiology and photobiology (effects of UV radiation on humans in Antarctica). 
Appendix 1 MEMBERS~P oF SCAR 
 
Full members: 
Date of ~dmission to 
D~te ~admission to 
 
Associate Membership 
Fl~ll Membership 
 
     Argentina 
 
3 February 1958 
     Australia 
 
3 February 1958 
     Belgium 
 
3 February 1958 
     Chile 
 
3 February 1958 
     France 
 
3 February 1958 
     Japan 
 
3 February 1958 
     Ne~v Zealand 
 
3 February 1958 
     Norway 
 
3 February 1958 
     South Africa 
 
3 February 1958 
Russia (formerly Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) 3 February 1958 
     United Kingdom 
 
3 February 1958 
     United States of America 
 
3 February 1958 
Cermany (including former Cerman Democratic Republic) 22 May 1978 
     Poland 
 
22 May 1978 
     India 
 
1 october 1984 
     Brazil 
 
1 october 1984 
     China 
 
23 June 1986 
     Sweden 
(24 March 1987) 
12 September 1988 
     Italy 
(19 May 1987) 
12 September 1988 
     Uruguay 
(29July 1987) 
12September 1988 
     Spain 
(15January 1987) 
23July 1990 
     Netherlands 
(20 May 1987) 
23 July 1990 
     Korea, Republic of 
(18 December 1987) 
23 July 1990 
     Finland 
(1 July 1988) 
23 July 199O 
     Ecuador 
(12September 1988) 
15June 1992 
     Canada 
(5September 1994) 
27July 1999 
 
Associ~te Members: 
     Peru 
14 April 1987 
     Switzerland 
16 June 1987 
     Estonia 
15 June 1992 
     Pakistan 
15 June 1992 
     Ukraine 
5 September 1994 
     Bulgaria 
5 March 1995 
 
ICSU Ullioll Me1nbers 
ICU 
International Ceographical Union 
IUBS 
International Union of Biological Sciences 
IUCC 
International Union of Ceodesy and Ceophysics 
IUCS 
International Union of Ceological Sciences 
IUPAC 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry 
IUPS 
International Union of Physiological Sciences 
URSI 
Union Radio Scientifique Internationale 
Appendix 2 
SCAR EXECUTIVE CoMMIrrEE 
 
Preside~l t 
Dr R H Rutford 
Ceosciences Program, The University of Texas at Dallas, Po Box 830688, 
MS: Fo 21, Richardson, T~< 75083 O688, United States of America. 
Telephone: +1 972 883 647O;        Fax: +1 972 883 2482; 
E-mail: rutford@utdallas.edu 
 
Past President 
Professor A C Rocha-Campos 
Instituto de Ceociencias, Universidade de S~o Paulo, 
Rua do Lago 562, CEP O5508-9OO, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil. 
Telephone: +55118184125;        Fax: +55118184129; 
E-mail: acrcampo@usp.br 
 
Vice-Presidents 
Dr F J Davey 
Institute of Ceological and Nuclear Sciences, 
Po Box 3O368, Wellington, New Zealand. 
Telephone: +64 4 570 4807;         Fax: +64 4 57O 4603; 
E-mail: f.davey@gns.cri.nz 
 
Dr R Schlich 
Ecole et observatoire des Sciences de la Terre, 
5 Rue Rene Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France. 
Telephone: 33 88 41 63 86;          Fax: +33 3 88 61 67 47; 
E-mail: rschlich@eost.u-strasbg.fr 
 
Dr J Valencia 
Departamento Scientifico, Instituto Antartico Chileno, 
Avenida Louis Thayer ojeda 814, Santiago, Chile. 
Telephone: +56 2 678 7263;         Fax: +56 2 272 7363; 
E-mail: jvalenci@inach.cl 
 
Professor A D ~I Walker 
Space Physics Research Institute, Department of Physics, 
University of Natal, Durban 4041, South Africa. 
Telephone: +27 31 260 2775;         Fax: +27 31 261 6550; 
E-mail: walker@scifsl.und.ac.za 
 
Execlltive Secretary 
Dr P D Clarkson 
SCAR Secretariat, Scott Polar Research Institute, 
Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 lER, United Kingdom. 
Telephone: +44 1223 362061;        Fax: +44 1223 336549; 
E-mail: execsec@scar.demon.co.uk 
Web site: http://www.scar.org 
Appendix 3 
SCAR CHIEF oFFICERS 
 
WoRKING GRoUPS 
 
Biology 
 
Dr Y Le Maho (Chairman), Centre d'Ecologie et Physiologie Energetiques, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, 23 rue Becquerel, 67O87 Strasbourg Cedex, ~:rance. 
 
Mr J Cooper, (Chairrnan of the Bird Biology Sub-Conunittee), Percy FitzPatrick Institute of African 
ornithology, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa. 
 
Dr P C Rodhouse (Chairman of the Subcomrnittee on Evolutionary Biology of Antarctic organisms), 
British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom. 
 
Geodesy and Geographic Inforrnation 
 
Mr A L Clarke (Secretary), Departrnent of Industry, Science and Tourism, Analytical and Mapping 
Division, cPo Box 9839, Canberra, ACT 26O1, Australia. 
 
Geology 
 
Dr R A J Trouw (Seaetary), Universidade Federal do Rio de Janiero, Dept de 
Ceologie I.CEo, Ilha do Fundao, CEP 2191O-900, Rio de Janiero, Brazil. 
 
Glaciology 
 
Professor Qin Dahe (Chairman), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Bureau for the 
Harmonious Development of Nature and Society, Beijing 100864, China. 
 
Human Biology and Medicine 
 
Dr D J Lugg (Chairman), Antarctic Division, Channel Highway, Kingston, Tasmania 7050, Australia. 
 
Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere 
 
Dr J Turner (Chairman), British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OET, 
United Kingdom. 
 
Solid-Earth Geophysics 
 
Dr D Damaske (Secretary), Bundesanstalt fur Ceowissenschaften und Rohstoff (BCR), Stilleweg 2, 
D-3000 Hannover 51, Cermany. 
 
Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical I~esearch 
 
Professor A D M Walker (Chairman), Space Physics Research Institute, Department of Physics, 
University of Natal, Durban, 4041 South Africa. 
Joint Working Groups on Geology and Solid-Earth Geophysics 
 
Dr A K Cooper (Chairman of the ANToSTRAT Programme), Pacific Branch of 
Marine Ceology, US Ceological Survey, MS 99, 345 Middlefield Road, Menlo 
Park, CA 94025, USA. 
 
GRoUPS oF SPECIALISTS 
 
Seals 
 
Dr J L Bengtson (Convenor), National Marine Mammal Laboratory, 
NoAA/NMFS, 760O Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115, USA. 
 
Dr I L Boyd (Secretary), British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, 
Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom. 
 
Antarctic Environmental Affairs and Conservation 
 
Dr D W H Walton (Convenor), British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley 
Road, Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom. 
 
Global Change and the Antarctic 
 
Dr J H Priddle (Convenor), British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley 
Road, Cambridge CB3 OET, United Kingdom. 
 
Dr I D Coodwin (Programme Coordinator), SCAR Clobal Change Programme 
office, Antarctic CRC, cPo Box 252C, Hobart 7001, Tasmania, Australia. 
 
Antarctic Neotectonics 
 
Dr T J Wilson (Convenor), Department of Ceological Sciences, ohio State 
University, 275 Mendenhall, 125 South oval Mall, Columbus oH 4321O, 
United States. 
 
oTHER GRoUPS 
 
SCAR-CoMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
 
Dr L Belbin (Chairman), Antarctic Division, Po Box 361, Kingston, TAS 7O51, 
Australia. 
 
Mr A L Clarke (SCAR Representative), Department of Industry, Science and 
Tourism, Analytical and Mapping Division, cPo Box 9839, Canberra, ACT 
26O1, Australia. 
 
Standing Finance Committee 
 
Dr R Schlich, Ecole et observatoire des Sciences de la Terre, 5 Rue Rene 
Descartes, 67O84 Strasbourg, ~rance. 
Appendix 4 
 
LIST oF AcRoNyMs 
 
ADMAP 
Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map 
ACoNET 
Antarctic Ceospace observatory Network 
AMAP 
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme 
AMD 
Antarctic Master Directory 
ANTEC 
Croup of Specialists on Antarctic Neotectonics 
ANTIME 
Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution 
ANToSTRAT Antarctic off-shore Stratigraphy 
APIS 
Antarctic Pack Ice Seals 
ASPeCt 
Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate 
ATCM 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
BIoTAS 
Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems 
CCAMLR 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
 
Resources 
CEP 
Committee for Environrnental Protection 
CFC 
Chloro-fluoro-carbon 
CCA 
Composite Cazetteer of Antarctica 
CoMNAP 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
FRoST 
First Regional observing Study of the Troposphere 
CLoCHANT 
Croup of Specialists on Clobal Change and the Antarctic 
CoSEAC 
Croup of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
 
Conservation 
CPS 
Clobal Positioning System 
IACA 
International Association of Ceomagnetism and Aeronomy 
IASC 
International Arctic Science Committee 
IBA 
Important Bird Area 
ICAIR 
International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research 
ITASE 
International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expeditions 
IUCH 
International Union for Circumpolar Health 
JCADM 
Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management 
JCoFS 
Joint Clobal ocean Flux Study 
NASA 
National Aeronautical and Space Administration 
oDP 
ocean Drilling Program 
PICE 
Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores 
SCAR 
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
SCoR 
Scientific Committee on oceanic Research 
SDLS 
Seismic Data Library System 
So-JCoFS 
Southern ocean - JCoFS 
START 
System for Analysis, Research and Training 
UV 
ultra-violet radiation 
VLF 
Very Low Frequency 
WMo 
World Meteorological org~nization 
Appendix 5 
 
PAPERS SCHEDULED To BE PRESENTED To X~aII ATCM 
 
Working Papers 
 
The Monitoring of Environmental Impacts of 
  Scientific Activities and operations in Antarctica 
with CoMNAP 
Reporting on the State of the Antarctic Environment: 
  The SCAR View 
 
Information Papers 
 
SCAR Report to XXIII ATCM 
Antarctic Data Management 
with CoMNAP 
SCAR Clobal Change Programme 
Scientific Research in the Antarctic 
SCAR Composite Cazetteer of Antarctica 
