DELEGATION OF SWEDEN 
 
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT 
BY 
AMBASSADOR EVA KETTIS 
 
Mr Chairman, 
 
First, let me express the greatfulness of the Delegation of Sweden to the Government of Peru for inviting the 
ATCM XXIII to your beautiful country. We lool; forward to your chairing this Meeting which takes place at an 
important time for the Antarctic Treaty System with many new challenges and which will be the last Meeting of 
this millenium. 
 
It is important because it is a manifestation of the 4Oth Anniversary of the signature ot the Antarctic Treaty, which 
has so far served us well in keeping that continent free from discord and dedicated to peace, cooperation and 
science. It now lies upon us that the Treaty also in the coming century will continue to be a tool for a peaceful 
development. This wacs recognized by the Ministerial-on-lce gathered at the invitation of New Zeelalld in January 
1999. 
 
Olle issue that is pertinent to the good functioning of the Treaty is to provide it witll adequate clssistance from a 
~ecretariat. Sweden is of the view that this is is now one of the most urgent tas~;s in the preparations for the next 
century. Sweden will support a consensuci view of the location of the secretariat. Aware of the fact that there are 
diffcrent orlers we suggest that - in thc true spirit of the Treaty itself - we mal;e an effort to carry this issue forward 
at this meeting. 
 
To prolect and preserve the environment is one of the important goals of the ATS. We welcome the increased 
Iranspclrency of the ATS, the openness to the general public all(l the bettcr availability of information on Antarctica 
and the activities thcre, that is a result of the entry into forcc last yeclr of the Madrid Protocol on Environlllelltal 
Protection to the Antarctic Trcaty. 
 
Wc welcomc the development Or a comprehensivc State of the Antarctic Environment Report as an important tool 
to increase the linowledge on Antarctica and on the impact on the environment of this pristille continent. Tlle report 
will be of bclle~it to govcrnments alld ~o the scientific community as well as to the general public. In addition. a 
Slatc of thc Antarctic Environment Report will constitule a useful baselinc of glob~l relevance for further studies on 
the effects on Antarctica, in particular by antllropogenic activities as well as providing a basis for policy decisions 
and trend allalysi~ in cllvironmelltal monitorillg. 
 
Sweden welcomes the fact th~t the ATCM now enters into ncgotiation~ on a liability annex to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection. Even more important is that delegations show a willingness to engage in the search for 
constructive solutions to many difficult problems. Sweden is ~nxious to see that these negoti~tions result in 
comr1rehcnsive liability regime, hGp~fully in time for the year 2()()1. 
One of the most imminent problems that need a speedy and solid solution is the illegal. unreported or unregulated 
fishing of Patagonian toothfish in the CCAMLR area. CCAMLR is a convention on its own ground, and at the same 
time an important element of the ATS and of the overall management regime of the Antarctic ecosystem. We 
therefore support the idea that ATCM XXIII urges CCAMLR to take action as soon as possible. 
 
There is a strong link between investigations for scientific and environmental purposes in the Arctic and the 
Antarctic. The importance of a scientific bipolar approach played a role when Sweden decided to adhere to the 
ATS. And it is why we now welcome the development of co-operation in the Arctic Council, where the Declaration 
of Ministers in Iqaluit and the meeting recently of senior officials in Anchorage in Alaska signal new and 
strengthened efforts. 
 
Finally, I would lil;e to draw the intention to the positive effects that could be derived from international 
co-operation. As an example I would lil;e to mention the successful logistic and environmental management 
co-operation between three of the Nordic countries, Finland, Norway and Sweden, active in both the Antarctic and 
Arctic regions. 
