 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education and training 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
1. 
During the discussion at ATCM XXII on Education Issues (ATCM XXII Report, Item 16, 
para 138) COMNAP advised that it was to convene a forum on Education and Training at its 1998 
Annual Meeting in Concepcion, Chile.  The aim of the forum was to consider what action may be 
necessary as a result of the findings outlined in the paper presented by COMNAP at ATCM XXII 
(XXII ATCM/Information Paper 5).  ATCM XXII requested COMNAP to table its report of the 
forum at ATCM XXIII so that Parties could further consider what action, if any, Parties and the 
ATCM might need to take. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
2. 
Attached is a copy of the report on the Forum on Education and Training conducted in 
conjunction with the COMNAP X meeting held in Concepcion during July 1998.  It will be noted 
that the outcome of the Forum was an agreement to establish COMNAP networks on training 
(called TRAINET) and information (called INFONET) to facilitate exchange of information 
between the relevant officials in the various national Antarctic agencies.  Both networks have been 
established and are able to readily exchange information via the Internet through list servers that 
have been established at the COMNAP Secretariat and which contain the e-mail addresses of all the 
respective members. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
3. 
It is recommended that the ATCM note that COMNAP has established networks to 
facilitate the exchange of information on Education and Training, and Information Exchange as 
described in the Attachment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT 
 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
COMNAP X 
 
Forum on Education and Training 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
The XXI ATCM in Christchurch requested COMNAP and IAATO to collect information 
on the education and training of expeditioners and other visitors to Antarctica and report the results 
to ATCM XXII.  Both COMNAP and IAATO conducted a survey of their members and presented 
the results to the Tromso ATCM XXII.  COMNAP also decided to convene a Forum on Education 
and Training in conjunction with the COMNAP X Meeting at Concepcion and invited IAATO to 
participate.  ATCM XXII requested COMNAP to report the results of the Forum to ATCM XXII 
that is to take place in Lima in May 1999. 
 
 
FORUM PROCEEDINGS 
 
2. 
The Forum was conducted on 22 July 1998 during the period of the COMNAP X meeting 
that was held at the University of Concepcion in Chile.  
 
 
Chairman’s Address 
 
3. 
In his opening address the Chairman, Ambassador Oscar Pinochet de la Barra (Chile), 
referred to ATCM XXII which noted that Chile would host the Forum.  Ambassador Pinochet 
stated the results of the COMNAP survey on education and training confirmed that all operators 
gave their expeditioners thorough training on environmental matters, safety, etcetera plus 
specialised training according to their role in Antarctica.  He also noted that many countries had 
developed and refined their training process over a period of fifty years experience of working in 
the Antarctic.  Ambassador Pinochet acknowledged that training people to live in Antarctica is 
often more difficult than other elements of training. 
 
Tourist Operators 
 
4. 
Anne Kershaw (IAATO) said that the training provided by tourist operators was 
somewhat different to that given by national operators.  Staff  members of tourism operators receive 
extensive briefing materials with their contract.  On tourist ships there are briefings on safety drills 
but in the event of emergencies, it is the crew not the staff who are responsible for managing the 
incident.  Nevertheless staff is trained on the use of lifeboats and zodiacs and is given an IAATO-
designed slide show on emergency procedures prior to departure. 
 
5. 
With regard to the air operations of Adventure Network International (ANI), their staff is 
given seven days training in Punta Arenas prior to the commencement of the season.  The training 
includes navigation, communications, use of equipment, incident scenarios, etc.  Mrs Kershaw 
emphasised that the safety of passengers is of paramount importance to the company. 
 
2 
 
 
 
6. 
ANI also conducts five days of training for staff in the Patriot Hills.  She noted that ANI 
and other tourist operators take a lot of leads from the training regimes developed over the years by 
national Antarctic operators. 
 
National Operators 
 
7. Anders Karlqvist (Sweden), noted that there is a need to make a distinction between education 
of the public about Antarctica and training persons going to Antarctica.  In the latter category 
Professor Karlqvist referred to three principal groups, namely: 
 
• 
Short term visitors; 
• 
Persons working in Antarctica; and  
• 
Field guides. 
 
8. 
He noted that there is a large degree of consistency in the content of training programs 
conducted by national operators.  Virtually all include Antarctic knowledge, health and safety, 
environmental matters, field behavior and specialist training relating to the proposed location of the 
expeditioners.  Various training techniques are used including lectures, videos, practical exercises, 
etc.  Field training is conducted in the home country, Antarctica or both. 
 
9. Professor Karlqvist suggested that there could be benefit in exchanging information between 
operators on details of their training programs that would help to determine best practice.  He 
further suggested that by exchanging this information it might be possible to establish common 
ground or standards.  He noted, however, that an earlier attempt to standardise medical screening 
procedures had not worked well.  It could also be beneficial for representatives of programs to 
undertake the training programs of other operators.  In this regard Professor Karlqvist extended an 
invitation for other national operators to participate in the Swedish expeditioner training program. 
 
 
 
Science Perspective 
 
10. Dr David Walton (UK), pointed out that the views he was expressing were personal and he 
was not speaking on behalf of SCAR.  He referred to the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Opportunities 
for Antarctic Environmental Education and Training held in Gorizia, Italy in April 1993.  The 
workshop focussed on environmental training but also considered the importance of informing the 
public on Antarctic science.  Dr Walton summarised the principal recommendations which 
included: 
 
• 
The need for a lay guide to the Madrid Protocol; 
• 
Training on the requirements of the Protocol; 
• 
The need for education at all levels including visitors, scientists, support staff, etc; 
• 
The importance of public information and public access to Antarctic information; 
• 
The need to use the media to a greater extent; 
• 
Raising the profile of Antarctic by offering a prize; and  
• 
Increasing the availability of videos on Antarctica. 
 
11. 
Dr Walton advised that SCAR has not produced a publication to present its work to the 
public although this was attempted several years ago.  He referred to some examples of education 
packages for schools including a Belgian publication, CD-ROM and slides on the benthos, and a 
British Antarctic Survey publication on the ozone hole.  He suggested that SCAR needed to present 
itself more effectively to the public at large. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Information 
 
11. Tim Higham (New Zealand), said that he intended to address the topic of public awareness 
and education.  He noted to three elements of strategic education, namely: 
 
• 
Science in society; 
• 
Environmental awareness; and 
• 
Private sector influence. 
 
12. 
Mr Higham referred to a foresight process undertaken by the Antarctica New Zealand  
several months ago and involved all the principal stakeholders.  He advised that Antarctica New 
Zealand adopted a partnership approach in promoting public awareness of Antarctica and referred 
to: 
 
• 
the public exhibitions in Christchurch and Auckland; 
• 
poets in Antarctica; 
• 
artists in Antarctica; 
• 
teachers in Antarctica linked to NZ by the INTERNET and video  
conferencing; and 
• 
tracking a sea ice journey of the US research vessel Nathaniel B Palmer. 
 
13. 
During the forthcoming season the Antarctica New Zealand will be supporting coverage of 
an ice trekking expedition to the South Pole.  In January 1999 they will host an international visit of 
government ministers to Scott Base and McMurdo.  Antarctica New Zealand is also keen to develop 
a “Towards 2000” international public awareness project.  Mr Higham suggested possible 
networking of information officers on potential events at the dawn of the new millenium. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
14. 
Reference was made to The Netherlands experience during the current “Year of the Ocean” 
when berths were made available to school children and university students on research vessels.  
The Argentine representative advised of an Antarctic School that offers course for persons 
travelling to Antarctica.  The Italian delegate advised that conferences involving Antarctic scientists 
had been held in a number of schools and that an Antarctic Exhibition had been displayed in three 
Italian museums. 
 
15. 
Towards the conclusion of the discussion proposals were supported to establish two new 
COMNAP networks; one on training and the other on public information.  Small working groups 
were set up to develop the terms of reference for the networks (see Annex).   
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
16. 
The Chairman, Ambassador Oscar Pinochet de la Barra thanked participants for their 
contribution to the Forum and welcomed the establishment of the proposed networks that would 
foster the exchange of ideas, knowledge and expertise in the fields of training and public education. 
 
 
 
 
JCAS/10Aug99 
 
4 
 
 
 
5 
ANNEX 
 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
COMNAP 
 
Education and Training Networks 
 
Antarctic Information Officers Network (INFONET) 
 
Aim 
 
• To exchange information and experience about public information and public education 
initiatives. 
 
Tasks 
 
• Establish a membership list; 
• Set up mechanisms to exchange information (eg. an e-mail network); 
• Conduct a survey of members on public information and education initiatives; 
• Assess the potential of a collaborative millennium project; and 
• Facilitate coordination of media releases regarding incidents or activities involving 
more than one national program. 
 
Network Membership 
 
• Those persons responsible for the public information and education functions in 
COMNAP agencies and in the offices of SCAR and IAATO. 
 
 
 
Antarctic Training Network (TRAINET) 
 
Aim 
 
• To exchange information and experience on the training of Antarctic expeditioners and 
other visitors to the continent. 
 
Tasks 
 
• Exchange information and experience on training programs including manuals, 
techniques, procedures and training aids; and 
• 
Promote initiatives between national programs in order to develop and facilitate closer 
cooperation. 
