1 
GREENPEACE 
1998/99 SOUTHERN OCEAN EXPEDITION  
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION 
 
 
1.  
CONTACT DETAILS IN RELATION TO IEE 
 
 
 
This IEE has been produced by: 
 
Lic. RICARDO ROURA 
 
Email: gondwana@voyager.co.nz 
 
 
to whom all inquiries and comments should be directed, 
 
 
 
on behalf of the organisers of the expedition: 
 
GREENPEACE 
 
c/o Private Bag 92-507 
 
 
Keizersgracht 176  
Wellesley Street 
 
 
 
1016 DW Amsterdam 
Auckland 
 
 
 
 
The Netherlands 
New Zealand 
 
Ph: 
+64 9 630 6317 
 
 
+31 20 523 6222 
Fax: 
+64 9 630 7121 
 
 
+31 20 523 6265 
 
 
2 
2.   
NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY 
 
This Initial Environmental Evaluation relates to the proposed 1998/99 Southern Ocean Expedition, 
organised by Greenpeace.  This document is in fulfilment of the requirements set forth by the 
Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol), given that part of 
the Expedition’s voyage will take place in waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area (south of 60o S). 
 
The planned expedition involves a cruise of approximately 11,000 nautical miles and 12-13 weeks 
of duration, divided in two legs.  On the first leg, the MV Arctic Sunrise, chartered by Stichting 
Marine Services, will depart Auckland, New Zealand in late December 1998 and proceed to the 
sector of the Southern Ocean south of New Zealand and Australia and north of the Ross Sea, 
passing by but not landing at the Balleny Islands.  No activities will take place in the Specially 
Protected Area No4 (Sabrine Island), and no access permits will be sought.   The ship will call at 
Macquarie Island before  heading to Hobart, Australia at the end of January 1999.  The ship will 
spend approximately three weeks in waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area.  On the second leg, the 
MV Arctic Sunrise will continue her activities in the Southern Ocean for a further seven weeks, but 
will not visit the Antarctic Treaty Area.   
 
This environmental impact assessment is limited to the Expedition’s first leg. 
 
No overnight ashore accommodation in Antarctic or Subantarctic islands is planned except in case 
of emergency.  Helicopter trips are planned as part of the expedition. 
 
The proposed activities include the inspection, documentation and public exposure of illegal, 
unsustainable or pseudo-scientific harvesting activities in the Southern Ocean, including waters of 
the Antarctic Treaty Area, and a modest research program. 
 
The trip will be carried out on board of the MV Arctic Sunrise, registered in The Netherlands, which 
has full ice-breaker classification.  The ship, ship's equipment and crew have proven capacity and 
experience in operating in polar and Southern Ocean conditions.  All wastes will be taken away 
from Antarctica and from Subantarctic islands, with the exception of sewage which will receive a 
full non-chemical treatment on board.  The ship has a custom made oil spill contingency plan 
(SOPEP).   
 
Direct, indirect and cumulative impacts of the proposed activity, and alternatives to that activity are 
considered in this document.  It is concluded that, except in the case of major contingencies, the 
proposed expedition cruise is unlikely to have more than a minor or transitory impact upon the 
Antarctic environment. 
 
 
3 
3. 
COMMENTS IN RELATION TO THIS ASSESSMENT 
 
This IEE has been made based on earlier documents prepared by Greenpeace, but modified to suit 
in format and length a model IEE for Antarctic cruises.  This model is becoming increasingly used 
in New Zealand for activities in Antarctica and in Subantarctic Islands comparable to the activities 
described in this document.  While this is a shorter and somewhat less detailed document than 
earlier IEEs prepared for Greenpeace, it is however judged to be adequate for a single Southern 
Ocean cruise with no anticipated activity ashore in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
 
Greenpeace is committed to the continuous improvement of the EIA process, including the 
assessment methods used and the format of the final document.  Within the Antarctic Treaty 
System, an accepted standard for IEEs and for activities demanding certain levels of IEEs should be 
agreed upon.  In this context, brevity is considered an improvement as long as the accuracy of 
assessments and the effectiveness of the EIA process is maintained. 
 
The evaluation of expected impacts has been made using a suite of approaches.  Individual 
assessments and proposed mitigate measures are largely (albeit not solely) based on operational 
experience in the Southern Ocean and on the best EIA practice in Antarctica.  Uncertainties on the 
accuracy of assessments remain, especially in relation to the assessment of cumulative impacts.  
Taking uncertainties (and subjectivity factors) in consideration, a precautionary approach has been 
used as an overall principle in the planning of the Expedition and assessment of impacts.  This has 
resulted in limiting to some extent the scope and magnitude of the proposed activities while not 
compromising significantly the Expedition’s goals. 
 
 
 
4 
4. 
BACKGROUND  
 
4.1 
Scope of this evaluation 
 
This Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) focuses on the first leg of a planned voyage to the 
Southern Ocean including waters south of the Antarctic Convergence in December 1998 and 
January 1999 with the MV Arctic Sunrise.    The second leg, a further two months cruise of 
Southern Ocean, is not included here as the Expedition will not re-enter the Antarctic Treaty Area.  
Unless otherwise specified, for the purposes of this document the terms “Expedition”, “activity” or 
similar refer only to the first leg.  For the purposes of this document, “the ship” refers to the MV 
Arctic Sunrise, chartered by Stichting Marine Services. A discussion of possible environmental 
impacts and mitigating measures is included and alternatives are discussed.   
 
This IEE has been carried out in accordance with Article 8, Annex I and other requirements of the 
Madrid Protocol.   
 
Greenpeace’s activities in the Southern Ocean are managed in accordance with the relevant 
regulations and recommendations including: 
• The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (implemented in New Zealand 
through the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act of 1994) with particular reference to 
Annex II (Conservation of Flora and Fauna), Annex III (Waste Disposal and Waste 
Management) and Annex IV (Prevention of Marine Pollution). 
• All Resolutions from the Antarctic Treaty System dealing with SPAs, SSSIs and other Protected 
Areas. 
• Relevant sections of Recommendation X-8 (Effects of non-governmental expeditions) and 
Recommendation XVIII-1 (Tourism and non-governmental activities). 
• International regulations relevant to vessels at sea. 
• The requirements of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
(MARPOL), as well as SCALOP's and COMNAP's recommendations on prevention of fuel 
spills.  
• All national regulations pertaining the environmental management of sub-Antarctic islands in the 
Southern Ocean;   
• All national legislations that apply to the ship and individual crew members. 
• Greenpeace’s own standards and operational procedures. 
 
New Zealand citizens, residents and entities have general obligations in regard to seals and whales 
under the Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978.  A separate application for the appropriate permits in 
relation to whale and seal watching activities at sea has been lodged with the responsible department, 
the Department of Conservation (DoC).  
 
Implementation of the above regulations are the responsibility of the ship's Master, Expedition 
Leader and Environmental Officer.  
 
Further legal obligations and permitting requirements are necessary for the visit to Macquarie 
Island.  These are not included in the present IEE and are being dealt with separately with 
Australian authorities of the State of Tasmania.   This IEE does not aim to present all of the material 
necessary under these other legal obligations. 
 
 
 
5 
                    
4.2 
Expedition organiser 
 
The Expedition organiser is Greenpeace, an environmental non-governmental organisation based in 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 
  
Greenpeace has been campaigning since 1983 for the protection of the Southern Ocean ecosystem.  
Greenpeace has campaigned for the establishment of  “World Park Antarctica,” a comprehensive 
environmental protection regime that would allow activities that pose acceptably low risks to the 
environment;  for the designation of a Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary; for the effective 
implementation of an ecosystem-based management of the fisheries in the Southern Ocean under 
the Commission for the Conservation of  Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).  
Greenpeace has also campaigned to control the causes of human-induced climate change and other 
processes of global pollution that are also having direct and indirect effects on the Southern Ocean 
ecosystem. 
 
As part of these campaigns, Greenpeace has carried out activities in the Southern Ocean (both south 
and north of the Antarctic Convergence) focused on illegal, unsustainable or pseudo-scientific 
harvesting activities that constitute an unacceptable risk to the Antarctic and Southern Ocean1 
ecosystems.  
 
Currently there is an out of control illegal fishery for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus 
eleginoides) in the Southern Ocean.  Little is know about the biology of this species.  However, 
there is a real possibility that the species will become commercially extinct before enough is known 
to allow for the development of effective management mechanisms.  The broader impact of this 
fishery on the ecology of the Southern Ocean is unknown.  In addition, there is a significant seabird 
bycatch problem as this fishery uses longline technology.  Similar problems may also soon affect 
populations of a related species, the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsonii) in a similar 
fashion. 
 
The Expedition Leader for the first leg of the 1998/99 Southern Ocean Expedition is Cristina 
Mormorunni.  Annex I includes a list of the names, responsibilities and a brief résumé of the other 
key Expedition members. 
 
 
 
1 This document will refer to the Southern Ocean in its widest sense (i.e. including both waters north and south of the 
Antarctic Convergence). 
6 
4.3   
The Expedition 
 
4.3.1 The ship 
 
 
 
 MV Arctic Sunrise 
Vessel   
DNV 1A1 icebreaker EO (launched Norway, 1975) 
Lenght  
49.62m 
Breadth 
11.5m 
Draft  
5.3m 
Displacement 949 tones gross, 284 tones net 
Flag state 
The Netherlands (ATCP) 
Comments: 
Seismic research vessel converted to sea going motor yacht.  Stern and bow thruster, 
 
 
crane, A-frames for fast rescue boats, helicopter lift. 
 
4.3.2 Ship’s complement 
Total   
 
 
27 
Campaign staff  
 
 9 
Crew (inc. helicopter pilot) 
18 
Helicopter  
 
 
 1 
Inflatables 
 
 
 4 
Other vehicles  
 
 0 
7 
5 
PROPOSED ACTIVITY 
 
 
5.1 
Purpose 
 
The proposed activity is a six weeks expedition to the Southern Ocean.  This includes, but is not 
limited to, waters under the Antarctic Treaty Area (south of 60o S).   The primary aims of the 
1998/99 Southern Ocean Expedition are: 
 
• to focus the attention of the public, media and decision makers on current and continued threats 
to the Southern Ocean’s environment and wilderness values; 
• to express Greenpeace's views directly, through documentation and exposure, to those who are 
having an immediate effect on the ecosystems of the Southern Ocean;   
• to investigate, document and publicly expose illegal, unsustainable or pseudo-scientific 
harvesting activities in the Southern Ocean and 
• to carry out a modest research program. 
 
 
5.2 
Itinerary 
 
The precise itinerary will depend on weather and ice conditions, as well as on logistic and campaign 
 considerations.  Within the Antarctic Treaty Area, the approximate boundaries to be visited are 
170o W and 160o E and 75o S.  The approximate schedule is as follows:  
 
Day 
 
Date  
Expected location/activity 
 
1 
 
28/12/98 
Departure from Auckland, New Zealand 
10 
 
6/01/99 
Arrive Ross Sea 
24 
 
20/01/99 
Depart Ross Sea 
28 
 
24/01  
Arrive Macquarie Island 
29 
 
25/01  
Depart Macquarie Island 
33 
 
29/01  
Arrive Hobart, Australia. 
 
The ship will continue her activities in the Southern Ocean after a partial personnel change and 
provisioning in Hobart.  However, the ship will not return to waters of the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
 
 
 
 
5.3 
Description of the proposed activities at each location 
 
The Expedition itinerary includes three definable localities of activity (other than major ports): at 
sea; the Ross Sea and Macquarie Island.  Operation of the ship itself constitutes a continuous activity 
over the entire cruise.  Activities at sea, which includes waters within the Antarctic Treaty Area, will 
constitute the bulk of the Expeditions’ program. 
 
8 
                    
No Antarctic Protected Area will be entered at any of the localities visited, and no permits will be 
sought for any collection, sampling or handling of Antarctic biota other than those specified under 
sections 4.1 and 5.7.1. 
 
5.3.1 “At sea” 
 
During the first leg of the expedition, the ship will spend approximately 25 days cruising at sea beyond 
sight of land, and a further 8 days cruising within a relatively short distance of  land.  During this "at 
sea" period various research activities are will take place including marine mammal and seabird 
research, and a marine debris survey.  Helicopter aerial surveys will be carried out during this period. 
 Depending on weather and campaign considerations, one or more daily flights may take place, 
usually at altitudes of over 1,000m.  
 
5.3.2  Balleny Islands 
 
The ice-capped Balleny Islands are the northernmost land in the Ross Sea region.  The islands 
support flora and fauna which represent many circumpolar distributions at this latitude and have the 
most diverse variety of breeding bird species in the Ross Sea, including (depending on different 
records) four to five species that are not found anywhere else in the region2.  In addition, the islands 
support six Adélie penguin colonies3.  
 
Specially Protected Area No 4  (66o 57’S, 163o 16E) is located in Sabrine Island, the smallest island 
in the group.  The island is a representative sample of the flora and fauna in the region and has no 
agreed Management Plan. 
 
The Balleny Islands are on the shipping route between New Zealand and the Ross Sea and are 
occasionally visited by tourist ships (it is not clear how frequent landings are). 
 
The ship will spend approximately 5 days in the vicinity of, but not landing at, the Balleny Islands, 
but not necessarily in sight of the islands.  During this period the research and documentation 
program will continue.  Depending on weather conditions and campaign needs, one or more 
helicopter flights may take place on a daily basis.  The islands will not be overflown. 
 
Given the paucity of knowledge of the ecosystem of the Balleny Islands, it is not intended to make 
landfall.  Any documentation required will be effected from an inflatable launch. Particular care 
will be taken to avoid disturbance to wildlife, particularly breeding penguins, other breeding 
seabirds, and hauled out seals (including possible breeding seal species), by following a strategy of 
avoidance or staying away from fauna. 
 
5.3.3 Macquarie Island 
 
Macquarie Island is Australian sovereign territory outside the Antarctic Treaty Area, administered by 
the State of Tasmania. The proposed visit to Macquarie is coordinated with the Tasmanian National 
Parks and Wildlife Service and the Australian Antarctic Division, the latter of whom operate the 
 
2  These are: chinstrap penguin (Pygoselis antarctica); cape pigeon (Daption capense capense); Antarctic fulmar 
(Fulmarus glacialoides); Antarctic prion (Patchyptila desolata); and (perhaps) Southern skua (Stercorarious skua 
lonnbergi). 
3 There are three Adélie penguin colonies on Buckle Island (900 pairs), one on Sabrine Island (2,000-3,000 pairs), and 
one on Sturge Island (10 pairs). 
9 
scientific station.  Necessary permits for the visit, and agreement on conditions for access, have been 
sought from these agencies.  
 
The ship will spend two days in the vicinity of Macquarie Island with the purpose to continue with the 
expedition tasks as described above, including with whale, seabird and marine debris research.  The 
activities may include sailing beyond sight of the islands as well as landings and nearshore inflatable 
cruises.   Aerial surveys of the area will be complemented by the landing of a small group (<10 
persons) of researchers and support crew members by inflatable at an approved coastal locations.   
 
5.4  Ship operation 
 
The vessel is equipped, and will be operated, in a manner that complies with the Protocol.  The crew 
will be given basic training in their obligations under the Protocol.  Copies of the Protocol and its 
Annexes will be available for browsing.  A document summarising key obligations of the Protocol in 
relation to waste disposal, marine pollution, avoidance of harmful interference with fauna and flora, 
and the specific attention that specific crew members should take when carrying out their tasks will be 
distributed.  Training and written material will be in English, which is the official language on board.  
The Expedition Leader or Environmental Officer will give a talk to the crew and other staff on their 
obligations prior to arrival in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
  
5.4.1   The engine room 
 
The engine room is where most of the polluting substances on board the ship are used, and from 
where emissions are generated on routine operations and toxic substances could be released in the 
environment in the event of a major contingency. 
 
Fuel storage and disposal 
 
The MV Arctic Sunrise is powered by a single engine of 2500hp, with two auxiliary engines of 
208hp.  The cooling of the engine is carried out by means of a closed freshwater system, which in 
turn is cooled by an open saltwater system.   The ship's engine stores 2,000 litres of lube-oil, and 
further 4,000 litres are stored for replacement. 
 
The ship has a maximum fuel carrying capacity of 470 cubic meters (400 tones approximately) that 
is distributed in 14 different tanks.  The volume of the individual tanks range from eight to over 40 
cubic meters.  The fuel used is low sulphur (<0.5%) gas-oil. 
 
The MV Arctic Sunrise is fitted with oil filtering (15 ppm) equipment including an alarm and 
automatic stopping device.  This equipment complies with IMO regulations and the vessel has a 
valid IOPP certificate.  Waste oil is stored in a sludge tank for disposal at port.  
 
The MV Arctic Sunrise complies with the standards required under Article 3 of Annex IV.  Waste oil 
will be retained onboard for proper disposal on port. The ship is provided with a Shipboard Oil 
Pollution Emergency Plan (SOPEP), which includes reporting requirements as well as steps to 
control both operational spills (leakages, overflow, etc.) and those resulting from contingencies 
such as grounding, collision, hull damage, etc.  Limited oil spill contingency response equipment is 
carried on board, and officers and crew are trained in emergency response procedures.  
 
 
 
10 
Fuel consumption 
 
Fuel consumption at cruising speed amounts to 5,000 to 7,000 litres per day of low sulphur (< 5%) 
medium diesel fuel.  High power usage, such as breaking through ice, increases fuel consumption to 
up to 10,000 litres per day.  Fuel consumption for the first leg is estimated on 150-230 tones.  
 
Other chemicals 
 
Glycol (for treatment of the cooling water), grease removers and detergents for engine room use, to 
a maximum of approximately 100 litres, are also carried on the ship.  The ship's main reefer carries 
the gas R22 (which has 10% the ozone depleting capacity of CFCs). 
 
5.4.2  Waste management 
 
The ship will comply with the standards required under Article 5 of Annex IV, Annex III and 
Appendix C of Annex II.  
 
All wastes will be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, with the exception of treated sewage 
and grey water.  All wastes generated on land will be returned to the vessel, including human waste. 
 Prohibited products identified by Article 7 of Annex III will be identified in the expedition's inventory, 
and substituted wherever possible.   
 
Solid and liquid waste 
 
Throughout the trip, waste will be separated at the source.  A waste management regime on board the 
vessel, common to all ships chartered by Stichting Marine Services, separates the different waste 
streams.  It is standard practice on ships chartered by Stichting Marine Services that a crew member is 
responsible for ensuring adequate separation, storage and disposal of waste. 
 
Food scraps generated north of the Antarctic Convergence will be thrown overboard.  While sailing 
in Antarctic waters, all food scraps will be separated and stored for disposal north of the 
Convergence, where the preferred option is to dispose of them at the first port of call.  Alternatively, 
disposal will be into the sea north of the Convergence.  This would be done at night, to minimise 
the chances of seabirds feeding on food scraps.  No food waste will be disposed overboard in the 
vicinity of land. 
 
Food scraps that are known to present an unacceptable risk to seabirds will be separated from the 
other scraps, stored on board and disposed off in the next major port. 
 
All other solid and liquid waste will be separated and retained on board for proper disposal at ports 
of call outside Antarctica.  All plastics, glass, paper and metal (cans) will be separately compacted and 
retained on board for disposal upon return to a major port.  Laboratory and photographic liquids, 
batteries and medical wastes and sharps will be separately stored for specialist recovery or disposal 
upon return to a major port.  Efforts will be made to ensure recycling for as many types of waste as 
possible.  This includes the purchase of supplies, packaging minimisation and final disposal. 
 
Sewage 
 
The ship is equipped with low water usage vacuum toilets.  Sewage is treated by a process that 
includes aeration and biological digestion.  The system uses micro organisms already present in the 
11 
waste water to digest organic matter.  This is performed by aerobic bacteria attached to a contact 
material with high specific surface that is fully immersed in the sewage.  Sewage circulates several 
times through the filter, to achieve adequate levels of BOD5.  Small amounts of sludge deposit at 
the bottom of a settling tank for later proper disposal on port.  Treated liquid sewage spills over a 
disinfection tank (however, the chlorination stage will not be used in Antarctic waters).  The 
treatment process meets the IMO/Marpol regulations regarding discharge of sewage from ships 
(Marpol MEPC.2 (Vi) annex IV). 
 
 
The system includes a zero discharge option which allows a retention time of three to four weeks 
for 30 crew.  Consequently,  sewage discharges can be controlled according to Protocol regulations. 
 The ship complies with the standards required under Article 6 of Annex IV i.e. sewage will not be 
disposed at sea within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves; and beyond such distances, the 
discharge of sewage will be gradual while the ship sails at speeds of no less of 4 knots.   Sewage will 
not be discharged in the proximity of any other vessel or concentrations of wildlife.  A record of 
sewage discharge locations and times will be kept. 
 
 
5.4.3  Inflatable boat operation and landings 
 
The ship carries four inflatable craft equipped with either inboard diesel engines or outboard four-
stroke engines run with a 50:1 mixture of petrol and oil.  
 
Usually two boats are used simultaneously for the transport of personnel from ship to shore, for at 
sea documentation, and for emergency use.  A reconnaissance trip may precede the actual landing 
of a shore party, to assess conditions and the presence of wildlife.  A field person accompanies the 
shore party and remains by the boat acting as a link with the ship and the personnel ashore.  Basic 
survival gear and a first aid kit are taken ashore. 
 
 
5.4.4 
Avoidance of harmful interference with biota 
 
The ship will not (for safety reasons) be closer than several nautical miles from breeding colonies or 
concentrations of animals ashore even during cruises along the coast. At points of landing the ship will 
ordinarily not approach closer than 0.5 nautical mile from the landing point. Inflatables employed in 
marine mammal research may approach whales.  In these instances the speed of the boats will be 
reduced, and the inflatables will stand off no closer than 30 metres from the animal unless in the act of 
agreed scientific data collection procedures as described and approved by DoC. 
 
In open water, and especially in the pack ice, the ship may encounter seals, whales and penguins..  The 
case of whales is dealt with below.  Although the ship will aim to allow researchers to view marine 
mammals and seabirds from onboard, and the vessel may reduce her speed to facilitate this, the ship's 
course will be altered if it comes across concentrations of wildlife at sea or on ice floes. 
 
5.4.5 Contingency 
 
Safety drills for person overboard, fire on board and abandon ship are carried out throughout the 
trip.  All crew members have a specific role in case of any of these incidents happening.   
 
 
12 
5.5   
Helicopter operation 
 
The ship will carry one helicopter (Hughes 500) equipped with emergency flotation gear. All 
regulations of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual are followed.  The helicopter pilot has 
extensive flying experience in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. 
 
The helicopter uses low-sulphur content aviation fuel (ca. 0.001 percent mass), which is unleaded.   
A maximum of  25 cubic meters tank of helicopter fuel will be transported on board.  The helicopter 
has a maximum carrying capacity of approximately 450 litres of fuel.  Refuelling will be carried out 
on board the ship.  While at sea, the helicopter will carry out aerial surveys.  Under ideal flying 
conditions, this will involve one or two flights a day of up to two hours each.  It is not predicted that 
overflying of ice-free areas will take place, other than the occasional landing on coastal locations.  
Landing by helicopter will be replaced wherever possible by boats. 
 
The helicopter is maintained regularly.  The conditions of visibility, rolling of the ship and wind 
speed can restrict helicopter use.  The helicopters carry sufficient equipment to deal with 
contingencies such as becoming weather-bound or stranded ashore due to minor technical problems. 
 An emergency crew and boat are on call during helicopter operations. 
 
 
5.6 
Activities ashore and nearshore 
 
It is not intended that there will be any need for activities ashore in the Balleny Islands. 
 
Nearshore activities will include baseline site observations and documentation of the Balleny 
Islands, a survey of floating debris washed ashore, and cruising on inflatables in nearshore waters 
for whale research.  
 
There will be no Greenpeace activities in Antarctic Treaty protected areas.  Activities in sub-
Antarctic islands will follow local regulations.   Care will be taken (and local advice sought, if 
possible) to ensure that there is no interference with scientific equipment or programmes.  
 
 
5.7  
Other activities 
 
A modest on-board research program will be carried out throughout the trip. 
 
 
5.7.1 
Whale research 
 
The expedition will aim to carry out a whale relative abundance sighting survey, acoustic recordings, 
and a feasibility study of collecting skin samples.   
 
The sighting survey will be possible from the ship itself, while cruising. On encountering whales, the 
vessel will where possible aim to remain in proximity to the animals until identification is completed 
(which is often immediate).  In cases, the ship will slow down, and some course changes may be made 
to keep the animals in view in order to carry out behavioural observations.  The ship will not be placed 
closer than 100 metres from any animal, and animals will not be pursued.  
 
13 
On an opportunistic basis, whale photo identification and documentation work will be carried out. 
Obtaining quality photographs (e.g. the underside of Humpback whales flukes) will normally require 
the launching of an inflatable, which will not always be feasible.  Encounters with whales will be 
terminated after suitable photographic material has been obtained, with a maximum of one hour.  A 
record of location, time and duration of whale encounters will be maintained.  
 
A feasibility study involving collecting a swab sample of Minke whale skin by means of a telescopic 
stick is being investigated in consultation with researchers at the University of Auckland.  Trials will 
be carried out as long as no harassment is apparent.  Whales will not be pursued for this purpose.  As 
an alternative, skin fragments or oil droplets may be looked for and collected from the water once the 
whale has dived.  Further advice, and necessary permits under the Marine Mammals Protection Act, 
have been sought from the Department of Conservation.  
 
The helicopter will not itself be used as a platform for whale watching i.e. whales will not be followed 
by the helicopter, even though chance encounters with whales may take place while flying at sea.  
 
5.7.2 
Other research 
 
A bird relative abundance sighting survey and the collection of environmental data will take place 
throughout the trip.  These activities will not modify the normal operation of the ship.  
Seabird observations will be carried out at sea, and where possible nearshore observations will be made 
in the vicinity of the Balleny Islands by qualified scientific personnel. 
  
A marine debris survey will be carried out throughout the trip.  The survey will have an on board 
component (slow-speed tows of a neuston net from the ship); and an onshore component (survey of 
waste washed ashore Southern Ocean islands).   Samples from dead animal carcasses may be collected 
and documented outside the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
 
 
6 
POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF PROPOSED ACTIVITY 
 
 
The Expedition’s potential environmental impacts have been assessed with reference to an activity-
output-exposure-impact framework.  Each activity has specific outputs to which the environment may 
or may not be exposed.  Exposure of the environment to a particular output may or may not result in an 
impact.  Environmental impacts will be more significant the larger is their intensity or magnitude 
(deviation from background levels), the larger the area affected, the more persistent the effects are, and 
the probability of occurrence. 
 
These assessments have primarily been based on operational experience, best judgment, and best 
Antarctic EIA practice.  Specialist advice has been sought where considered necessary. 
 
 
6.1 
Direct and indirect impacts 
 
 
6.1.1  Ship operation 
 
Throughout the journey, the ship may encounter feeding birds, pack ice seals, and most types of 
Antarctic whales.  Seabirds or seals resting on ice floes may be distressed by a ship passing nearby, 
although in cases wildlife do approach ships.  Whales and other marine mammals as well as seabirds 
14 
often follow a moving ship, and at times penguins and other seabirds approach a stationary ship.  The 
ship's superstructure may pose a risk of crashing for flying birds, particularly at night or in some 
weather conditions.  The deck will be periodically checked out for birds that might have crashed 
against the ship.  These will be assisted in the best possible way (i.e. set free or let to rest). 
 
Waste 
 
The disposal of sewage in water bodies causes deoxygenation of waters due to the amount of oxygen 
that is required to break down the organic matter present in sewage.  Under Antarctic conditions 
biological degradation processes are slow, and low temperatures have been show to prolong the 
survival of enteric bacteria on the marine environment.  Sewage will receive full (non-chemical) 
treatment.  The ship's holding tanks have a capacity to store sewage for several weeks, so that the 
location where treated sewage is to be released can be controlled. 
 
No other waste will be disposed of in the Antarctic environment.  To the extent that these products are 
on board the vessel, they will not be released to the environment during the course of the cruise. 
 
Ballast  
 
The discharge of liquid ballast may cause the introduction of alien species or the translocation within 
Antarctica of plankton or invertebrates.  The ship uses a fixed ballast system so that liquid ballast 
releases will not occur. 
 
Anchoring 
 
Anchoring has the potential to cause have an intense and localized impact on benthos.   Anchoring is 
an important safety measure, but it is often the case that the ship drifts or sails while shore activities are 
taking place. 
 
Inflatable boat operation 
 
Wildlife in the water or on beaches could be disturbed by the presence of the inflatable or by noise.  
Inflatable drivers are trained to exercise care around wildlife.  Whales will not be approached closer 
than 30 metres as estimated by boat lengths unless in the act of agreed scientific data collection 
procedures as described and approved by DoC.  Behaviour of whales and other wildlife in the vicinity 
of inflatables will be monitored visually.  The direction and speed of inflatable travel will be modified 
as necessary.  Landings that are approved will be carried out at sites away from wildlife concentrations 
and in such a way as to avoid disturbing individual animals, including the option of landing elsewhere. 
 However no landing permits are applied for within the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
  
Contingency 
 
Minor spills are likely to remain on board, or to involve low volumes of floating fuel that can be 
collected with adsorbant pads.  However, minor spills may contribute to the cumulative impact of 
hydrocarbon contamination.  Spill kits will be kept at hand whenever there is handling of fuel.  All 
small spills will be immediately contained with adsorbent materials. 
 
At the other end of the scale, the ship could founder or discharge oil or other wastes to the marine 
environment.  Major spills may occur as a consequence of grounding or collision involving hull 
damage, fire and explosion on board, and operational problems.  A major spill is likely to involve a 
15 
significant amount of floating fuel and associated marine pollution, and have very significant effects on 
wildlife, wilderness, and science values.  A spill of this kind is likely to cause immediate lethal effects 
to some organisms, alter behaviour (e.g. due to fouling), and have long term sublethal effects on 
seabirds, benthos and intertidal communities.   
 
The severity of a large spill is difficult to predict and would depend on a number of factors: whether 
the event occurs offshore or in coastal waters; the presence of sensitive features at the spill site; 
weather conditions; tides and currents; the type of fuel involved; the possibilities of immediate 
response; and the equipment available.  In open water, particularly far from land, hydrocarbons could 
disperse rapidly, resulting in low immediate, direct impact (however, hydrocarbons would end up 
elsewhere, where it could have an impact). Were the vessel to be closer to shore, or in confined areas 
of pack ice, localised containment might follow, with potentially more concentrated impacts.  
Pollutants could be washed ashore, with resulting impact there. 
 
The likelihood of these events is reduced by the use of a high grade polar-capable ship and qualified, 
highly experienced ice crew; by cautious operational practices; by onboard contingency plans for such 
eventualities; and by the fact that aside from its own fuel supply (described above) the ship will not be 
carrying bulk and/or noxious substances (as a scientific or logistic support vessel might). 
 
6.1.2  Helicopter operation   
 
Harmful interference 
 
Helicopter operation could result in "harmful interference" if flown low over, or landed upon or close 
to, the biota.  Such harmful interference could include bird strikes as well as visual or acoustic 
disturbance of marine mammals and seabirds.  
 
The helicopter embarked on the ship is primarily intended to be used at sea.  Flight altitudes will be on 
the order of 1,000m or higher.  In coastal areas, an altitude of 600m and a horizontal distance of 
1000m will be kept from concentrations of birds or seals.  The noise levels at this distances will be 
lower than 60-70dB.  The helicopter will not be used to follow whales.  
 
Other impacts 
 
Other impacts associated with helicopter operations include the generation of dust, mechanical 
damage to stands of vegetation or exposed ground and dispersal of alien microbiota. These effects 
will be limited to the extent that no onshore activities are anticipated. 
 
Contingency 
 
The helicopter may become stranded away from the ship due to changing weather conditions or minor 
technical problems, potentially causing impacts related to fuel spills, waste disposal, etc.  More serious 
contingencies could involve emergency landings.  The potential environmental impacts are related to 
the severity of the contingency and to the location where they take place.  Rigorous maintenance and 
operations will minimise the possibilities of these contingencies being required. 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
6.1.3  On-board activities offshore 
 
On-board activities offshore are ordinarily unlikely to have additional impacts to those potentially 
arising from ship operation.  The vessel itself or inflatables launched offshore as part of the whale and 
or seabird research programs could cause disturbance to the whales.  Previously described operation 
protocol and a minimum spatial separation of ship or boats and whales should reduce the likelihood of 
impacts. 
 
6.1.4   Activities ashore or nearshore 
 
Activities ashore, or inflatable cruising nearshore, could result in "harmful interference" with the biota. 
 Breeding birds (particularly penguins) or hauled out seals could be disturbed by visual or acoustic 
effects of passenger activity, boats, or helicopter use.  In the case of breeding birds, disturbance of 
incubating, brooding or guarding parents could predispose eggs or young to environmental stress (e.g. 
chilling) or increased risk of predation, or injury by neighbours. 
 
Landings within the Antarctic Treaty area are not anticipated and therefore not applied for.  Minimum 
approach standards with wildlife, ensuring that no materials are removed or introduced should reduce 
the risk of impact.  The scientific staff are trained to recognise signs of stress in the animals under 
scrutiny. 
 
A crew document and onboard briefings will address the potential areas of impact that activities ashore 
or nearshore may cause.   
 
6.2  
Cumulative impacts 
 
6.2.1  Introduction 
 
In an Antarctic context, cumulative impacts have been defined as the impact of combined past, 
present and reasonably foreseeable future activities.  These activities may extend over time and space. 
 The pathways of accumulation may be diverse(e.g. additive (A+A=2A), interactive (A+B=C) or 
synergistic (A+A>2A)). 
 
In broad terms, cumulative impacts may be brought about by a high density and/or high frequency of 
human activity (there is however a more extensive typology of impacts).  In Antarctica, cumulative 
impacts may be associated with multiple station areas or frequently visited sites, and the access routes 
to these sites.  At the other end of the spectrum, in near-pristine sites, cumulative impacts may also be 
associated with any activity.  A first visit "opens up the place" to future visits, and every new visit will 
be cumulative to a site, and to all remaining pristine sites elsewhere in the continent. 
 
The assessment of cumulative impacts arising from multiple activities is constrained -- almost by 
definition -- in EIAs carried out for a single activity.  However, the greatest deficiencies might be 
legal and political -- the relatively little weight given to marginal impacts.  The relatively limited 
information available about the local environment, and past (or foreseeable future) human activities in 
many Antarctic sites is an additional constraint. 
 
The strategies used to assess cumulative impacts include the definition of spatial and temporal 
boundaries, and the evaluation of potential pathways of accumulation.  The fact that a ship cruise is a 
moving activity further limit the assessment of cumulative impacts: the definition of spatial and 
temporal boundaries is limited to the visited sites and to the ship's "sphere of influence", the spatial 
17
                    
 
and temporal coordinates of which change constantly.  The potential pathways of accumulation will 
depend on the ship’s outputs as well as on site-specific environmental characteristics.  Evaluating the 
Expedition’s potential cumulative impacts may be more tractable through an examination on a site-by-
site basis of all operators' activities in a given site -- a “macro” approach that eventually leads to the 
need for a more strategic (higher tier) assessment of impacts and for the integrated management of 
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic sites.  
 
6.2.2  Loading of atmospheric pollutants 
 
The loading of atmospheric pollutants is perhaps the only output of the planned activity that cannot 
be avoided or mitigated.  
 
Exhaust emissions are dependent on fuel composition, engine type and performance and power/load 
conditions of the engine.  Typically these would include some or all of SOx, NOx, CO, CO2, 
uncombusted hydrocarbons, particulates (soot) and water.  In helicopter engines, different 
emissions prevail at different stages of the take off-landing cycle, and fuel venting may occur at 
shut down.  Tanks and other containers and fuel pipelines may add heavy metals to the combustion 
products.  The oxidation of SOx and NOx to sulfuric and nitric acids contribute to wet or dry acid 
deposition.  NOx takes part in photochemical production of ozone which contributes to the greenhouse 
effect.  The emissions produced by two-stroke engines (e.g. outboard engines) contain substances that 
have a negative impact on fish and that are bioavailable via water and food.  Heavy metals have the 
potential to bioaccumulate in benthic fauna or to disperse extensively.  Compounds associated with 
soot are carcinogenic.   
 
The significance of the contribution of the various engines used during the trip to the overall 
cumulative impact cannot be easily assessed, other than the emissions contribute to the total loading 
of the atmosphere with pollutants.  The emissions of individual ships, helicopters, etc. might be 
undetectable or cause only a very minor impact, but the cumulative effects of various sources (from the 
local to the global) may be more significant. 
 
6.2.3 Ship operation 
 
The ship is carrying out a Southern Ocean cruise of  some 12-13 weeks duration, of which 
approximately 3 weeks would be spent in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  This would represent a 
comparatively small fraction of the vessel-time spent in the Area by a dozen or so vessels operating in 
the Ross Sea region, most of which will be operating in support of national Antarctic programs for 
longer periods of time. 
 
The sites that the Expedition will pass by or visit may be exposed to the cumulative effects arising 
from low-intensity, low frequency activities.  The Balleny Islands lie to the west of the shipping route 
from New Zealand to the Ross Sea, and are at times visited by tourists ships4 (although it is not clear 
how frequent landings are).  Most sub-Antarctic islands have some level of permanent or temporary 
occupation by logistics and research personnel, as well as being tourism destinations. 
 
The environment of the Southern Ocean (the “at sea” site) is influenced not only by very limited local 
activities such as shipping and land-based activities in Antarctica and sub-Antarctic islands, but also 
by regional activities such as legal and illegal fishing, migration of pollutants from industrial centres 
in lower latitudes, and by global environmental change.  Arguably, pressure on the environment of the 
 
4 In the 1997/98 season less than 10% of the ca. 110 tourist cruises to Antarctica took place outside the Antarctic Peninsula. 
18 
Southern Ocean is likely to increase in the foreseeable future, and every activity contributes to this 
process.   
 
The outputs (or impacts) with which the ship will potentially contribute to the overall cumulative 
impact in the region include the loading of atmospheric pollutants from its funnels and exhausts; 
releases of oil products during normal operation; possible visual and acoustic/hydroacoustic 
disturbance of the biota (collisions, interference, pollution).  There are considerable uncertainties 
associated even with this level of assessment. 
 
 
6.2.4  Helicopter operation 
 
There is no clear assessment of the cumulative impacts to which a helicopter may contribute, beyond 
recognising that this expedition's helicopter contributes inter alia to the total loading in relation to 
hydrocarbon emissions, acoustic and visual effects on the biota when airborne, and to hydrocarbon 
spillage, mechanical perturbation, transfer of wastes and alien materials.   
 
Impacts associated with take-off and landing ashore would be minimised as the helicopter is unlikely 
to land ashore; most helicopter operations will be focused on offshore aerial recognisance.  Overall, the 
assessment of impacts is currently uncertain. 
 
 
6.2.5 
On-board activities offshore 
 
Distinguishing between the contribution made by passenger activities to cumulative impacts offshore 
and those arising as a consequence of ship operation is difficult in the circumstances of this Expedition, 
although the formal separation may be conceptually helpful.   At present levels of Antarctic activity the 
cumulative impacts from on-board activities offshore will be undetectable. Even in the case of the most 
obvious of the proposed offshore activities - whale photo-identification  -- it is difficult to evaluate the 
contribution of this cruise to cumulative impact, other than acknowledging the potential to distress 
individual whales. 
 
 
6.2.6  Activities ashore and nearshore 
 
These are the activities where cumulative impact appear most obvious, and the one where this 
expedition most clearly could make a contribution even though very limited activities will take place 
ashore if at all, and not in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Making informed judgments concerning the scale 
of the contribution of this expedition is limited.  Little is known about the activities proposed (or 
currently underway) by other operators, and very little of the past nature and level of activity at the 
Balleny Islands.  
 
It is assumed that little activity takes place at the Balleny Islands and presumably most of the 
contribution to the cumulative impact in the islands during the coming season would come from 
landings by tourist operators.  The use of inflatable boats in nearshore waters can contribute to the 
overall cumulative impact by effect of leaks and minor fuel spills, noise and visual disturbance, etc. 
 
Some measures can be taken to reduce potential cumulative impacts.  Interference with wildlife will be 
minimised by avoiding concentrations of animals and keeping a distance from individual animals.  
 
19 
6.3 
Impact on wilderness and aesthetic values 
 
An impact on wilderness and aesthetic values is inherent to human presence in the Southern Ocean.  
Human presence or the effects of people or the ship itself may have a visual impact; auditory/acoustic 
impacts; impacts upon the perception of wilderness; other effects upon the wilderness and aesthetic 
values of the Southern Ocean.  These impacts, which are mentioned in Article 3 of the Protocol, may 
be more or less significant depending on the scale and permanence of human activities, and  may exist 
individually or coexist with impacts from other sources.  The perception of the impact may vary 
depending on the degree to which other activities are occurring simultaneously, and to the lasting 
effects of some or all those activities (e.g. due to the presence of litter).  Impact on wilderness and 
aesthetic values are contributors to cumulative impacts as are other past, contemporary or future 
activities.  The scale of these impacts may vary from the localised to the circumpolar. 
 
The impact arising from Greenpeace activities in individual sites will mostly be limited in time and 
space.  No permanent, immediately obvious evidence of the expedition will remain after departure 
from each site.  Perhaps the largest impact on wilderness would be a change upon the perception of 
wilderness of a site. 
 
 
7. 
ALTERNATIVES TO PROPOSED ACTIVITY 
 
The following alternatives to the proposed activities might contribute to reduce the Expedition’s 
environmental impacts. 
 
7.1 
Changes to itinerary 
 
The Southern Ocean Expedition could be carried out following a different itinerary, including the 
alternative of not sailing into Antarctic Treaty Area.   
 
The Expedition’s itinerary has been drawn following the movements of  commercial operators 
harvesting marine resources in the Southern Ocean in an illegal, unsustainable or pseudo-scientific 
manner.  These activities take place within a range of sites and times which are related to the biology 
of the target species.  The fact that such activities take place in Antarctic Treaty Area (often by 
nationals or interests of Parties to the Antarctic Treaty) undermine the spirit of the Madrid Protocol and 
may have negative long term protection of the Southern Ocean environment.   
 
It is likely that the impact on the Southern Ocean environment would be similar if the itinerary was 
changed, while the objective of the Expedition (which is ultimately an increased protection for the 
Southern Ocean ecosystem) may be compromised.   
 
7.2 
Changes to the timing of the expedition 
 
The risk of impacts on penguins and other seabirds would be less if the activities would take place 
outside the breeding season.  However, there are time-specific considerations in relation to the 
objectives of the proposed activity that are an unavoidable part of the planing of the Expedition.  The 
period outside the December-January window is not the safest period of the year to operate in the Ross 
Sea, which is a factor (combined with the biology of the target species) contributing to the timing of 
commercial harvesting activities.  In addition, the exposure of penguins to Expedition activities will be 
minimal if operational procedures as described elsewhere in this document are maintained.  As in the 
20 
case of changes to the itinerary, changes to the timing of the Expedition may not contribute 
significantly to reduce impacts, while compromising the achievement of objectives. 
 
7.3 
Not having helicopter operations 
 
Helicopter operations have been identified as one of the main sources of potential impacts from routine 
operations including cumulative impacts (i.e. other than the worst case scenario of a contingency 
involving the ship).  Therefore, the use of a helicopter could be avoided. 
 
If helicopter operations are carried out in such a manner that are open to modifications, suspension or 
cancellation of flights, as described in this document, then they will provide the Expedition with the 
possibility of finding, documenting and publicly exposing illegal harvesting activities while having a 
degree of environmental impact that is acceptably low.  Whenever possible, and depending on ice, 
weather and logistic considerations, helicopter use will be restricted to those activities that cannot be 
carried out with inflatables. 
 
 
7.4 
Changes to vessel used 
 
A different ship could in principle be employed. This option could arise through an attempt to replace 
the vessel by one with a lower environmental "footprint", for example a sailing boat. 
 
However, this IEE has not found appreciable environmental risk with the present vessel, which is the 
only polar vessel available to the charterers and arguably as suitable to carry out the job as any other 
polar vessel.   For a number of operational reasons (e.g. speed) several of the objectives fundamental to 
the Expedition taking place could not be met if a sailing boat was used. 
 
 
7.5 
Alternative: not proceeding with the Expedition 
 
The option of not proceeding with the Expedition would clearly remove any risk of impact.  The 
objective environmental risk does not appear to justify such an alternative, given public, national and 
international concerns about illegal, unsustainable or pseudo-scientific harvesting of marine resources 
in the Southern Ocean.  Subject only to reasonable environmental standards, the proposed activities in 
the Southern Ocean are a legitimate activity that would have an acceptably low level of impact. 
 
 
8. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The overall direct and indirect environmental impacts of the proposed activities are judged to be no 
more than minor and transitory except in the worst case scenario of a major contingency. The 
contribution of the Expedition’s activities to the overall cumulative impact cannot at this stage be fully 
assessed. 
 
The conclusion of this IEE for the 1998/99 Southern Ocean Expedition of the MV Arctic Sunrise is that 
the cruise is unlikely to have more than a minor or transitory impact upon the Antarctic environment 
(terminology as in Article 8 of the Protocol). 
 
Greenpeace therefore concludes that a CEE is not required.  Provided that the measures for the 
prevention or mitigation of impacts are implemented, and approval is received from relevant 
21 
authorities, the activity should proceed as planned.  This IEE is therefore sent to the Minister in 
accordance with section 18 of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994. 
 
 
9.  
MONITORING 
 
At all levels of activity, prevention will be applied to avoid impacts, and the mitigative measures 
described in this document will be implemented.  The efficiency of implementing these measures will 
be reviewed throughout the trip, to ensure the maintenance of high environmental standards.  The 
monitoring planned by Greenpeace in relation to the coming Expedition falls largely in the category of 
monitoring of activities. 
 
Wildlife will be monitored for signs of behavioural disturbance (an adequate behavioural repertoire is 
now established for most species of Antarctic birds, seals and cetaceans to enable such a first order 
assessment to be made in the field).  In the event of indications of disturbance, the activities underway 
will be modified, suspended or cancelled.   Activity records will be kept including time and spatial 
(GPS) location. 
 
10. 
SOURCES 
Acero JM, Agraz JL, Aguirre CA (1996):  Environmental Review of Argentine Activities at Esperanza 
(Hope) Bay, Antarctic Peninsula.  Buenos Aires: Instituto Antártico Argentino. 
Ainley DG, O’Connor EF and Boekelheide RJ (1984):   The marine ecology of birds in the Ross Sea, 
Antarctica.  Ornithological monographs No 32.  Washington DC: The American Ornithologists’ 
Union. 97pp. 
Australian Antarctic Division (1994): IEE of the proposal to use long range helicopters to support 
Australia's Antarctic Programme. Hobart, Australia: Australian Antarctic Division. 
Balk l, Ericson G, Lindesjoo E, Petterson I, Tjarnlund U and Akerman G (1994):   Effects of exhaust 
from two-stroke outboard engines on fish.  Tema Nord 1994:528, The Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 66pp. 
Bidleman T, Walla M, Roura R, Carr E, Schmidt S (1993): Organochlorine pesticides in the 
atmosphere of the Southern Ocean and Antarctica, January-March 1990.  Marine Pollution Bulletin 
26:5, 258-262. 
Boutron CF and Wolf EW (1989):  Heavy Metal and Sulphur Emissions to the Atmosphere from 
Human Activities in Antarctica.  Atmospheric Environment 23:8, 1669-1675. 
Cocklin C, Parker S, Hay J (1992):   Notes on cumulative environmental change I: A contribution to 
methodology.  Journal of Environmental Management 35, 51-67. 
Cocklin C, Parker S, Hay J (1992):  Notes on cumulative environmental change I: Concepts and issues. 
 Journal of Environmental Management 35, 31-49. 
Damman DC, Cressman DR, Husain Sadar M (1995): Cumulative effects assessment: The 
development of practical frameworks. Impact Assessment 13:4, 433-454. 
Dignon J (1992):   NOx and SOx emissions from fossil fuels: a global distribution.  Atmospheric 
Environment.  26A:6, 1157-1163. 
Erickson AW and Hanson MB (1990):  Continental estimates and population trends of Antarctic ice 
seals.  In: Antarctic Ecosystems.  Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. 
Hempel).  Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 253-264. 
22 
Greenpeace, 1986. Greenpeace Antarctic Programme; Environmental Assessment for 1986-87 season. 
Lewes: Greenpeace International. 
Greenpeace, 1987. Greenpeace Antarctic Programme; Environmental Assessment for 1987-88 season. 
Lewes: Greenpeace International. 
Greenpeace, 1989. Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Programme; Initial Environmental Evaluation 
(follow up of previous assessments and predicted impacts for 1989/90). Amsterdam: Greenpeace 
International. 
Greenpeace, 1991.  Initial Environmental Evaluation; Removal of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross 
Island, Antarctica 1991/92. Amsterdam: Greenpeace International. 
Greenpeace, 1994.  Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition 1994/95: Initial Environmental Evaluation. 
Amsterdam: Greenpeace International. 
Greenpeace, 1994.  Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition 1994/95: Initial Environmental Evaluation.  
Taking into account additional activities in the Ross Sea.  Amsterdam: Greenpeace International. 
Greenpeace, 1997.  Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition 1996/97: Initial Environmental Evaluation. 
Amsterdam: Greenpeace International. 
Howington JP, Mc Feters GA, Barry JP and Smith JJ (1992): Distribution of the McMurdo Station 
sewage plume.  Marine Pollution Bulletin 25:(9-12), 324-327. 
Hemmings A (1996): Antarctic wilderness and aesthetic values. In: De Poorter M and Dalziell J (eds): 
Cumulative impacts: Minimization and management.  Washington: IUCN. 
Hemmings AD (1990):  Human Impacts and Ecological Constraints on Skuas.  In: Antarctic 
Ecosystems.  Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel).  Springer 
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp 224-230. 
Hemmings AD (1997): A model initial environmental evaluation (IEE).  Antarctic tourism cruise 
1996:97, MV Hypotheticus.  Wellington, New Zealand: Antarctic Policy Unit. 24pp. 
Kennicutt MC, Sweet ST, Fraser WR, Stockton WL, Culver M (1991):  Grounding of the Bahía 
Paraíso at Arthur Harbour, Antarctica: 1. Distribution and fate of oil spill related hydrocarbons.  
Marine Pollution Bulletin 24:10, 499-506. 
Lawrence DP (1997): EIA: Do we know where we are going?  Impact Assessment 15:1, 3-14. 
Mostert E (1996): Subjective impact assessment: causes, problems, solutions.  Impact Assessment, 
Vol. 14, pp. 191-213. 
Nimon A, Schroter R, Stonehouse B (1995): Heart rate of disturbed penguins. Nature  374, 415. 
Quantas (1996): Preliminary Assesment of Environmental Impacts of the proposal to conduct Tourist 
Overflights of the Antarctic Continent. Sydney, Australia: Quantas Airways Ltd. 
Ravetz J (1998):  Integrated assessment models -- from global to local.  Impact Assessment and Project 
Appraisal.  147-154. 
Report: Workshop on Researcher-Seabird Interactions.  July 15-17 1993, Monticello, Minnesota, 
USA. Fraser WR and Trivelpiece WZ, Conveners. 
Wilson RP, Culik B, Danfield R and Adelung D (1991):  People in Antarctica: How much do Adelie 
penguins Pygoscelis adeliae care? Polar Biology 11: 363-370.   
Young EC (1990):  Long-term stability and human impact in Antarctic skuas and Adelie penguins.  
Antarctic Ecosystems.  Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel).  
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 231-236. 
23 
 
ANNEX I -- KEY PERSONNEL  
 
 
Peter Bouquet (UK): Ship’s master.  Master Mariner for 13 years, with previous ships master 
experience in the Ross Sea area. 
  
Paula Huckleberry (USA): Helicopter pilot.  Has flown helicopters in Antarctica and the Southern 
Ocean for six seasons. 
 
Cristina Mormorunni (USA): Expedition leader & Environmental Officer.  Postgraduate research in 
marine resource management, and previous at sea campaigning and expedition leading experience. 
 
Dr Ralf Sonntag (Germany): Chief scientist. PhD in marine biology specialising in marine mammals. 
 Has published scientific papers on marine mammal mass mortality events. Previously coordinator of 
small cetacean research program for German Government for 2.5 years.  German delegate to Scientific 
Committee of the International Whaling Commission. 
 
Robert Willighagen (NL): Chief engineer.  Has been chief engineer for 5 years, and has travelled 
regularly to the Antarctic Treaty Area on an almost yearly basis since 1989.  Responsible for all 
engine, outboard and sewage operations on board. 
