Activities of the Russian Antarctic Expedition in respect of studies of subglacial Lake 
Vostok 
 
In late 1998-early 1999, in addition to the continued seismic studies of Lake Vostok, radar studies were 
initiated. 
 
The program of radar studies was carried out using a new specially developed digital radar system (DRS). 
 
The radar studies included: 
 
- ice cover thickness measurements in the Vostok station area; 
 
- determination of the subglacial relief morphology with the analysis of signals reflected from the 
ice-water and ice-bedrock interfaces; 
 
- comparison of the results of radar sounding with those of seismic measurements. 
 
The results of radar soundings were recorded to the onboard computer connected with the GPS navigation 
system receiver. 
 
The ice cover thickness measurements near the borehole (the Vostok station area) were carried out using a 
methodology developed during the previous Russian Antarctic expeditions. The electromagnetic wave 
propagation speed in the ice was assumed to be 167 m/microsecond. The ice sheet thickness above the 
subglacial lake surface in the vicinity of Vostok comprised 3760+75 m (from DRS measurements). 
 
Based on the same methodology, the profile ice thickness measurements were performed along 13 
traverses with a total length of 148 km aiming to determine the lake boundaries within 20 km from the 
station. The geographical coordinates in the process of measurements were determined by means of the 
GPS navigation system. The ice sheet thickness along the traverses varied between 30OO m (shore) to 
3800 m above the lake. 
 
An analysis of radar signals reflected from the ice bed and the obtained morphological characteristics of 
the subglacial relief allowed us to define the boundary between the water column and bedrock. Based on 
the results of radar surveys, the maps of the ice cover thickness and the subglacial relief morphology were 
constructed. 
 
Data on the lake coastline obtained from the area radar soundings differ significantly from the previously 
published airborne and satellite radar data. 
 
Seismic profile observations along with radar soundings were performed on three profiles. A comparison 
of the results of two remote sensing methods demonstrated their good agreement and coincidence with an 
accuracy of up to the error of measurements. The ice sheet thickness above the lake in the borehole area 
comprises 37S0+30 m. 
Seismic sounding allowed obtaining a continuous seismic section of the deepwater portion of the lake 
providing material for investigating the thickness of sedimentary deposits. 
 
Profile point seismic observations (13 twice repeated soundings) were carried out along the long axis of 
Lake Vostok during the sledge-tractor traverse from Vostok station to Mirny base. They allowed us to 
determine the ice cover thickness by a profile (reflected wave method), investigate the distribution of the 
water and sedimentary layer thickness and define the northern boundary of Lake Vostok. The information 
on the northern coastline of the lake was obtained for the first time. A deepwater area of the lake with a 
water layer thickness of 8OO m (thinning to 273 km) was delineated at a preliminary section 313 km in 
length. The sedimentary mantle with a thickness of about 2SO m was determined in the deepwater area of 
the lake (thinning to 1 9S km of the profile). 
 
The feasibility study and development of safe technology in terms of ecology for penetrating the 
subglacial Lake Vostok were continued. The Ministry for Science and Technology of the Russian 
Federation announced a competition among the Russian scientific and practical institutions for developing 
such technology. The successful bidder should complete the development of safe technology for accessing 
Lake Vostok and obtain a positive conclusion of the State Ecological Expert Commission of Russia by 
2OOO. 
