OPENING ADDRESS 
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF JAPAN 
 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
On behalf or the Japanese delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election to the chair of the 
XXIII Antarctic treaty Consultative Meeting. I also would like to express our  heartfelt  gratitude to the 
Government of Peru for organizing this meeting and to the warm hospitality of the people in Lima. 
 
Japan continues its constructive involvement in Antarctic affairs. Japan particularly values the Antarctic 
treaty System, not only because of its importance and success in managing and protecting, a large and 
important part of our planet. but also as an good example of  international cooperation and the use and 
sharing of scientific knowledge as a basis for the management and protection or the Antarctic. 
 
I b would like to emphasize the importance to protect the environment of the Antarctic Treaty. This year 
we celebrate the 40th anniversary of  the Antarctic Treaty. 
We can be duly  proud of our achievements made so far  in the protection of the environment of the 
Antarctic through the Antarctic Treaty System and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. 
 
As we are all aware the environment of Antarctica could be easily affected by  any intervention from 
outside. As a member state of the ATCM, Japan has been always mindful of how to raise the awareness or 
the importance of protecting the environment of Antarctica among the Japanese people. 
 
One such example is the exhibition on Antarctica, which was held at the National Science Museum in 
Tokyo from July to November 1997. Approximately  290,000 people visited the exhibition, a great 
success for us. 
On the basis of this excellent result, the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, which 
supervises Antarctic research activities, planned additional travelling exhibitions around Japan and 
budgeted 20O million yen for these  four-years(from 1998 to 2001). We believe that the concept of the 
Exhibition has thus been fully understood and also that additional travelling exhibitions will 
surely contribute not only to the promotion of the appreciation of the activities of Antarctic expeditions 
but also to the enhancement of the awareness of the importance of Antarctica itself. 
 
JARE, Japanese Antarctic Research .Expedition, has been sent since the foundation of Syowa Station in 
1957 and the commemorative 40th expedition is now under way. The activities have had a brilliant 
achievement such as data collection of geophysics, geology, meteology,  marine science and ionosphere as 
well as a great contribution to an ozone  layer finding. The recent big news was  approximately 4000 
meteorite collection b the 39th expedition, which is a significant result in science world. The collection 
has reached about 13,OOO in total  and the analysis is to be done. For this kind of scientific success, 
international cooperation is essential and we will internationally promote further contribution to science 
for the next century. 
 
Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty is effective tool for the 
protection of environment of Antarctica. Through a series of legal expert meetings from 1993 to 1998, we 
have taken sound steps toward structuring a new scheme on liability. We are looking forward to making, 
further progress toward frameworking an effective and workable liability instrument for the 
environmental protection of Antarctica at this XXIII Meeting. 
Finally., The Japanese delegation is pleased to have the honour of  working  together with our colleagues 
to solve issues facing us, under your enlightened chairmanship, and we sincerely hope that there will be 
fruitful discussions. 
