Antarctic Treaty                 XXIII ATCM/ IP66
XXIII Consultative Meeting       May 1999
                                 English
Traité sur l'Antarctique         Original: Spanish
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative   
                                 Agenda Item 1
Tratado Antártico                
XXIII Reunión Consultiva         
Договор об Антарктике            
XXIII Консультативное Совещание  

                  Opening Statement by 
                  Ambassador José Urrutia,
                  Head of the Delegation of Peru
                  to the XXIII Antarctic Treaty 
                  Consultative Meeting

                  Submitted by
                  Peru
OPENING STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR JOSÉ URRUTIA,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF PERU
TO THE XXIII ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr. Chairman of the XXIII Consultative Meeting,

First and foremost, on behalf of the Peruvian Delegation and my own, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this important meeting. We have come to this forum convinced that the decisions to be adopted over the next two weeks will have an impact on the future of mankind as a whole. The Delegation of Peru is determined to contribute to the upcoming discussions. We sincerely wish that the Antarctic Treaty System, developed in a spirit of peace and international cooperation, will be strengthened by this experience.

We are aware of the enormous challenges we face at the end of this millennium to preserve Antarctica as a peaceful area, free from armed conflicts and devoted to international cooperation and scientific research. Peru wishes this status to be preserved, so that future generations will have the opportunity to pursue scientific endeavors in the vast laboratory of Antarctica.

We are keenly interested in the institutionalization of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty. In our opinion, this process is essential for the future operation of the System. We wish this process to come to a successful conclusion and that we will soon be able to celebrate the establishment of a permanent Secretariat.

Likewise, we should not fail to recognize the important contributions on the subject of Antarctic Liability made by the various Parties in order to improve the discussions on this issue. We are convinced that the constructive dialogue that will be generated by these papers will allow us to reach the necessary consensus to achieve the goals of the Madrid Protocol.

On this 40th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty that brings us together every year in this forum, the Delegation of Peru would like to take this opportunity to hail this vital instrument as a model for peace and cooperation among nations. This remarkable feature has helped the progressive accession of an increasing number of countries to the System from which the Treaty derived, allowing its gradual development through successive consultative meetings and special Antarctic agreements. In this regard, Peru wishes to reaffirm the commitment made in the various documents that supplement the Antarctic Treaty, developing its principles and goals, including the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Since its accession to the Treaty in 1981 and its subsequent recognition as Consultative Party in 1989, Peru has made a sustained effort to contribute to the lofty goals that inspired the Antarctic Treaty. As a result, Peru has carried out ten scientific expeditions and has built the “Machu Picchu” research station on Admiralty Bay, King George Island. The renovation and maintenance of this station, carried out during successive annual expeditions, as well as the scientific research programs developed at
2

the station and on board the research vessel Humboldt, show my country's sustained 
interest in the development of Antarctic science.

Mr. Chairman,

Peru has welcomed the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the establishment of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, which will hold its second meeting. We give high priority to 
its goal of ensuring the preservation of the Antarctic ecosystem, and we wish it success 
in its endeavors.

My country is aware of the difficulties that might arise in the pursuit of such lofty 
goals, but we recognize that the best way to contribute to the fulfillment of the 
commitments made by all Contracting Parties is through international cooperation.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate, on behalf of my Delegation, our 
congratulations on the 40th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty.
