





Visitor Site Guidelines Assessment and Review Checklists









Visitor Site Guidelines Assessment and Review Checklists

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and the United States 
(in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition)

Summary

At CEP XXI, the United Kingdom, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC presented WP32 detailing their experiences in reviewing and drafting a number of site guidelines in the Antarctic Peninsula region. That paper recommended that a formal checklist be developed to assist in the assessment of site guidelines for new sites and for the review of existing site guidelines. With this in mind, the co-sponsors present two new checklists for endorsement by Parties: one relating to Site Guidelines for new sites (Attachment A) and one relating to Site Guidelines for sites with existing guidelines (Attachment B).

Background

    1. Site Specific Visitor Site Guidelines have become an integral part of the Antarctic visitor management experience since they were first adopted by the ATCM in 2005. The CEP subsequently endorsed/adopted criteria to aid in the development and maintenance of a comprehensive set of site guidelines (see Resolution 1 (2018) and previous relevant Resolutions for more detail). This criterion has been used to aid the expansion of the list of sites with guidelines to 42 separate sites.

    2. At CEP XXI, the United Kingdom, Argentina, IAATO and ASOC presented WP32 detailing their experiences in reviewing and drafting a number of site guidelines in the Antarctic Peninsula region. This built on work set out in WP15 CEPXVI. The authors recommended that a formal checklist be developed to assist in the assessment of site guidelines for new sites and for the review of existing site guidelines. This proposal was supported by the CEP, see para 72 of the CEP XXI Report.

    3. The importance of site guidelines, and of increasing the number of sites with guidelines, was noted at the recent informal Tourism Workshop hosted by the Netherlands. The meeting noted that site guidelines were an important tool for managing a growth in number of visitors to Antarctica. The meeting also noted the importance of reflecting seasonality in site guidelines.  

    4. Draft checklists for a) developing site guidelines (Attachment A); and b) reviewing site guidelines (Attachment B) are submitted for the CEP’s consideration. 

Checklists

    5. The proposed checklists are designed to be an aid for use by on-site site guidelines development and/or review teams. They set out many of the relevant questions an assessor/reviewer should be asking when considering new site guidelines or reviewing existing guidelines. 

    6. The questions focus on the information generally contained within site guidelines, the layout and criteria for which has developed over the last 13 years since the ICG in 2005-06 and WP1 ATCM XXIX.

    7. These include details of: Key features of the site; Topography and geology; an overview of site including issues such as an appropriate landing beach, present flora and fauna; Historical/ Cultural/ Scientific activities; details of any visitor impacts; details of appropriate landing sites, restricted zones, walking routes and visitor numbers; site specific behaviour including any cautionary notes.

    8. When reviewing a site with existing guidelines, the checklist notes the importance of assessing under similar parameters the existing guidelines to note any particular site-specific questions the team should be addressing. Also the checklist encourages reviewers to take into account the trend in the level of visits to the site and any environmental incidents reported.

    9. The importance of accurate photos and maps is noted in both checklists.


Recommendation

    10. The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, the United States, IAATO and ASOC recommend that the CEP recommend to the ATCM that they:

    i) Endorse the Site Guidelines for Visitors checklist for new sites (Attachment A) and the Site Guidelines for Visitors checklist for sites with existing guidelines (Attachment B);
    ii) Encourage Parties either assessing sites for new guidelines or reviewing existing guidelines to make use of the checklists; and
    iii) Request the Secretariat make the checklists available on the ATS website.



