





An on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area









An on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area 
Summary
The implementation of an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area could address some of the concerns regularly expressed by Parties regarding the compliance of tourism activities with rules adopted under the Antarctic Treaty System. This working paper aims to resume past reflections on the issue and move forward on establishing a common operational framework for the implementation of such a mechanism. The proponents suggest that a dedicated intersessional contact group (ICG), approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), be created for this purpose for the 2019-2020 period. A proposed mandate is presented in this working paper. 
Background 
Tourism in Antarctica has been growing significantly for decades, and especially in the last few years. According to the available records, about 9,000 tourists visited the region in 1995-1996,1 compared to more than 55,000 tourists estimated for the 2018-2019 season.2 During the last ATCM (Buenos Aires, 2018), the Parties agreed that more attention needed to be paid to the issue of increased tourist numbers in the region.3 Resolution 7 (2009) stated that it was the responsibility of Parties to provide a framework to manage tourism in Antarctica.  
International inspections are the main mechanism available for supervising different aspects of tourist activities on board cruise ships The Antarctic Treaty determines that ships in the Treaty area may be inspected “at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica”.4 Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty could be complemented by the establishment of an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels as it can adjust adequately to the growth and characteristics of current tourism.
The creation of such a scheme was one of the potential responses identified by the Parties in several opportunities in the past. 
In this sense, the creation of a corps of observers to be deployed on board tourist vessels was proposed by the United Kingdom at ATCM XXVI (2003),5 and by the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) in Tromsø (2004).6 At ATCM XXXII, “delegations agreed (…) that establishing a more open system of observers on board of cruise ships would be very useful.”7 

At ATCM XXXIII (2010) current mechanisms of inspections, the deployment of observers from National Antarctic Programs on own flag vessels and the on-site deployment of observers were pointed out by Argentina as useful tools available to Parties.8 Argentina also proposed to discuss possible additional tools, or changes to the existing ones, that would serve to ensure better supervision of the management of Antarctic tourism on board cruise ships. While several Parties noted the demonstrated benefit of official observers on- board cruise vessels, other Parties cautioned that such an observation programme would be resource intensive and that any programme of observers should consider the practical challenges involved. Finally, after two years of discussions, the additional tool agreed to was a checklist to guide the inspections of ships and tourism operations, which was adopted through Resolution 11 (2012) "Checklist for visitors’ in-field activities".

More recently, in the current context of growth and diversification of Antarctic tourism, following the Rotterdam Workshop on Antarctic Tourism, the Chair’s Report stated that an observer scheme would provide greater monitoring and awareness of activities in Antarctica, with the IAATO observer scheme potentially being a model for a more formal CEP/ATCM-endorsed scheme in future.9
Implementation and expected results
The current context leads France, Argentina and the United Kingdom to propose to the Parties to resume debates on this tool. The on-board observer mechanism could be implemented at different scales:

    1. The first step is to encourage Parties authorizing tour operators to consider the establishment of a national scheme applicable to the ships under their jurisdiction in cases where they have not yet implemented it. In this context, as guidance, the prior definition of a common framework would make it possible to harmonize national practices.

    2. With a view to supporting international cooperation in the field, developing multinational on-board observer scheme initiatives would, in the longer term, result in feedback facilitating the establishment of an international system under the auspices of the ATCM.

The implementation of an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels could have the following results:
    • Improve monitoring of the compliance of tourism activities in the Treaty area with the existing regulatory framework;
    • Help achieve the objectives set out in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the management of tourism activities and site monitoring; 
    • Promote and support responsible and supervised tourism in Antarctica; 
    • Improve National Competent Authorities’ understanding of activities carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and their knowledge of visited sites and operator practices; 
    • Strengthen and enhance constructive dialogue between Parties and key operators in Antarctica;
    • Improve monitoring of the sites concerned by tourism activities.
Proposal and Terms of References
The authors propose the establishment of an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) with the assistance of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, working until ATCM XLIII to examine the issue of an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels operating within the Antarctic Treaty area. 
The creation of this intersessional contact group would allow Parties to develop an operational framework for an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels. This framework could then be implemented at the national level by interested Parties. 


France, Argentina and the United Kingdom propose:    
    1. The objectives of this group be: 
i) to establish a draft harmonized operational framework that can be implemented by Parties willing to deploy observers on tourist vessels under their jurisdiction; 
ii) to consider the establishment of an international observation scheme for tourism activities in Antarctica.
    2. The ICG be tasked with:
iii) Studying existing schemes in order to provide feedback; 
iv) Establishing an operational framework to address the following issues:
    • How an on-board observer scheme for tourist vessels could be integrated into the current ATCM legal framework; 
    • The role of observers and the missions potentially assigned to them; 
    • The profile and qualifications required for observers, as well as the means to assess their skills;
    • The type of vessel concerned and the frequency of observations;
    • The methods used to share the expenses incurred. 
v) Preparing detail on how an International Observation Scheme for tourism activities in Antarctica could be established and how it might operate;
vi) Presenting a proposed framework at ATCM XLIII (2020).
    3. Observers and Experts participating in the ATCM will be invited to provide input, in particular ASOC and IAATO are encouraged to contribute. 

