





Report of the Informal Discussions on Human Resource Policy for ATS








Report of the Informal Discussions on Human Resource Policy for ATS
Working Paper submitted by Argentina

Summary

This Working Paper aims to summarise the comments and suggestions that Consultative Parties made during the Informal Discussions on Human Resource Policy for the ATS. As a result of these discussions, Argentina, in consultation with the Secretariat, has drafted a Staff Regulations Amendments Proposal, which is attached to this document for consideration of the Parties. Also attached to this document are: i) a comparison of ATS Staff regulations with CCAMLR Staff Regulations and ii) a Seniority Salary Scale prepared by the ATS. 

Background
At ATCM XL, after reviewing matters related to the functioning of the Secretariat, the Meeting requested the Executive Secretary to develop a Secretariat Paper on Human Resource Policy for the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat staff (ATCM XL Final Report, para. 120). In response to this requirement, at ATCM XLI the Secretariat presented SP 7, which briefly listed the human resource policy issues that, in the opinion of the Executive Secretary, could require the attention of the ATCM.
After considering SP 7, ATCM XLI requested that the Secretariat develop a more detailed proposal and consider whether the staff regulations already in place at the CCAMLR Secretariat could be taken as a model. In order to facilitate discussion on these matters, Argentina agreed to lead the informal discussions in consultation with the Secretariat on the ATCM discussion forum (ATCM XLI Final Report, para. 44).
The main topics that the Secretariat noted in its proposal related to:
    • Seniority. The creation of a salary scale with a greater number of steps, but with smaller progressive increases, might provide a more balanced alternative for all the staff without affecting the Secretariat’s budget. 
    • Special and compassionate leave. In the current Staff Regulations there are no clauses related to compassionate leave, study or examination leave, etc. An ad-hoc regulation is already in place in accordance with similar regulations contained in Argentine Law and could be included in a revised set of Staff Regulations. 
    • Unpaid leave of absence. There is no provision in the Staff Regulations for a general staff member to take a voluntary and unpaid leave of absence for a certain period of time.
    • Performance evaluation. In the Staff Regulations there is no established methodology for the periodic evaluation of staff members’ performance of their assigned tasks and thus no objective assessment procedures for their promotion, career development, recognition or separation from service.
    • Retirement age. It may be necessary to establish a regulation that determines an age at which the Executive Secretary could request a staff member to withdraw from his/her duties once retirement conditions by Argentine Law are fulfilled for that staff member.
Fourteen years after the establishment of the Secretariat and fifteen years after the adoption of its Staff Regulations, Argentina understands that it could be a good opportunity, in light of the issues raised by the Secretariat, for the Consultative Parties to consider the possibility of introducing some changes to those regulations. It should be noted, however, that regarding retirement conditions under Argentine law, those are currently undergoing a review process on a national level.
Informal Group
During the first round of comments in the framework of this informal group agreed to at ATCM XLI, inputs from the United Kingdom, Russia and Argentina were received. Additionally, the Secretariat provided comparative information on applicable aspects of the CCAMLR Secretariat Staff Regulations to the ATS (see Annex 1). After a brief summary shared by the convener, Germany also expressed its views in respect of topics under discussion and drew the attention to other staff regulation systems, like the UN or CCAMLR.
Regarding Parties’ views, there was widespread agreement that any staff regulation on retirement age, seniority and special/unpaid leave should be in line with the local law. As far as special leave goes, Argentina mentioned that it would seem natural to follow practice as established in the local law and include them formally in the staff regulations. Similarly, Germany referred to best practices and international standards to include general forms of parental leave. Regarding unpaid leave, which is also contemplated in local law, both the UK and Argentina understand that it should be included in the staff regulations insofar as it does not cause undue disruption to normal Secretariat operations. With reference to seniority, Argentina suggested the Secretariat study the feasibility and applicability of improving the general staff’s salary scale table, to make it consistent with the executive staff’s, including more progressive steps with smaller salary increases, avoiding both inequalities between new and existing staff and significant impacts on Secretariat budget. In this regard, Germany further elaborated on different alternatives for a new salary scale.
A brief explanation was provided by Argentina regarding the main aspects of its current retirement law (as mentioned, presently, conditions under Argentine law are undergoing a review process nationally), so that Parties have a better idea of the retirement conditions in Argentina. Under this topic, Germany suggested a common retirement age of 65 for men and women, considering respective international standards and practice. 
Regarding performance evaluation, whereas the UK would like to see line managers more consistently seeking 360 and external feedback on staff performance, Russia and Argentina consider that this should remain within the mechanisms of the ATCM, and consequently staff performance and subsequent decisions should remain responsibility of the executive staff of the Secretariat. In this regard, Germany raised doubts as to whether a “hierarchical” evaluation system would benefit the organization and whether “360” feedbacks would be practicable. 
Conclusions 
The agreed points of the discussions were as follows:
- Seniority: requires the presentation of a draft new general staff salary scale requested to the ATS.
- Special, parental and compassionate leave: it would seem natural to follow practice as established in the local law, international best practices and standards, and include them formally in the staff regulations.
- Unpaid leave of absence: should be included in the staff regulations insofar as it does not cause undue disruption to normal Secretariat operations.
- Performance evaluation: should remain within the mechanisms of the ATCM, and consequently staff performance and subsequent decisions should remain responsibility of the executive staff of the Secretariat.
- Retirement age: any staff regulation on retirement age, seniority and special/unpaid leave should be in line with the local law.
Having been appointed to coordinate the informal discussions and after sharing these proposals in that framework, Argentina  proposes an amendment for the Annex of Decision 3 (2003) (current staff regulations) using as references SP 7, ATCM XLI, and the CCAMLR Staff Regulations and the agreed points mentioned above.
Our proposal (see Annex 2) has been drafted in consultation with the Secretariat and consists of one file containing the proposed amendments to the current Staff Regulations with track changes so as to facilitate consideration by Parties, and a brief explanation of each of the proposed changes. The ATS has also prepared a new proposed salary scale –providing three new options- including their budgetary implications, which is contained in Annex 3, for consideration of the ATCM. 
Recommendations
Argentina recommends that the ATCM:

    1. Discusses the proposed changes of the Annex to Decision 3 (2003).
    2. Evaluates the salary scale proposals presented by the ATS and their implications, at the Budget Committee. 
    3. Requests the legal drafting group to prepare the text of a new Decision, modifying the Annex to Decision 3 (2003), if the suggested amendments are duly accepted by all Consultative Parties.
