





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay









Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay
Working Paper submitted by Japan
Summary
Japan has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay, in accordance with Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’ appended to Resolution 3 (2018).
ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay (69º14'30''S, 39º46'00''E) was originally designated in Recommendation XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No.22) after a proposal by Japan. A management plan for the Area was adopted under Recommendation XVI-7 (1991) and revised under Measure 1 (2000) and Measure 7 (2014).
A revised Management Plan for ASPA NO. 141 is provided at Attachment A. There are no major changes to the Management Plan. Minor amendments are summarised as follows:
    • The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
    • To protect the adjacent area with the same qualities as ASPA No. 141, the part of western boundary of Area that delineated by rope boundaries have been changed to the high-water line of the coast. In addition, the western boundary has been amended to clearly define ASPA.  
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to, and movement within or over, the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by RPAS shall not be permitted unless for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority’.

Recommendation
Japan recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay (Attachment A).

ASPA No. 141, Yukidori Valley, Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay
    1) Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
    2) Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes. ASPA No. 141
First designation:
Rec. XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No. 22)
First adoption of management plan:
Rec. XVI-7 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No.
Renaming and renumbering as Decision 1(2002)
ASPA No. 141
    4) If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
    (i) Major or minor?
Minor.
    (ii) any changes to the boundaries or coordinates?
Yes - the part of western boundary that delineated by rope boundaries have been changed to the high-water line of the coast.
    (iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes – Map 2 has been changed to show the revised western boundary. Changes are therefore to both the caption and the graphics.
    (iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes – the description of the western boundary has changed.
    (v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
    (vi) Other – brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    • The section Supporting documentation has been updated.
    • The following text has been added under section 7(ii) Access to, and movement within or over, the Area: ‘Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by RPAS shall not be permitted unless for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority’.
    5) If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? Yes/No
N/A
    6) If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No
N/A
    7) If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? Yes/No (If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant CCAMLR Final Report should be given).
N/A
    8) If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
B - representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
    9) If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008)? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.)
D - East Antarctic coastal geologic (e.g. Vestfold, Bunger, Wilson hills)
    10) If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012)? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here.)
ACBR 5 Enderby Land
    11) If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas  (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCM XXXVIII – IP 27 and the full report available at: http://www.erg.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A


