 





Recommendations arising from the Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System
Prague, Czech Republic, 27-28 June 2019







Recommendations arising from the Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System
Prague, Czech Republic, 27-28 June 2019
Working Paper submitted by Australia, SCAR and the United States as the workshop co-conveners and the Czech Republic as the workshop host
Summary
The Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System was held in Prague, Czech Republic, from 27-28 June 2019. The Committee is invited to consider the recommendations arising, which are outlined in this Working Paper. The full co-conveners’ report of the workshop is presented separately in Information Paper 165. 
    1. Background
At CEP XXI (2018) the Committee considered Working Paper 16 Proposal for a joint SCAR / CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system jointly prepared by Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, China, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Russian Federation, SCAR, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The Committee strongly supported the proposal to convene a joint SCAR / CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system, consistent with actions identified in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan and the CEP Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP).
The Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System was hosted by the Czech Ministry of the Environment at the Masaryk College in Prague, Czech Republic, from 27-28 June 2019. The workshop was co-convened by Ewan McIvor (Australia), Chandrika Nath (SCAR), Polly Penhale (United States) and Aleks Terauds (SCAR), and was attended by 50 participants, including 9 representatives of SCAR, representatives of 19 CEP Members and representatives of 3 CEP Observers (see list of participants in Information Paper 165).
As agreed at CEP XXI, the workshop terms of reference were to:
    1) Review the current status of the Antarctic protected area system.
    2) Identify information and resources relevant to designating ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework.
    3) Identify actions that could be taken to support the further development of the Antarctic protected area system.
    4) Prepare a report for consideration by the CEP.
The workshop addressed these terms of reference through a series of presentations, plenary discussion sessions and break-out groups.
    2. Outcomes and recommendations
The full workshop report is presented in Information Paper 165 Co-conveners’ report of the Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System, Prague, Czech Republic, 27-28 June 2019 (Australia, Czech Republic, SCAR, United States). The following sections reflect the workshop co-convener’s observations on the main conclusions, and present the five recommendations agreed by participants during the final session of the workshop.
The workshop was highly constructive, both for facilitating productive discussions under the workshop terms of reference, and as an opportunity to build on the long-standing close collaboration between SCAR and the CEP. There was clear recognition of the value of continuing the effective engagement between SCAR and the CEP, in general, and particularly on the systematic further development of the protected area system.
There was a high level of engagement among participants throughout the two days, reinforcing the benefits of periodically convening workshops to allow dedicated and interactive discussions on significant issues.
ToR#1 Review the current status of the Antarctic protected area system
The workshop recognised that the current series of 72 ASPAs continue to serve an important purpose, but also acknowledged that those areas had, in general, not been identified in a systematic manner. There was general agreement that initiating further work to systematically develop the protected area system, in conjunction with the application of other tools available within the Antarctic Treaty system, would help to advance the comprehensive and lasting protection of Antarctica’s outstanding values.
Recommendation 1: That the CEP considers the draft Report on the State of the Antarctic Protected Area System (Attachment A), which is an objective report not an evaluation or assessment, and as appropriate, forwards the report to the ATCM in accordance with its role to provide advice on the ‘operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system’.
ToR#2 Identify information and resources relevant to designating ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework
The workshop reaffirmed the importance of drawing on the best available scientific information to support the further development of the protected area system. It was noted that there is a considerable body of existing relevant information, which represents a sounds basis for moving forward, but also that there is value in continuing to build the level of scientific information over time. It was acknowledged that SCAR will continue to play a fundamental role in this regard.
Recommendation 2: That the CEP encourages Members, SCAR and other Observers and Experts to prioritise and support further research that will build on the existing body of scientific evidence to support the further development of the protected area system in accordance with Article 3.2 of Annex V.
Recommendation 3: Recognising SCAR’s role in facilitating access to data, that the CEP requests SCAR to consider establishing a repository of information relevant to identifying ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework (e.g. environmental datasets, human activity data, analyses of the implications of global pressures – see Attachment B).
ToR#3 Identify actions that could be taken to support the further development of the Antarctic protected area system
There was a high level of support during the workshop for initiating dedicated work to support the further systematic development of the protected area system, through close collaboration between the CEP and SCAR, and involving close engagement with other stakeholders. Such work would aim to develop a series of ASPAs that address the criteria in Article 3.2 of Annex V, that are designed on the basis of the best available science to maximise the protection of values in light of current and anticipated future pressures, and that are dynamic. It was emphasised during the workshop that any future protected area system would need to be implemented effectively and efficiently, which would require the broad involvement of Parties and international collaboration, particularly for areas that are not regularly accessed by national Antarctic programs. 
Recommendation 4: That the CEP initiates a program of work involving close engagement with SCAR and other stakeholders (e.g. COMNAP, IAATO, ASOC), to develop a framework for systematically developing the protected area system (e.g. to identify goals/objectives, related science requirements, priorities for actions to be taken by the CEP and Parties, timeframe for action, measures to evaluate progress).
Recommendation 5: That the CEP supports a program of work to review and rationalise its existing protected area guidance materials. This could also involve consideration of guidance for the five-yearly review of management plans.
