





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands









ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No. 34)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-2 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Measure 11 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 11 (2013)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, Map 1 The location of Lions Rump in relation to King George Island was re-drawn for better quality; location of ASPA No 171 Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island was added to the map 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See above for a list of changes
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
The following point is also considered:
(e) areas of particular interest for ongoing or planned scientific research;

9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Environmental Domain A
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation 
Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here). 
ACBR1 North-east Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here). 
N/A

Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 151 Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

Summary
Poland has conducted a five-year review of the management plan for ASPA No 151, Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, and has determined that only minor amendments are required. Poland recommends that the CEP approves the revised management plan attached to the Working Paper.
Background
Lion’s Rump was originally designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest No 34 through Recommendation XVI-2 (1991, SSSI No. 34) after a proposal by Poland. on the grounds that it contains diverse biota and important geological features, and is a representative example of the terrestrial, limnological, and littoral habitats of the maritime Antarctic. The Area also valuable as a reference site with diverse avian and mammalian Antarctic fauna, against which disturbance at sites situated near locations of human activity can be measured, In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area was re-designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA No 151). A revised Management Plan was adopted in 2000 (Measure 1/2000), and then in 2013 (Measure 11/2013).
Since 2007 a monitoring program of birds and pinnipeds is carried out in the Area according to CCAMLR standard methods, and since 2014 Lions Rump is one of CEMP (CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program) sites.
The original goals for designating the Area are still relevant. 
Summary of Amendments
The revised Management Plan is provided in Attachment A. No major changes to the Management Plan were needed. The minor amendments were as follows:
    • updates were made to the Introduction including reference to the ACBR (Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions) and information on Lions Rump being one of CEMP (CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program) sites;
    • editorial amendments were made throughout the text, including for consistency with the CEP Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2/2011) and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM;
    • Map 1 The location of Lions Rump in relation to King George Island was re-drawn for better quality; location of ASPA No 171 Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island was added to the map; 
    • Section 2 Aims and objectives. Provision allowing visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan was added;
    • Section 6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features. Numbers of penguins and pinnipeds were updated; information on breeding attempts by king penguins was added;
    • Section 6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity. Information about ASPA No 171 Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island was added;
    • The following text has been added to Section 7(ii) Access to and movement within or over the Area: “Overflight of bird colonies within the Area by Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) shall not be permitted unless for scientific or operational purposes, and in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority. Guidance can be found in Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica  (Resolution 4 (2018))”;
    • Section 7 ( ix) Disposal of waste. Provision on waste disposal was clarified to “All wastes, including human waste, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes may be disposed of into the sea off the Area”;
    • Section 7(x) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan continue to be met. Provision on maintaining markers/signs at long-term monitoring sites was added; recommendation on avoiding interference with long-term research and monitoring activities through consultations and information exchange was added;
    • Section 8 Supporting documentation was updated.
Recommendation
Poland recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No 151 Lions Rump,  King George Island, South Shetland Islands - Attachment A.

