





Review of  Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 - Svarthamaren








ASPA No. 142  Svarthamaren
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes 
First designation:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
Any revisions to management plan:
    • Measure 1 (1999)
    • Measure 2 (2004)
    • Measure 8 (2009)
    • Measure 8 (2014)
Current management plan: 
Measure 8 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation 3 (1996)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 142
Other relevant measures:
None
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
None
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
None 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Clarification that the field station Tor is not part of the Area, but immediately outside. 
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
    • Modifications in the Introduction
    • Allowing posting of signs informing about danger of rock avalanches (Section 3)  
    • Clarification that the field station Tor is not part of the Area, but immediately outside (Section 6 (i)).
    • The numbers of breeding birds in the seabird colonies have been modified on basis of new survey information (Section 6 (i)).
    • Regulations of RPAS use in the Area (Section 7 (i))
    • Allowing essential management activities (Section 7 (ii))
    • Allowing installation of Automatic Weather Stations for scientific purposes (Section 7 (iii))
    • Bibliography updated
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
To avoid human induced changes to the population structure, composition and size of the seabird colonies present at the site, to allow for undisturbed research on the adaptations of the Antarctic petrel, snow petrel and south polar skua to the inland conditions in Antarctica.
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.

Yes, both  Environments T- Inland continental geologic - and U- North Victoria Land geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? 
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here.

Yes, Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region 6 – Dronning Maud Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? 
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here. 

Yes, IBA 112 Svarthamaren

Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 
No. 142 - Svarthamaren
Working Paper Submitted by Norway


Summary
The management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 Svarthamaren Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land has been reviewed in accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. No substantive changes to the plan are proposed. Changes are generally editorial in nature, and Norway recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 142.  
Introduction
Norway has conducted a review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land in accordance with the provisions in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

The review process for the ASPA has been completed and is described in this paper. A draft revised plan for the Area is attached. 
The Area
Svarthamaren is protected for its seabird colonies, in particular the colony of Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), which constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of Antarctic petrel and which is one of the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent. The area was first designated in 1987 (Recommendation XIV-5) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23. The management plan was last revised in 2014 (Measure 8 (2014)).
Review of Activities
Three permits to enter the Area have been issued in the period since the last revision of the management plan. These permits have been granted for scientific field work and  associated activities. 

In this period one specific scientific project looking at responses of Antarctic seabirds to a changing environment has taken place in addition to the regular population monitoring program. In 2017 a film crew making a documentary accompanied the scientists in the field. The same year a study was also conducted to assess the Area with respect to risk of rock avalanches, following such an event in the colony during the previous field season.  
Assessment of Area
Norwegian researchers who have worked in the Area since its designation have been involved in the assessment as to whether information in the management plan still is current and whether the values identified have changed since the last revision. In general, it has been assessed that the values of the Area are still warrant continued protection.

It should be noted that the last few years of monitoring (2015-2018) have shown that the productivity (number of chicks produced/year) of Antarctic petrels at Svarthamaren shows large inter-annual fluctuations and was generally declining and much lower than in the 1990s. Preliminary information about this situation was submitted to the CEP in 2016 through  ATCM XXXIX IP113 (Norway). It is yet too early to provide solid explanations for the decline, which indicates that continued  regular monitoring is warranted in order to capture the variability in the Area and consequently give an accurate picture of trend and status of the colony. 
Proposed Revision
The Management Plan text has been modified. The changes include:

Introduction
Seabird population numbers have been updated.

Section 3: Management activities
Text allowing posting of warning signs informing about danger of rock avalanches has been added.

Section 6 i: Description of area
    • It has been clarified that the field station Tor is situated immediately outside the Area, not surrounded by the Area.
    • Seabird population numbers have been updated.

Section 7 (i)
Provisions regulating the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) has been included.

Section 7 (ii)
Text allowing essential management activities has been added.

Section 7 (iii)
Adding text that allows for the installation of Automatic Weather Stations for scientific purposes.

Bibliography
The bibliography of relevant literature has been updated. 

Conclusion and proposal
No substantive changes to the text of the management plan for ASPA No. 142 Svarthamaren have been proposed, although note in particular that: 
    • it has been clarified that the field station Tor is not located in the Area, but immediately outside 
    • a provision generally prohibiting the use of RPAS has been added
    • a provision allowing the posting of signs informing about danger of rock avalanches has been added   

The changes made are generally of an editorial nature, and Norway proposes that CEP XXII approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 142 Svarthamaren and forwards it to ATCM XLII for adoption.


