





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 128
 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands









ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation X-5 (1979, SSSI No.8)
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation X-5 (1979)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000), Measure 4 (2014)
Current management plan:
Measure 4 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Resolution 7 (1995)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Measure 2 (2006) Designation of ASMA No 1 (Admiralty Bay), Resolution 2 (2011), Measure 14 (2014).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No change to captions. Minor update removing refuge no longer present.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment A – Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic; Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and other islands; and Environment G – Antarctic Peninsula offshore islands
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 3 – Northwest Antarctic Peninsula
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))? 
Yes. IBA No. 046
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands was first adopted in 1979 and a comprehensive revision was adopted in 2014. A number of minor revisions have been made to the present management plan, both as a result of new data and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. The Area at the Western shore of Admiralty Bay was originally designated primarily for its ecological and scientific values. In particular, large and diverse avian and mammalian fauna and locally rich vegetation are present, and the Area is a representative example of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem. Long term scientific research has been, and continues to be, carried out within the Area.
    4. The outstanding ecological and scientific values are considered to have been maintained and to remain valid. 
    5. A small area of the non-native grass species Poa annua was identified within the Area and the previous management plan set objectives to prevent its spread and to develop a program of eradication. This has been given priority management attention since 2014 and all known plants within the Area have now been removed. The site continues to be monitored for the effectiveness of the removal program and for potential recolonization.
    6. In the context of increasing multinational scientific, logistic and tourism activities in the local region, it is important that the Antarctic Specially Protected Area is continued so that the outstanding values of the Area can be protected and maintained.
    7. No changes to the boundaries or maps of the Area have been made. A minor update to reflect removal of a nearby refuge outside of the Area has been made to the maps.
    8. The minor changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    9. Revisions to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the Management Plan was first adopted;
    10. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the Area was updated to include new data on breeding seabirds. Since 2014, the numbers of Adélie penguins have remained relatively stable (~8 % increase), while for Chinstrap penguins there has been a further decline of ~24 %. In contrast, the increase in Gentoo penguins has continued since the last management plan review, with an increase of ~32 % over this period. Skua numbers have increased since the last management plan review, returning to a local population similar to that in 1978/79. A description of the status, and process of removal, of the non-native grass species Poa annua has been added;
    11. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The policy on air access was revised to achieve consistency with Resolution 4 (2018) Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica. The current overflight ceiling limit of 2000 ft without a permit continues and applies both to piloted and remotely piloted aircraft, with permits required to operate <2000 feet (~610 m). This provides a consistent set of rules on overflight limits;
    12. (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). The reference list was updated.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  We recommend that the revised Management Plan for ASPA 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, be adopted by the CEP.
