





Antarctica as a platform for exploring the universe: Successful international collaborations and recent achievements









Antarctica as a platform for exploring the universe: Successful international collaborations and recent achievements

Working paper presented by the United States
Summary
Among the most fundamental scientific mysteries are the origins and evolution of our Universe. Recent technological advances have ushered in an exciting new era whereby signals from electromagnetic radiation, particles such as neutrinos and cosmic rays, and gravitational waves detected at various locations around our planet and in space are being combined to address long-standing questions about our Universe. Multi-messenger astrophysics has yielded stunning new insights into phenomena such as the formation and collisions of neutron stars and black holes. Very high energy neutrinos detected by the IceCube Observatory at South Pole Station were combined with other measurements to provide a first answer to the 106-year old question regarding the source of cosmic rays. Most recently, a network of global telescopes including one at South Pole, generated the first-ever image of the event horizon surrounding a black hole. These latter examples leveraged the geographical location and exceptionally thin, cold, and dry atmosphere of the high Antarctic plateau for critical observations. Many unanswered questions remain for which it can be anticipated that observations from Antarctica, using ever improving technologies, will continue to be crucial. We recommend that the Parties note the importance of the Antarctic as an unparalleled platform for astronomy and astrophysics investigations and the need for on-going international cooperation to support this priority research area.
Background
Importance of astrophysical research supported from Antarctica

The Universe is the ultimate laboratory that can now be probed as never before through several powerful and diverse “windows” - electromagnetic waves, high-energy particles (such cosmic rays and neutrinos), and gravitational waves distorting and propagating through spacetime fabric as envisioned by Einstein. Such multi-messenger simultaneous observations are now possible using advanced telescopes and detectors situated in space, flying on high-altitude balloons in the upper atmosphere, and deployed on the Earth's surface. Ground-based instrumentation offers the advantage of ready access for maintenance and upgrades; however, electromagnetic measurements can suffer from signal distortions by the atmosphere. In this and other ways, the high Antarctic plateau provides a number of advantages for state-of-the-art astrophysics research. 

The Antarctic continent enables researchers to address fundamental questions regarding the structure and formation of the universe and all matter known within it such as "how did the universe begin?", "what are the underlying physical laws that control the evolution of the Universe?", what is “dark energy and matter” and "what is the source of high energy cosmic rays?" The Antarctic atmosphere offers researchers the opportunity to have a clearer view of 'fossil' light from the Big Bang in the form of cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation, as well as for millimeter radio waves used to create the first image of a black hole. The thick ice sheet allows researchers record interactions of high-energy neutrinos from space using detector arrays embedded deep in the optically clear ice. 

The Antarctic polar plateau is an ideal, ground-based platform for studying CMB radiation as the high altitude fosters dry and stable conditions that reduce the atmospheric interference with signals. A constellation of scientific instruments currently leverages these conditions to enable CMB experiments including the South Pole Telescope (SPT) and Background Imaging of Cosmic Extragalactic Polarization (BICEP) array at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, as well as CMB detectors on balloon platforms launched at the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Long Duration Balloon Facility at McMurdo Station. Two other Antarctic stations also carry astronomical observations on the high-elevation plateau - French-Italian Concordia and Chinese Kunlun. 
   
A notable scientific achievement in past decades was the use of measured fluctuations in the CMB radiation to understand the early history and composition of the Universe. CMB radiation is the fossil light from the early Universe emitted nearly 13.4 billion years ago. CMB investigations have provided a framework to understand initial moments of the Universe during a very short period of accelerated expansion of spacetime known as Inflation. 

While CMB provides clues to the early history of the Universe, modern high-energy cosmic events such as supernovae, gamma-ray bursts, black holes, active galactic nuclei, and other extrema produce cosmic rays. Cosmic rays are high-energy elementary particles or even atomic nuclei that propagate through space with relativistic velocities. Cosmic rays produce other charged particles upon interaction with Earth's upper atmosphere, but their origin cannot be traced because cosmic ray trajectories are significantly influenced by interstellar and intergalactic magnetic fields. However, a neutral/ uncharged particle known as a neutrino is not affected by magnetic fields and this can point to the cosmic ray source. The extremely low mass and lack of charge of a neutrino results in neutrinos traveling with almost speed of light and minimal interaction with matter. Neutrinos can thus travel nearly unhindered for many light-years from some of the most extreme cosmic environments in the Universe.
The international IceCube Neutrino Observatory is comprised of 5,160 optical sensors embedded in a cubic kilometre of ice at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. IceCube, completed in 2010 and funded by the National Science Foundation and international partners, was constructed to detect neutrinos with energies up to teraelectronvolts. Currently, the IceCube science collaboration includes more than 300 people from 50 institutions in 12 countries. 
When neutrinos pass through ice sheet and interact with an atomic nucleus, resulting electrically charged secondary particles (muon and electrons) in turn move through the ice and produce short flashes of blue light known as Cherenkov emissions.  The energy and direction of the neutrino can be inferred, allowing scientists to trace the neutrino's origin in the Universe. Since the installation of IceCube, there have been unprecedented astrophysical discoveries. The first-ever detection of high-energies neutrinos, reported in 2013, was named a top physics discovery of the year1. 
Following that in 2017, IceCube scientists linked a high-energy neutrino with an extragalactic source, a brilliant cosmic blazar roughly 4 billion light-years away2. At the centres of galaxies, blazars eject massive jets of elementary particles from a supermassive black hole at their core. IceCube scientists not only linked detected neutrinos with their source, they advanced our knowledge of the nature of blazars. Previously it was unknown what particles blazers eject. Detecting neutrinos indicated that at least some of the ejected particles (cosmic rays) are protons, as neutrinos and protons are produced there in combination. 
That same year, in April 2017, the Event Horizon Telescope network of radio antennas observed a black hole, M87*, in the Messier 87 galaxy for four days. The radio array includes eight radio telescopes on four continents including the South Pole Telescope. Those observations were analysed over the course of two years to generate the first-ever image of the region immediately surrounding a black hole, known as an event horizon, released in 20193 (Figure 1). 
Future Plans 
Antarctica will continue to play a central role in CMB based research. The next level, known as CMB Stage 4, will include telescopes equipped with more sensitive and more powerful superconducting cameras at the South Pole. CMB Stage 4 promises a transformative step forward in understanding of the evolution of the Universe and the fundamental properties of space and time.
Furthermore, plans are currently being developed for the next-generation IceCube neutrino facility. The IceCube/Gen2 detector will expand the current installation to about 8 times greater ice volume. The larger detector array will enhance the rate of high-energy neutrino detection, increase statistical certainty, and improve instrument sensitivity across a broader range of neutrino energy levels. 
These experiments stand alone in their own right but also complement investigations across the globe, from high-energy colliders, to dark matter searches, and sky-scanning surveys using a multitude of electromagnetic and particle classes both at stationary observatories and aboard balloon and satellite platforms.
Collaborations
CMB and neutrino studies at South Pole Station are multinational endeavours. The U.S. partners for ongoing astrophysical experiments at the South Pole with Belgium, Germany, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and others.  Such collaborative investments that capitalize on the unique conditions of the Antarctic continent will, for the foreseeable future, make key contributions to the progress of astrophysics. Antarctic facilities will increasingly join those around the world and in space to observe anticipated and unanticipated astronomical events and uncover fundamental properties of matter and processes of the Universe in the multi-messenger age.  
Recommendations
International cooperation will continue to be vital for a sustained, coordinated effort around key projects and initiatives to advance priority astrophysical research. The United States recommends that the Parties:

    1) Recognize the achievements of collective efforts to understand the structure and history of the universe and the energy and matter contained within, in particular through research based in Antarctica.
    2) Encourage ongoing efforts and increase international collaboration to advance astrophysical research efforts taking advantage of the Antarctic continent as a unique platform for observations.



 
Figure 1. Image of M87* from observations on 2017 April 11 from series of images collected in the Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration 2017 campaign4. The scale of 50 µas (microarcseconds) imaged is equivalent to reading the date stamped on a quarter coin in Los Angeles from New York.


