





The Status and Monitoring of Antarctic Seal Species









The Status and Monitoring of Antarctic Seal Species

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
Identifying management practices to advance protection for Antarctic seals species has been a challenge due to a lack of detailed knowledge on the exact number and distribution of animals within each seal species. The status of each Antarctic seal species, as currently understood, is elaborated on in Attachment A. This overview reveals the need for further work to refine population estimates and assess environmental variables. This data could then feed into further discussions around the need for additional management measures.
Background
    1. The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) was signed in 1978 with the purpose of protecting seals from commercial exploitation while recognising that the stocks of Antarctic seals are an important living resource in the marine environment; however, it has largely been overtaken by other Antarctic Treaties, namely the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Antarctic Treaty’s Protocol on Environmental Protection. Many of its provisions are not now compatible with the wider Antarctic Treaty System, while only 15 Consultative Antarctic Treaty countries (and one Non-consultative) are Party to it. Nevertheless, the Convention does include a number of provisions for the protection of seals, which have not be replicated by the CEP. 
Status of Antarctic Seals
    2. Attachment A provides an overview of the available knowledge on the current status of the different Antarctic seal species. 

    3. While all seal species endemic to Antarctica are currently classified as of “least concern” on the IUCN list of endangered species, due to their high levels of mobility and limited amount of time spent on land there is a lack of detailed knowledge of the exact numbers within each species, including wide variations in established estimates. This emphasises the difficulty in making appropriate conservation decisions for the protection of individual seal species across their distribution.
Monitoring of Antarctic Seals
    4. Clearly more research is needed on the population counts of different seals species and on any threats posed to them. Work is already underway on this front. For example, British Antarctic Survey scientists are developing machine-learning tools for high-resolution satellite data and RPAS imagery to enable the automated counting of ice seals over large areas of the Antarctic Peninsula region. The resulting seal numbers and locations will then be analysed in conjunction with a range of remotely sensed environmental variables, including ice-type, bathymetry, tides and productivity, to assess the key environmental drivers that influence ice seal distributions.

    5. Currently only one Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) has been designated solely for the protection of seals and there is no equivalent for seals of the Important Bird Areas (IBAs) that identify important breeding sites for avifauna. The Ross seal has been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species but no Action Plan has been developed for its protection. 

    6. This lack of specific protection is understandable, but does highlight a lack of knowledge to inform seal conservation practices. It is to be hoped that increased understanding of breeding areas and the potential vulnerability of the species will mean that the Committee is better informed to determine whether further action is required. Furthermore, an assessment of the effectiveness of the management tools currently available through the Protocol in protecting seals would be a valuable additional step in protecting these species.
Recommendation
    7. The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP:

    i) urge SCAR and other scientists to increase research into Antarctic seal species; and 

    ii) encourage interested Parties to join informal intersessional work in assessing the available management tools for the protection of Antarctic seals and considering whether additional protection for Antarctic seals is required.

