





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123
 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land









ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 6 (2008), Measure 3 (2013)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 123, Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987), Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000) 
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No change to captions. Minor change to land / ice boundary in NE of the map.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment S – McMurdo - South Victoria Land geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 9 – South Victoria Land
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))? 
N/A

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123
Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys was last reviewed in 2013, and the United States accordingly commenced the review in 2018. A number of minor revisions have been made, both as a result of new data and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. Barwick Valley was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 3 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) due to its value as “one of the least disturbed and contaminated of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land” and its importance as a reference base against which to measure changes in comparable ecosystems of the other Dry Valleys.
    4. Soil samples collected from the Area by scientists from the United States in 2015 showed some evidence of low levels of metals and hydrocarbon contamination at one previously disturbed site near Lake Vashka. However, given the low magnitude and very limited spatial extent of contamination observed, as well as very low absolute levels of contaminants in samples taken nearby, the largely pristine nature of the Area is being maintained and its value as a reference site is considered to remain valid.
    5. No changes to the boundaries or maps of the Area have been made.
    6. The minor changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Revisions to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011);
        b. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the Area was updated to include information from recent visits made to the Area. In particular, results are summarised from a new soil geochemistry study on levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and a suite of 17 metals/metalloids to determine whether geochemical indications of human activities are present within the Area (Klein et al. 2018. See management plan for reference). The study provided for the first time quantitative data on soil geochemistry within the Area, and as such provides an initial set of baseline levels across a range of elements that are valuable for future comparisons. Overall, little evidence of contamination was found, except at one site of past disturbance near Lake Vashka where several contaminants were elevated above background levels. In absolute terms, however, contamination at this site was still considered low;
        c. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The policy on air access was revised to achieve consistency with Resolution 4 (2018) Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica. The current overflight ceiling limit of 2000 ft without a permit continues and applies both to piloted and remotely piloted aircraft, with permits required to operate <2000 ft.. This provides a consistent set of rules on overflight limits;
        d. (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). The reference list was updated.
Proposal
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  We recommend that the revised Management Plan for ASPA 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land, be adopted by the CEP.
