





Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Antarctic Clean-up Manual








Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Antarctic Clean-up Manual
Working paper submitted by Australia
Summary
CEP XX established an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG), convened by Australia, to review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual. Australia provided a progress report to CEP XXI on the work of the ICG (ATCM XLI/IP36). Due to the limited time available and reduced agenda of CEP XXI, the ICG continued work under its terms of reference through the 2018/19 intersessional period. This paper presents the final report from the ICG, summarising the outcome of discussions held during the 2017/18 and 2018/19 intersessional periods. 
The ICG reached general agreement on a suggested revision of the Clean-up Manual, presented at Attachment A, including additional Guidelines to support clean-up activities. The ICG also reviewed developments and advances since the Clean-Up Manual was adopted. It noted that Antarctic clean-up has continued to be a focus of scientific research and action by the Parties. A summary of the significant advances in the scientific and practical aspects of clean-up is provided at Attachment C, for the information of the CEP and ATCM.
It is recommended that the Committee: considers the revised Clean-up Manual and conveys the revised guidelines to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (draft at Attachment B).
Background
The Antarctic Clean-Up Manual was adopted in 2013 by ATCM XXXVI (Resolution 2 (2013)). In adopting the Resolution, the ATCM encouraged the CEP to continue to develop the manual, with the input of SCAR and COMNAP. The Manual was updated in 2014 to include a checklist for preliminary site assessments. The CEP Five-Year Work Plan included an action for CEP XX to ‘consider review of the Clean-Up Manual’. 
At CEP XX, Australia and the United Kingdom provided ATCM XL/WP28 Review of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, proposing the establishment of an intersessional contact group (ICG) to review and revise the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual. The CEP agreed on the importance of keeping the Clean-Up Manual up to date to reflect the current state of knowledge, and agreed to establish an ICG to review the Manual, led by Australia (CEP XX report, Paras 41-45) with the following terms of reference:
    1) Collate information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites; 
    2) Review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual appended to Resolution 2 (2013), as updated in 2014, and suggest any modifications and additional guidance; and
    3) Report to CEP XXI.
Operation of the ICG
During each intersessional period (2017/18 and 2018/19) the ICG held several rounds of discussion, using the CEP Discussion Forum on the Secretariat website. The ICG was convened by Phillip Tracey (Australia). Participants included Australia, Argentina, Belarus, Finland, France, Germany, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and ASOC. The ICG completed its work according to the terms of reference as follows.
TOR #1: Collate information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites; 
ICG participants were invited to comment on a convener’s discussion paper that, for each section of the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual, compiled relevant CEP papers and publications in the academic literature, and provided a brief summary of developments and advances. Feedback from participants was incorporated into this summary document, which was used as a reference for the ICG’s work to review the manual. 
The review of developments and advances indicated that since the Clean-Up Manual was adopted in 2013, Antarctic clean-up has continued to be a focus of scientific research and clean-up actions by the Parties, and significant advances in the scientific and practical aspects of clean-up have been made. A substantial body of relevant scientific literature is available, and clean-up activities and experiences have been reported to the CEP by Parties. Attachment C presents a brief summary of the developments and advances in clean-up, for the information of the CEP and ATCM.
TOR#2: Review the Antarctic Clean-Up Manual appended to Resolution 2 (2013), as updated in 2014, and suggest any modifications and additional guidance.
In the 2017/18 intersessional period ICG participants were invited to comment on a convener’s discussion paper presenting suggestions for potential revisions to the manual, including a list of relevant references identified in work under TOR#1, grouped under topic heading, for potential inclusion in the References section of the manual. 
In the 2018/19 intersessional period, participants considered revised versions of the manual taking into account comments received. Suggestions were received for minor modifications to Section 1. Introduction and Section 2. Key Guiding Principles. Participants agreed a list of relevant references grouped under topic heading for inclusion in the References section of the manual.
Guidance and resources to support clean-up
The ICG also noted progress in some aspects of clean-up research and practice, and considered whether additional guidelines and resources (e.g. guidelines, checklists, techniques, or protocols) including those identified in Section 3 of the manual, Guidance and resources to support clean-up, could be developed. 
The ICG considered two guidance documents proposed by Australia:
    • “Guidance for Construction and Management of Biopiles for the Bioremediation of Petroleum Hydrocarbon Contaminated Soil in the Antarctic”. A biopile is a purposefully designed mound of soil used to accelerate the degradation of petroleum contaminants. It utilises bioremediation, the process of using microbes to degrade contaminants. 
    • “Guidance for Construction and Management of Permeable Reactive Barriers for the Treatment of Hydrocarbon Contaminated Groundwater in the Antarctic”. A Permeable Reactive Barrier is an in-ground groundwater treatment technology designed to prevent the migration of contaminants. A Permeable Reactive Barrier can: adsorb and degrade hydrocarbons, utilising native microbes to degrade contaminants through a process known as biostimulation and bioremediation; can adsorb and capture contaminants such as metals and other contaminants not amenable to biodegradation; or, a mix thereof.
Each of the non-mandatory guidances are based on Antarctic-specific research and practical experience with construction and operation, and identify general considerations and principles to support decision making, planning and management, and the conduct of remediation activities. 
Participants commented on these guidance documents and agreed to recommend their inclusion in the manual. 
Argentina noted that it has developed techniques for separation and recovery of fuel spilled on ice or snow, and management of resultant fuel and water. The ICG welcomed Argentina’s advice that it was working towards additional guidance intended for future inclusion in the manual on this topic. 
Suggestions to clarify and enhance the Checklist for Preliminary Site Assessment were also agreed by the ICG. 
The ICG identified additional guidelines and resources that would be desirable to support clean-up work, and updated the list of desirable future guidelines and resources to include additional items:
    • techniques for separation and recovery of fuel spilled on ice or snow;
    • guidance for detailed site assessment; and
    • guidance for the identification and detection of sites requiring clean-up (including for example abandoned worksites, waste disposal sites, spill sites covered by ice/snow).
ToR#3: Report to CEP XXI.
This Working Paper represents the ICG’s final report to CEP XXII. In the view of the convener, the ICG has thoroughly addressed the terms of reference agreed by the Committee at CEP XX, and the CEP may consider and act as appropriate on the ICG’s report. The convener extends sincere thanks to all participants for their considered contributions during the 2017/18 and 2018/19 intersessional periods.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the CEP:
    1) considers the revised Antarctic Clean-up Manual presented at Attachment A to this Working Paper and conveys the revised manual to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution. A draft Resolution on ‘Revised Antarctic Clean-up Manual’ is presented at Attachment B; and
    2) notes the summary of developments and advances in clean-up since 2013 (Attachment C).

Attachment B
Draft Resolution XXII

Revised Antarctic Clean-up Manual

The Representatives,
Recalling the requirement under Article 1(5) of Annex III to the Protocol that past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of such sites, provided that such actions shall not require the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument, or the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location;
Noting that under Resolution 2 (2013) the ATCM adopted a Clean-up Manual to provide guidance to the Parties in order to support Parties in meeting the requirement above, and encouraged the CEP to continue to develop the manual, with the input of SCAR and COMNAP;
Considering the revision of the Clean-up Manual by the Committee for Environmental Protection;
Desiring to update the Manual to reflect developments and advances in clean-up in Antarctica;
Recommend that:
    1) the Clean-up Manual appended to this Resolution replace the Manual adopted under Resolution 2 (2013); 
    2) the Committee for Environmental Protection be encouraged to continue to develop the Clean-Up Manual with the input of SCAR and COMNAP;
    3) the Secretariat post the text of Resolution 2 (2013) on its website in a way that makes clear that it is no longer current.
Attachment C
Summary of developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites
Introduction
This attachment briefly summarises developments and advances since the adoption of the Antarctic Clean-up Manual by the CEP and ATCM in 2013, following work by a CEP open-ended Intersessional Contact Group conducting established by CEP XX to review the Clean-up Manual. The ICG collated information on developments and advances in matters relevant to the clean-up of Antarctic past waste disposal sites, past work sites, and contaminated sites. The summary draws on publications in the academic literature and CEP papers. The revised CEP Clean-up Manual provides further detail of relevant CEP papers and scientific publications in the References section. 
Information on developments relating to prevention of contamination, responses to environmental emergencies, and waste reduction and handling are not included, as these issues are not directly related to clean-up, and are regulated by other provisions of the Protocol and its Annexes. 
Developments and advances in Antarctic clean-up
Since the Clean-Up Manual was adopted in 2013, Antarctic clean-up has continued to be a focus of scientific research and action by the Parties, and significant advances in the scientific and practical aspects of clean-up have been made. A substantial body of clean-up related scientific literature is available, and clean-up activities and experiences have been reported to the CEP by Parties. 
The information on developments and advances relating to clean-up is presented below, arranged under the topic headings used in the clean-up manual. 
Site assessment / characterisation
Assessments of contaminants and impacts at many Antarctic sites are reported in the scientific literature. 18 relevant references are included in the revised clean up manual. A checklist for the preliminary site assessment for clean-up activities was considered and incorporated in the Clean-Up Manual by the CEP in 2014.
Environmental risk assessment
A limited amount of research has been published relating to environmental risk assessment associated with clean-up of Antarctic sites, including reporting on clean-up case studies. Seven relevant references are included in the revised clean-up manual. Examples of case studies include: an assessment of heavy metal contamination from penguins and anthropogenic activities on Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island; an Ecological Risk Assessment (ERA) undertaken for metal contamination at Ardley Cove, King George Island; a comprehensive assessment of the environmental contamination and impacts of sewage and wastewater outfall on the marine environment at Davis Station, East Antarctica; an ERA undertaken during the reuse of remediated soil at Casey Station, East Antarctica; and the proposal of site specific ERAs for soil invertebrate communities in subantarctic fuel spill sites was reported, where a similarly designed approach could be appropriate for Antarctic site-specific ERA’s. 
Environmental quality targets for clean-up
Relevant work has been published relating to contaminant toxicity on some Antarctic species and communities, and on development of methods for estimating toxicity. Sixteen relevant references are included in the revised clean-up manual. A few Antarctic programs are actively remediating hydrocarbon contaminated soil, and also conducting more detailed investigation into guidelines and remediation targets. Development of Antarctic specific toxicity testing protocols and criteria for re-use of remediated soils are likely in the near future.
This information may help inform the development of environmental quality targets for individual clean-up projects (e.g. site specific criteria), future consideration of possible generic Antarctic clean-up environmental quality targets, and provide guidance on re-use of remediated soil and water.  
Consideration of clean-up options
Considerable progress has been made in advancing techniques and options for Antarctic clean-up. Developments and advances in clean-up, in particular with respect to remediation of sites contaminated with heavy metals and hydrocarbons have been reported in CEP papers (five) and the scientific literature (42 papers). Scientific foundations, and techniques for: in-ground and above-ground containment or immobilisation of contaminated materials to prevent spread and mobilisation (including long-term performance and durability under Antarctic conditions), in-situ bioremediation, ex-situ bioremediation within Antarctica, and enhancement of natural biodegradation are all reported. Parties have reported to the CEP on their experiences in establishing in-situ (biocaves) and ex-situ (in biopiles) soil hydrocarbon bioremediation. 
Clean-up actions
Antarctic clean-up activities across Antarctica have been reported in CEP papers (eight) and the scientific literature (four papers). Clean-ups of waste sites, former station sites, equipment and buildings, and scientific installations have proceeded. 
Monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring and assessment of biological and chemical parameters specific to Antarctic clean-up is reported in the scientific literature (nineteen papers). Information on relevant approaches and techniques, and case studies of monitoring and assessment have been published. 


