





Reviewing requirements for exchanging information on non-governmental expeditions





Reviewing requirements for exchanging information on non-governmental expeditions
Working Paper submitted by Argentina 

Abstract
Argentina carried out a review of the current Information Exchange requirements for non-governmental activities, as well as the consistency between the information required and the current format of the Post-Visit Report adopted through Resolution 5 (2005). We are proposing modifications to Decision 5 (2016) “Exchange of Information” and the creation of an Intersessional Contact Group to carry out the review of the Post-Visit Reports.
    1. Introduction
The current growth and diversification of tourist activity in the Antarctic is subject to debate between the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. These debates could lead to the adoption of new regulations or monitoring programmes, among other management tools. The efficiency of the tools being designed will largely depend on the decisions being made in an informed way and based on precise evidence. As such, the information available to the Parties is very valuable in enabling them to supervise the activities in the Antarctic and improve the effectiveness of policy and management responses. Thus, this information must be clear, complete and appropriate to current and future Antarctic tourism and to the regulatory objectives established by the Parties. 

While the information exchange requirements have been subject to past reviews and now include a rather wide range of data to be exchanged, it is still possible to improve them so that the Parties have a more complete overview of tourism activities in the area of the Antarctic Treaty, thereby assisting decision-making. 

In this connection, and bearing in mind that not all non-governmental activities carried out in Antarctica are centralised in already existing sources of information, such as the statistics compiled by the IAATO, Argentina carried out a review of the current information exchange requirements and identified needs that are still not covered.
    2. Background
Article III of the Antarctic Treaty establishes the principle of free exchange of information between its States Parties. Additionally, Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty requires the Parties to provide an Annual Report on the steps taken for its effective implementation.

Currently, the requirements for exchanging information are contained in Decision 5 (2016) and its Annex. 

From an environmental point of view, in 2012, the CEP indicated in its study on environmental aspects and impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic that "Compiling data for this study was onerous due to the variability in the quality and availability of the data." "Tourism data from the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), for example, provided no detailed data (only summary information) and was found to be largely incomplete and inconsistently reported between countries and between years and was therefore not used."

What emerged from the recent Informal Workshop on Antarctic Tourism that took place from 3 to5 April 2019 in Rotterdam, as well as what has been indicated in some papers submitted in recent years about the Parties’ concerns regarding the growth and diversification of tourism, demonstrate the importance of carrying out monitoring activities on the ground in the most effective way possible so as to adequately tackle problems through regulation.
    3. Information analysis and proposed modifications
With the aim of improving the information relating to non-governmental activities, Argentina focused its analysis on two aspects, one linked to the current information exchange requirements and the other to the consistency between the information exchange requirements and the Post-Visit Reports.

3.1 Information Exchange Requirements and the possibility of quantifying the overall numbers of visitors per season
Of the different types of information whose exchange is currently requested a possible improvement in terms of the numbers of visitors reported has been identified. In this connection, in accordance with Decision 5 (2016), operators are currently requested to provide information, per journey, on the maximum crew, the maximum passengers and the number of visitors who are participating/participated in each of the specific activities, but the total number of visitors per journey is not requested. 

However, with this information, it is not possible to calculate a definitive overall number of visitors to the Antarctic per season and thereby obtain a complete overview of current Antarctic activity, , which would include the total number of visitors participating innon-governmental activities.

Bear in mind that, within the data that is currently requested, the information about visitors by landing site is not representative of the total number of passengers transported in each journey, as not all of them take part in all of the landings. Additionally, the maximum capacity of passengers that a vessel can transport is not representative of the number of passengers for each journey either, as the capacity of said vessel may not be reached.

Consequently, it emerged from the analysis carried out that there is a need to modify the information requested in Decision 5 (2016) in order to incorporate, in section 2.2.2 Non-governmental expeditions in its sections A) Vessel-based Operations and B) Land-based Operations, the following information:
 

    • Total number of passengers transported in each journey
    • Total number of crew members on board for each journey.

In order to reach the desired result, through incorporating this information and the information that is currently provided, it is vital that all Parties be encouraged to provide the full amount of information in the EIES, correctly and on time, recalling the aforementioned outcome from the CEP Tourism Report (2012), which indicated that data from the EIES was found to be incomplete and inconsistently reported between countries and between years and was therefore not used.

3.2 On the Competent Authorities’ source of information: Post-Visit Reports
Consequent to the above, a review of the compatibility of the information requested in the Post-Visit Reports with respect to the Information Exchange Requirements is deemed necessary. 

The Post-Visit Report, which is completed by tour operators for transmission to their Competent National Authority, is the principal source of information that National Programmes depend on for completing the data on non-governmental operations that they must submit in accordance with the Annex of Decision 5 (2016). 

The format and content of the Post-Visit Report was adopted through Resolution 6 (2005), but has not been modified since then, even though the information exchange requirements have been1. It would therefore be useful to review the consistency between both tools, as they should mirror each other. 

Additionally, this report is not available to be downloaded in an editable format from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) website, in a way that the Parties would be able to provide it to operators under their jurisdiction, independently of their affiliation or lack thereof to the IAATO (which currently collaborates with the Parties by providing the file in Excel format to member operators).

During the analysis of the database carried out by Argentina, some inaccuracies and inconsistencies were identified which may, in some cases, be due to a certain level of incompatibility between the information exchange requirements and the Post-Visit Report. However,some such cases may be due to differences in the Operators' criteria for completing the reports. Carrying out an exhaustive comparative review of both tools would allow for the origin of these inaccuracies to be clarified and, potentially, corrected.

To this end, Argentina proposes the creation of an Intersessional Contact Group with the following Terms of Reference:

    1. To examine the content of the format of the Post-Visit Report contained in Resolution 6 (2005) relative to the information exchange requirements.
    2. To propose modifications to the Post-Visit Report that facilitate full compatibility between the information exchange requirements and these reports.
    3. Submit the results of the analysis and the proposed changes to the XLIII ATCM, with the aim of updating Resolution 5 (2005).


    4. Recommendation to the ATCM 
Argentina proposes to the ATCM that it: 
    • Accepts the proposed modifications of the information exchange requirements identified in section 3.1 and modifies Decision 5 (2016).

    • Requests that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat update the corresponding fields in the EIES.

    • Establishes an Intersessional Contact Group to review the compatibility between the information exchange requirements and the Post-Visit Reports.

    • Encourages the Parties to comply with the provision of information on tourism and non-governmental activities under their jurisdiction.

