





Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty System








Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty System
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
This paper reports on informal discussions among interested Members to:
    • respond to the request from the ATCM set out in Resolution 5 (2017) “to consider any appropriate actions within the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05”, and 
    • address the action in the CEP five-year work plan to consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties with respect to MPAs. 
Background
The ATCM, CEP and CCAMLR have prioritised work on Marine Spatial Protection, and reiterated the importance of a harmonised approach across the Antarctic Treaty System. The Secretariat’s summary of the CEP’s work on Marine Protected Areas (2018) is available here, and CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-02 (2012) recalls those shared commitments to a harmonised approach. 

In 2009, the first Joint SC-CAMLR / CEP Workshop agreed on the importance of a systematic approach to marine spatial protection and management, and recommended to the CEP and SC-CAMLR that: 
    • both committees should consider representative areas, reference areas and resilience areas with respect to spatial protection and management in the marine environment.
    • principles on which both CCAMLR and ATCM agree include the:
        ◦ Importance of a harmonised approach to protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System;
        ◦ Commitment to increased cooperation at a practical level between ATCM and CCAMLR (ATCM Resolution 1, 2006);
        ◦ The criteria held under ATCM Decision 9 (2005) on ASPAs and ASMAs of interest to CCAMLR;
        ◦ Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, as a basis for identifying a representative system of marine protected areas.

Resolution 5 (2017), welcomed the establishment of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA), encouraged increased cooperation between the ATCM and CCAMLR, and invited the CEP to:

    • consider any appropriate actions within the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05, particularly in the designation and implementation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas in the Ross Sea region and the management of relevant human activities; and
    • identify opportunities to conduct and support relevant research and monitoring activities that support the objectives and the forthcoming Research and Monitoring Plan of the RSRMPA, in particular through international collaborations.

In 2017 CEP XX discussed the benefit of looking at the connectivity between ocean and land, and agreed to consider if and how complementary measures within the framework of the Environmental Protocol, in particular Annex V, could support and strengthen marine protection initiatives. An action was added to the CEP Five-year Work Plan under the Priority 2 issue of marine spatial protection and management to “consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties with respect to MPAs.”

In 2018 CEP XXI considered WP 12 on Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty System (New Zealand, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, the Netherlands and the United States). The paper proposed that an ICG be established to identify options, within its mandate, to contribute to the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA). At CEP XXI, many Members strongly supported the proposal. Some members raised generic issues, including the independent roles of the ATCM from CCAMLR, the nature of MPAs as a tool to achieve CCAMLR objectives and principles, and the differences between conservation and protection. Some Members suggested that the proposed ICG should be established after a Research and Monitoring Plan for the Ross Sea Region MPA is adopted by CCAMLR. The CEP did not establish an ICG and New Zealand offered to lead informal work on these matters and report back to CEP XXII.
Intersessional discussion
Members from Argentina, Australia, China, France, Germany, New Zealand, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States and ASOC participated in the discussion. Work focussed on drafting a list of general complementary measures within the framework of the Protocol that could support connectivity between land and ocean, and strengthen marine protection initiatives within the Antarctic Treaty System.
 
Participants agreed that a staged approach to the work was appropriate, starting with broad initiatives, and aiming to progress towards addressing appropriate complementary actions to contribute to the objectives of CCAMLR MPAs. They also agreed that many aspects of the CEP’s ongoing work supports marine protection, and that this work would not open or duplicate discussion regarding the identification, designation and management of CCAMLR MPAs. On participant reiterated that this should be a ‘two way street’ i.e. where the respective tools relating to marine protection and enhance the work of each other, including improving and enhancing the use of ASPAs and ASMAs. Many participants reiterated the importance of the CEP’s continued consideration of this issue, particularly to attend to the ATCM’s request for advice from the CEP, under Resolution 5 (2017) and the relevant action in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan.

One participant stated that requesting the ATCM to contribute to the objectives of MPAs designated by CCAMLR might undermine the independence of the ATCM and that encouraging scientific research and monitoring in the marine area should strengthen marine protection initiatives by the ATCM. That participant also did not support the draft general complimentary measures and recommended attaching more attention to robust scientific evidence.
Draft General Complementary Measures
The discussion generated the following draft list of general complementary measures within the framework of the Environmental Protocol that could support connectivity between land and ocean, and strengthen marine protection initiatives within the Antarctic Treaty System:

    1. Consider the provisions of Management Plans of existing ASPAs or ASMAs adjacent, near or within MPAs to ensure that the aims, objectives and other provisions are complementary in supporting the protection of the marine environment (Annex V). 

    2. Consider designation of ASPAs or ASMAs in areas adjacent, near or within MPAs where such designation would complement protection of the marine environment (Annex V).

    3. Consider the representation and protection of Important Bird Areas and identification and designation of important bird foraging areas across ASPAs, ASMAs and MPAs (Resolution 5 (2015)) and recommend any management or monitoring of those Areas in support of protection of the marine environment.

    4. Consider updating the General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic (Resolution 3 (2011)) and updating or developing new Visitor Site Guidelines for sites that are adjacent, near or within MPAs, where updates or new guidelines would complement the protection of the marine environment.

    5. Consider risks to the marine environment when establishing and / or reviewing contingency plans to respond to environmental emergencies in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol.

    6. Contribute and complement, where appropriate, to the research and monitoring requirements identified in MPAs, and consider the implications of research and monitoring for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment.

    7. Note that the CEP’s work and the provisions of the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes complement marine spatial protection in general, including to:
        a. support prior environmental impact assessment of all proposed activities (Annex I), and the planning, management and monitoring of activities to avoid or minimise adverse effects on the environment, including the marine environment;
        b. provide advice and recommendations to the Parties on the need for scientific research, including environmental monitoring related to the implementation of the Protocol, and on the state of the environment, including the marine environment;
        c. prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate, including through the implementation of the Climate Change Response Work Program, which addresses climate-related issues relevant to the marine environment (Resolution 4 (2015)).
        d. prevent non-native species introductions to Antarctica, including to the marine environment (including through the ongoing development of the Non-Native Species Manual);
        e. clean-up of past and present waste disposal sites, abandoned facilities and contaminated sites in coastal areas, noting the potential impact to the marine environment (including through the ongoing development of the Clean-Up Manual);
        f. prevent marine pollution (Annex IV) and manage ballast water (Resolution 2 (2006))
        g. minimise potential impacts arising from waste disposal and waste management, including in the marine environment (Annex III).
Recommendations
New Zealand, on behalf of the participants in the discussion, recommend that the CEP:
    • Discuss and refine the draft list of general complementary measures within the framework of the Environmental Protocol that could support connectivity between land and ocean, and strengthen marine protection initiatives within the Antarctic Treaty System (above), and
    • Consider establishing an intersessional contact group to:
        ◦ further develop a response to the ATCM on their request (Resolution 5 (2017)) to consider any appropriate actions within the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting’s competence to contribute to the achievement of the specific objectives set forth in CCAMLR Conservation Measure 91-05; and 
        ◦ further address the action in the CEP five-year work plan to consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary actions that could be taken by Parties with respect to MPAs. 

