





Notification of the discovery of pre-1958 historic remains at Camp Lake, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica








Notification of the discovery of pre-1958 historic remains at Camp Lake, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In accordance with the Guidelines for handling pre-1958 historic remains whose existence or present location is not known (Resolution 5 (2001)), Australia notifies the Committee for Environmental Protection of the discovery of pre-1958 historic remains associated with early Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions activities in the vicinity of Camp Lake, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica. Consistent with the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica (Resolution 2 (2018)), Australia is assessing the heritage significance of the remains, which will inform future management actions. 
Background
Camp Lake is located in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica, approximately 7 km north-east of Australia’s Davis research station (see Map 1).
In February and November 2017 historic remains were discovered at Camp Lake by Australian Antarctic Program personnel undertaking geotechnical and environmental field studies to inform consideration of options for establishing a year-round aviation capability between Hobart and Antarctica. 
The historic remains, which appear to stem from the Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition’s early exploration of the Vestfold Hills in 1955, include: a rock cairn; two rock outlines of cleared tent sites; remnants of wooden crates; wire; a bar of soap; amphibious vehicle tracks; and a possible flag pole foundation (see Figures 1-5). This expedition was documented by the Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition in The Vestfold Hills, ANARE Reports, Series A, Volume 1 (Department of External Affairs, 1959). 
The location of the historic remains has been communicated to Australian Antarctic Program personnel, and the historic remains will be not be removed or disturbed pending consideration of options for future management.
Consistent with the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica (Resolution 2 (2018)), Australia is undertaking an assessment of the heritage value of the historic remains, which will inform management options.
Recommendations
Australia recommends that the CEP: 
    • notes that, in accordance with the Guidelines for handling of pre-1958 historic remains whose existence or present location is not known (the Guidelines) appended to Resolution 5 (2001), Australia has provided notification of the discovery of pre-1958 historic remains at Camp Lake, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica; and
    • agrees that, pending the outcome of a heritage assessment and consideration of management options by Australia, the remains will be subject to interim protection in accordance with the Guidelines.



Map 1. Location of Camp Lake, Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica. 






























Figure 1. Rock cairn located within Camp Lake


Figure 2. Weathered bar of soap



Figure 3. 
Top: Remnants of wooden crates at Camp Lake
Bottom: Wooden crate used at Camp Lake in 1955 
© Commonwealth of Australia


Figure 4. 
Top: Amphibious vehicle tracks preserved at Camp Lake 
Bottom: The two amphibious vehicles that the Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition used to explore the Vestfold Hills in 1955 became temporarily bogged at Camp Lake 
© Commonwealth of Australia






Figure 5. 
Top: Rock outline of a cleared tent site
Bottom: Assembled tent sites and raising of the Australian National flag in 1955 
© Commonwealth of Australia




