





Overview of outstanding ATME recommendations









Overview of outstanding ATME recommendations

A Working Paper presented by Norway and the United Kingdom 



Summary

This paper presents an overview of the outstanding ATME recommendations from the 2010 Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance. The outstanding recommendations are accompanied by questions to be considered by the Meeting. 

The paper recommends that the Meeting discuss and consider the questions posed in the table and based on the discussions either consider the ATME recommendation fulfilled, or place follow-up actions in the ATCM Multi Year Strategic Work Plan.

Background:

At ATCM XLI, Norway offered to look into the outstanding ATME recommendations from the 2010 Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance with interested Parties, and deliver an update to ATCMXLII (Decision 3, 2018), as noted in the Multi Year Strategic Work Plan. 

At ATCM XXXIV (2011) Norway and the United Kingdom presented WP 44 which contained a summary table over the ATME recommendations to facilitate ATCMs consideration of the recommendations. The Secretariat was then tasked with updating the table during the intersessional periods. The Secretariat has updated the ATCM and the CEP on the status of recommendations produced by the ATME on Climate Change (2010) since 2011, most recently with SP8 at ATCM XL.

It may now be timely to reflect on the status of the recommendations from the ATME and consider whether there is still a need for a yearly update of the table and a yearly review of recommendations, or if we can move the remaining recommendations forward in another manner. 


ATME (2010) Recommendations: 

During the intersessional period we have reviewed the summary table detailing the ATME recommendations. In this review we have chosen to take out the recommendations that we consider to have been addressed by the ATCM. We have also taken out the recommendations related to the CEP that have been incorporated into the CCRWP. By doing so, we have simplified the table, and reduced the number of remaining recommendations from 30 to 8 remaining recommendations. 

The recommendations that require consideration by the ATCM are listed in the table below. Of these recommendations we have only identified one recommendation that requires specific follow up action by the ATCM: 

    • Item 13: Request that the secretariat invite relevant space agencies to attend a future ATCM to give a demonstration of the use of modern space-based technologies for observing the Antarctic region in the context of climate change. 

For the remaining items in the table, Parties may wish to receive more information on progress by requesting an overview or report of the work that has been done.  Consideration of the information may help Parties to determine if there is a need for further action on specific items. 


Table 1. Outstanding ATME recommendations: 


ATME Recommendation (2010)
Questions to be considered by ATCM XXLII
Recommendation 2
The ATME recommends that the ATCM considers developing an Antarctic climate change communication plan to bring the findings of the ACCE report to the attention of other decision makers, the general public and the media.

On the basis of ATME recommendation 2, SCAR developed a communication plan for disseminating information on this (IP44, ATCM 35). Would Parties view this recommendation as fulfilled based on this, or would Parties like an update on this communication work?

Recommendation 5 
Recognizing the importance of emission cuts in Antarctica and their symbolic value in the global context, the ATME recommends that the ATCM encourage COMNAP to work with national programmes to use consistent methods to quantify and publish savings made by energy efficiencies, and which contribute to both (a) reducing carbon footprint, and (b) reducing fuel consumption and operating costs.
Does the Meeting wish to request a further update on this work from COMNAP, noting that COMNAP has provided such updates earlier in IP34 to ATCM XXXVI?

Recommendation 6
The ATME recommend that Parties be advised to use atmospheric models to evaluate the wind regimes around their individual stations, to determine the potential for wind power as a means of cutting fuel costs and greenhouse gas emissions.
Does the Meeting wish to know more about efforts that National Programs have done in this regard and request Parties and/or COMNAP to provide updates on relevant work?

Recommendation 7
Welcoming the risk assessment approach taken by Australia to identify potential climate change implications for current and future Antarctic infrastructure, logistics and environmental values, the ATME recommends that Parties be encouraged to undertake and report on appropriate risk assessment processes.
Does the Meeting wish to know more about efforts that National Programs have done in this regard, and request Parties and/or COMNAP to provide updates on relevant work?

Recommendation 8
In developing EIAs for new facilities, the ATME recommends that Parties be requested to take climate change considerations into account.
Does the Meeting wish to know how National Programs have considered the effect of climate change on new infrastructure in the EIA process?

Recommendation 10
The ATME recommends that Parties be advised to expand research that will refine and enhance our ability to predict future climate change with increasing accuracy on various temporal and geographical scales; and to encourage steps to link scientific research efforts to the activities of operational agencies involved in providing climate services and other related activities.
Considering regular updates from SCAR, WMO, and others, does the Meeting feel that it is kept sufficiently abreast of the current status of climate change prediction capability? 
Recommendation 13
The ATME recommends that Parties be requested to encourage the space agencies to continue coordinated observations of the Antarctic region from space, in the context of improving the operation of observing systems for climate change, and  to attend a future ATCM to give a demonstration of the use of modern space-based technologies for observing the Antarctic region in the context of climate change
Does ATCM still wish to invite space agencies to attend a future ATCM to give a demonstration of the use of modern space-based technologies for observing the Antarctic region in the contest of climate change?

If the Meeting does wish to invite space agencies, it may wish to consider what format it wants to receive the requested information through: e.g., workshop, lecture, Information Paper, etc.
 
Recommendation 14
The ATME recommends that Parties be requested to continue to strongly encourage collaboration and development of sustained integrated observing systems using in situ, air and space-based techniques.
Is the ATCM satisfied with the level of information that experts (WMO, SCAR, etc.) bring to the table, and the information provided on ongoing initiatives and needs?

Conclusion
Norway and the United Kingdom recommend that the Meeting discuss and consider the questions posed in Table 1 (above) and based on the discussions either consider the ATME recommendation fulfilled, or place follow-up actions on the ATCM Multi Year Strategic Work Plan. 

