





Review and Update of the “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programs for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species”








Review and Update of the “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programs for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species”
Summary
In 2010, COMNAP and SCAR jointly produced the “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programs for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species” (“Checklists”) in various formats. The Checklists can be found in ATCM XXXIV WP012 jointly presented by COMNAP and SCAR. The paper also requested the CEP to consider inclusion of the Checklists into the (then proposed) “Non-Native Species Manual” and this was agreed. The Checklists were always intended to be regularly reviewed and to evolve based on current, peer-reviewed science. In this paper we present the reviewed and updated Inter-continental Checklists 2019.
Background
In 2010, a non-native species workshop was convened in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on the margins of the COMNAP AGM and the SCAR Open Science Conference. The workshop was well-attended by a range of experts and resulted inter alia in a recommendation to COMNAP and SCAR to develop simple and inexpensive awareness tools which could be used by National Antarctic Program supply chain managers to reduce the risk of transfer of non-native species inter-continentally, that is, to the Antarctic region. Immediately following the workshop, the COMNAP AGM agreed to produce, jointly with SCAR, the voluntary “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programs for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species” in plain text format, in poster format and also as a foldable pocket-sized pamphlet that could be easily referred to. 
The Checklists were produced by COMNAP and SCAR based on then current peer-reviewed research and were distributed to National Antarctic Programs in time for the 2010/11 Antarctic summer season. Subsequently, the English text format was translated into other languages including Spanish, Dutch and Korean by National Antarctic Programs.
As a result of the joint COMNAP and SCAR Executive Committee Meeting 2017, Brno, Czech Republic, there was an agreement to review the Checklists and to consider adding information to reduce intra-regional transfer risks.
Update
COMNAP and SCAR undertook a lengthy review of the Checklists, which included consultation with the COMNAP Environmental Expert Group. As a result, two Checklists are being published.  
The first Checklist focusses on inter-continental activities and is therefore an update of the original Checklists for supply chain managers.  The text of that Inter-continental Checklist can be found as an attachment to this Working Paper, is available by way of the COMNAP website and will be distributed as a printed publication to any National Antarctic Program that requests a printed version.
The second Checklist focusses on reducing the risk of intra-regional transfer and is broader than supply chain managers. It is currently under development and will be presented to a future CEP meeting for consideration.
Recommendations
COMNAP and SCAR:
    1. Propose that the CEP to replace the 2010 version of the Checklists currently found in the CEP Non-native Species Manual with the revised 2019 version of the Checklists as found in the attachment.
    2. Request that Parties encourage their National Antarctic Programs and other supply chain managers and operators in their countries to use the Checklists on a voluntary basis.

