





Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) 169, Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica









Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 169
Working Paper submitted by Australia and the People’s Republic of China
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia and China initiated a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) 169 Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. The review was conducted in accordance with Annex V and with reference to the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). This paper briefly describes the Area and the review conducted. The review concluded that the management plan remains relevant for protecting the values for which the area was designated, and that revisions to the management plan are not required at this time.
Background
ASPA 169 Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica
Amanda Bay (69°15’S, 76°49"E) is located adjacent to Prydz Bay, on the Ingrid Christensen Coast of Princess Elizabeth land, East Antarctica. The ASPA was designated under Measure 3 (2008) following a proposal by China and Australia. The ASPA covers an area of approximately 17.15 km. A revised management plan for the Area was adopted under Measure 10 (2014).
The ASPA is primarily designated to protect the breeding colony of several thousand pairs of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) (see Figure 1). The colony possesses intrinsic and scientific values. The collection of long-term population monitoring data in the Area is valuable for comparative studies with other emperor penguin colonies in East Antarctica.

Review of management plan
The review of the management plan involved a comprehensive literature review and consultation with scientific, technical and management personnel permitted to enter or otherwise familiar with the Areas.
ASPA 169 was visited regularly by Australia in the last five years, to allow servicing and downloading images from automated cameras (see Figure 2), photographic census of emperor penguins, ground surveys, scientific research and the collection of scientific samples. Based on observations made during these visits, the emperor penguin population in the area appears to be stable, comprising up to 11,000 pairs.
China conducted continuous observation and study by visiting ASPA 169 in the last five years, implementing the project of Study on Population status and breeding environment of emperor penguin through photographic recording and the collection of samples.
Australia and China consider that the existing management provisions remain relevant to ensuring the protection of the values for which the ASPA was designated. The review of the management plan identified a number of editorial improvements that could be made but these improvements were not deemed sufficient to warrant a revision of the management plan at this time.

Recommendations
Australia and China recommend that the CEP:
    • notes that Australia and China conducted a five-yearly review of the management plan for ASPA 169 Amanda Bay in accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol, and concluded that that no updates to the management plan are required; and
    • agrees that the current management plan will continue for a further five-year period, or until new information is obtained that warrants an earlier review.  

Figure 1. Emperor penguin colony at Amanda Bay




Figure 2. Automated cameras overlooking the emperor penguin wintering site at Amanda Bay 


