





Coastal Camping Coordination








Coastal Camping Coordination

Working Paper submitted by the United States and Canada

Summary

Coastal camping, or vessel-supported overnight stays (VSSO), is an activity that some non-governmental operators offer to their clients.  Several National Competent Authorities (NCAs) currently review coastal camping activities and some are receiving requests from operators for increasing numbers of campers, including multiple requests related to single sites, and requests related to multiple locations, sometimes related to sites that have not previously been used for coastal camping.  This paper revisits key issues from previous discussions of coastal camping in the ATCM and CEP, proposes the development of coastal camping guidance, and recommends coordination amongst NCAs regulating coastal camping to continue to ensure that the activity has no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.  The sponsors of this paper welcome the participation of Treaty parties and observers in this process and specifically encourage the participation of the NCAs that regulate coastal camping.  
Background
The ATCM and CEP have previously discussed coastal camping, including WP 37 (2012) Coastal Camping Considerations (Norway and the United States), IP 98 (2013) IAATO Guidelines for Short Overnight Stays (IAATO), and WP 13 (2014) Coastal Camping Activities Conducted by Non-Governmental Organizations (Norway and the United States).  The Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a Fresh Approach Workshop (April 2019) in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, highlighted the need and interest for increased coordination among NCAs regarding activities by individuals in Antarctica on non-governmental expeditions.  

WP 37 (2012) recommended that site guidelines for visitors (SGVs) include explicit statements on camping, encouraged IAATO to develop a catalogue of potential camping locations, and recommended the development of camping guidelines to aid in the review process and improve consistency between competent authorities in reviewing such activities.  WP 13 (2014) summarized information collected on the experiences and responses of NCAs in approaches taken to address issues related to coastal camping.  At that time, most SGVs still did not explicitly address camping and Parties were split on the issue of including camping guidance in SGVs.  Some NCAs regulating coastal camping were using the IAATO guidance on VSSO during their reviews, while others applied more conservative standards to the activity.  In addition, while the reviews of coastal camping ensured that the activity had no more than minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment, NCAs were not consistent in their approaches to site selection, waste management, or supervision of campers. 
Emerging Challenges
Based on initial, informal discussions amongst NCAs currently reviewing coastal camping on a regular basis, it appears that governments are taking differing approaches to authorization or permitting.  IAATO VSSO guidelines are consistently incorporated into environmental impact assessments (EIAs) submitted by IAATO-member operators, but NCAs review coastal camping activities of non-IAATO members as well and these operators do not always adhere to the IAATO guidelines.

Recently, NCAs have received requests from non-governmental operators, both IAATO members and others, for increases in the numbers of campers allowed at a site for an overnight stay, increases in the number of sites at which they can camp, and the ability to camp at locations at which overnight stays have not occurred in the past.  The last type of request has even occurred during the austral summer season, in near real-time, when an operator came upon a location they thought was suitable for camping, but had not been identified or reviewed in their initial environmental evaluation (IEE).  There also appears to be an increase in the number of private vessel-based expeditions (generally non-IAATO members) including coastal camping in their EIAs as part of a suite of activities.

The impacts of larger groups of campers and such groups camping at greater numbers of sites would depend on a number of factors including the site location, proximity to wildlife or other values to be protected, waste management, and supervision.  Coastal camping at new and different locations could have impacts on previously unidentified values, could jeopardize sites of current or future scientific interest, or could expand the overall footprint of activities in Antarctica.  While the IAATO VSSO guidelines are a valuable resource for member-operators (and non-members) and a helpful reference for NCAs reviewing coastal camping, there are limits to the usefulness of the guidelines for most non-member operators and private expeditions. 
Next Steps
Given the challenges associated with increases in the frequency and intensity of coastal camping activities, we believe NCAs should consider identifying current and prospective sites as well as consider identifying the guidelines and mitigating actions for each site.  We believe that it would useful for the ATCM and CEP to provide guidance on these issues and to encourage additional discussions.  While there are still only a few NCAs that regularly review coastal camping activities, there may be broader interest in the issues as they relate to anticipated overall increases in visitor activities in the Antarctic.  Consistent and coordinated approaches to the management of coastal camping (as possible under existing national legislation and regulations) could ensure that impacts of such activities remain no more than minor or transitory. 
Recommendations
We recommend that the ATCM and CEP:
    • Encourage Treaty Parties to reconsider including explicit guidance on camping in Site Guidelines for Visitors.  For example, a statement could be added to the “Visitors” section as to whether camping is advisable and, if so, give the maximum number of campers and show a preferred camp site (or sites) on the map of the area.
    • Encourage IAATO to work with member-operators that are experienced in or interested in coastal camping to generate an updated list of current and prospective camping locations.  
    • Request that SCAR and other relevant experts evaluate the suitability of prospective sites for camping and develop guidance to be included in Site Guidelines for Visitors.
    • Promote discussions amongst NCAs that currently review coastal camping activities and other interested Parties and observers to enhance harmonization on issues such as numbers of campers and camping locations.
    • Consider the development of coastal camping guidelines to help ensure consistent application of best practices and minimise impacts to the Antarctic environment.






