





Proposed addition to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments of the wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance









Proposed addition to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments of the wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance 


Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom


Summary

This paper proposes a new Historic Site or Monument, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  The site proposed is the wreck of the vessel Endurance, used by British explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton during his ill-fated Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914-16.  Endurance sank in the Weddell Sea on 21 November 1915. Although the exact location of the wreck is unknown there have been a growing number of proposals, and an attempt in Jan-Feb 2019, to locate and explore the wreck. The United Kingdom considers that the wreck meets the criteria and should be afforded protection under Annex V of the Protocol. This paper has been prepared in accordance with the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica, as annexed to Resolution 2 (2018). A checklist is provided in accordance with the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments, as annexed to Resolution 3(2018).

Background

    1. In 2018, the United Kingdom presented ATCMXLI/WP21 Notification of pre-1958 historic remains: Wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance. In response, the Committee agreed that the wreck complied with the provisions of Resolution 5 (2001). The UK informed the Committee of its intention to seek full HSM status for the wreck following adoption of Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica. Subsequent to that meeting the “Weddell Sea Expedition,” a privately financed expedition, using the SA Agulhas II attempted but ultimately failed to locate the Endurance wreck. Despite the wreck not being discovered on this occasion, the United Kingdom feels it worthwhile to proceed with the listing of the wreck as an HSM.

Proposal
 
    2. The United Kingdom has assessed the wreck of the vessel Endurance against the provisions of Resolution 8(1995) and the Annex to Resolution 3(2009), as well as the Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica, as annexed to Resolution 2 (2018).

    3. The vessel Endurance was used by Sir Ernest Shackleton’s Trans-Antarctic Expedition, one of the most significant early pioneering expeditions to Antarctica widely accepted as a feat of exceptional courage and endurance. 

    4. The vessel sank in the Weddell Sea on 21 November 1915 having been trapped in the sea ice during its attempt to deliver Sir Ernest’s party to the coast. The vessel itself is of central importance in the story of the expedition and of Shackleton. This journey has been immortalised through the writings of Sir Ernest himself and the photography and films of Frank Hurley. The proposed HSM has the potential to reveal additional historical and scientific information relating to the expedition. The ship and its artefacts are archeologically significant in their own right having been submerged for over 100 years, which a widely accepted international threshold for constituting underwater heritage. 

    5. The exact location and condition of the wreck remains unknown. The recent “Weddell Sea Expedition” unfortunately failed to find the vessel, however it is expected that further expeditions are likely in the future.

    6. More detail is provided in the attached checklist, as per the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments, as annexed to Resolution 3(2018).

Recommendation

The United Kingdom recommends to the CEP that it approves the listing of the “Endurance, Wreck of the vessel owned and used by Sir Ernest Shackleton during his 1914-15 Trans-Antarctic Expedition” as a new Historic Site and Monument.





































COVER SHEET 


The following information is provided in accordance with the “Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments”, as annexed to Resolution 3 (2018):

1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM as a Historic Site or Monument? Yes/No (If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures.) 

Introduction

    2. Name of Proposed HSM: Endurance, Wreck of the vessel owned and used by Sir Ernest Shackleton during his 1914-15 Trans-Antarctic Expedition.

    3. Original proposing Party: United Kingdom 

    4. Party undertaking management: United Kingdom.

    5. Type: Wreck of vessel

Description and documentation of the site
    6. Site Location: The exact location of the wreck is unknown as the ship floated in the pack ice for some distance. Location records made by Frank Worsley, Shackleton’s skipper and master navigator give precise coordinates of the location of sinking of the ship but these have not been verified since 1915, We know the wreck is somewhere on the seabed in the Weddell Sea. It is proposed to designate the wreck and all artefacts contained within or formerly contained within the ship, which may be lying on the seabed in or near the wreck.

    7. Description: Wreck of the vessel Endurance, including all artefacts contained within or formerly contained within the ship, which may be lying on the seabed in or near the wreck within a 150m radius. This includes all fixtures and fittings associated with the ship, including ship’s wheel, bell, etc. The designation also includes all items of personal possessions left on the ship by the ship’s company at the time of its sinking. 

    8. The Endurance was built in Sandefjord, Norway on the 17th December 1912, overseen by the experienced master shipbuilder Christian Jacobsen at the Framnaes shipyard. Initially christened ‘Polaris’, she was one of the strongest wooden ships ever built. She was 44m long with a beam of 7.6m, weighing 348 tons gross, built of planks of oak and Norwegian fir up to 76cm thick and sheathed in greenheart. Her bow had been made from single oak tree timbers selected for their shape following the curves of the ship, her keel consisted of four solid pieces of oak all adding up to a thickness of 2.2m. With three masts, her forward mast was square-rigged with the two others carrying fore and aft sails, accompanied by a 350 horsepower coal-fired steam engine which could reach speeds of over 10 knots. 

Historical / cultural features

    9. Criteria for Designation: The Endurance wreck meets several of the criteria set out in Resolution 3 (2009), in particular: a) particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica occurred at the place; b) a particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science or exploration in Antarctica; and c) a particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement.  The wreck will also be of interest to marine archaeologists and others promoting the heritage of Antarctica and thus: e) particular technical, historical, cultural or architectural value in its materials, design or method of construction; and f) the potential, through study, to reveal information or has the potential to educate people about significant human activities in Antarctica, are also relevant.

    10. Historical Description: Sir Ernest Shackleton purchased the vessel shortly after construction with the intention of using her for his Trans-Antarctic Expedition, which aimed at making the first Antarctic crossing on foot. He rechristened her ‘Endurance’ after the Shackleton family motto: “Fortitudine vincimus” (By endurance we conquer). Endurance sailed from Plymouth harbour on 8th August 1914, setting course for Buenos Aires, Argentina to pick up the rest of the crew (including Shackleton) before heading further south. They departed their last port of call, Grytviken, South Georgia, on 5th December 1914 and headed into the Weddell Sea with the intention of landing in Vahsel Bay on the edge of Antarctica in order to disembark the landing party for their planned long march across the continent. 

    11. During January 2015, Endurance had managed to progress slowly through the ice floes of the Weddell Sea, but by the end of January was completely stuck in the ice and drifting. Initially, Shackleton and the crew planned to spend the Antarctic winter stuck in the ice; however in October 1915, when the ice contracted, the ship was crushed with water flooding the lower decks. Shackleton gave the order to abandon ship on 27th October. The Endurance sank on 21st November 1915. 

    12. There followed the heroic journey by the Endurance crew to Point Wild on Elephant Island, and Shackleton’s subsequent epic sail, in April-May 1916, to South Georgia in the tiny lifeboat the James Caird.  Shackleton finally succeeded in returning to Point Wild in August 1916 to rescue of the remaining Endurance crew, thanks to the bravery of the Chilean Captain Luis Pardo and the crew of his ship the Yelcho.

Management

    13. Management Plan: It not proposed to draft a full Management Plan for the site while its location and condition remain unknown. However, the site should be maintained intact and without any items removed until the location has been established and the management plan in place. 

    14. Once located, the wreck site will be managed in accordance with established international principles for the management of underwater cultural heritage and adopting international best practice for the management, access and study of the site. 

    15. Education and Outreach. The story of the Endurance and her crew is already widely known in the UK and internationally. The expedition is referenced heavily in the new Polar Gallery of the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich and the Scott Polar Research Institute Polar Museum in Cambridge. The United Kingdom Government regularly supports events highlighting the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration. Following the recent Weddell Sea Expedition, which tried but unfortunately failed to locate the wreck, there will be a number of events at the Scott Polar Research Institute and the Royal Geographic Society to highlight the scientific work undertaken by the expedition. Should the wreck itself be discovered, a further range of education and outreach activities will be planned.


Reason for Designation

    16. In conclusion, and with reference to Resolution 8(1995) and the Annex to Resolution 3(2009), this site merits Historic Site and Monument listing because:

    a. Sir Ernest Shackleton’s Trans-Antarctic Expedition was one of the most significant early pioneering expeditions to Antarctica and is widely accepted as a feat of exceptional courage and endurance;
    b. The vessel itself is of central importance in the story of the expedition and of Shackleton. This journey has been immortalised through the writings of Sir Ernest himself and the photography and films of Frank Hurley;
    c. The proposed HSM has the potential to reveal additional historical and scientific information relating to the expedition;
    d. The ship and its artefacts are archeologically significant in their own right having been submerged for over 100 years, a widely accepted international threshold for constituting underwater heritage; and
    e. The increased likelihood of an expedition to locate and dive on the wreck makes it important to protect the wreck and ensure it is not damaged, or its artefacts removed without appropriate permissions and planning.

