





The Ice Memory Project

English version provided by the authors






The Ice Memory Project
Working paper submitted by France and Italy
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to discuss the next steps in the Ice Memory project within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). The Ice Memory (IM) project, which was launched in 2015, features international scientific collaboration between national Antarctic programmes. The first phase of the project is currently underway, and involves collecting ice cores from the deep layers of key endangered glaciers before they lose their ability to preserve environmental history in optimal conditions. The second phase of the project involves the long-term storage of these ice cores for future generations of scientists. The safest storage place on Earth is the Antarctic plateau, where the ice never melts, even in summer. Mean annual temperatures are such that cold storage will be possible for hundreds of years, even in the current context of global warming. The IM project initiators therefore intend to store on the Antarctic plateau the samples collected in the endangered glaciers. 
Discussion is needed between ATCM parties and observers on the project’s next steps, given that collaboration by all parties would be welcome during the second phase. This means launching a process that complies with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol), especially Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment.
Background
The Ice Memory (IM) project was launched in France and Italy in 2015. Its international dimension has grown following contributions by Russia and Switzerland. The international scientific community is now working to make it a global initiative in the coming years.
At a later stage of the project, a governance framework will need to be defined by the ATCM parties who plan to contribute to the long-term storage of ice cores in Antarctica, particularly to ensure this complies with the Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol.
Goals of the IM project
The IM project is based on the observation, made 60 years ago, that the natural snow and ice which forms in glaciers contains environmental information for periods ranging from decades to hundreds of thousands of years. Natural snow and ice are mainly constituted of water vapour, which condenses and solidifies in the atmosphere to form snowflakes. During this natural process, impurities are trapped in snowflakes and buried in snow precipitation for long periods of time.
Every year, new snow covers earlier precipitation. Under this accumulated weight, the snow layers densify until they become impermeable ice. The resulting glacier flows towards lower altitudes, powered by gravity. In mountain ranges, glaciers end up becoming rivers. In Greenland and Antarctica, they mainly result in icebergs, which leave the coast and melt in seawater.
Around the world, glaciologists seek to study glaciers that contain the oldest possible information stored in their depths. When they identify these glaciers, they drill through them until they reach bedrock. Generally, this drilling results in several sections of ice core measuring one metre in length and 10 centimetres in diameter. Their total accumulated length can reach 100 to 250 metres for mountain glaciers, and up to 3,700 metres in Antarctica.
However, only small sections of these ice cores are used for geochemical and physics studies in laboratories. They are used to research past climate conditions (temperature and precipitation levels), atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs), natural and anthropogenic aerosols, the intensity of desert dust events, sea ice surface area, radioactive fallout from nuclear testing, volcanic activity, solar activity, and the intensity of cosmic rays. For example, ice cores have been used to show how GHGs affect natural climate variability, and how human activity has resulted in accelerating levels of GHGs over the past 200 years.
Although the ice caps in Antarctica and Greenland are not threatened by climate change to the point that they will disappear in the short term, this is not the case for mountain glaciers at low or medium latitudes. The surface areas and volumes of most glaciers around the world are shrinking rapidly. As this happens, we are losing precious information on the history of our planet.
The overall goal of the IM project is to: 1- Collect an ice core archive from the deep layers of key endangered glaciers before they lose their ability to preserve environmental history in optimal conditions; 2- Store these ice cores on a long-term basis (possibly hundreds of years) for future generations of scientists and humanity in general.
The idea underlying the IM project is that scientific ideas and technologies will continue to evolve, making new discoveries possible using ice cores. However, for this to happen, cores must be available to future generations of scientists and therefore protected from the harmful effects of climate change.
Relationship between the IM project and ATCM and CEP activities
The goal of the IM project is to ensure the safest possible cold storage of the ice core archive collected for this project. Safe storage should be guaranteed for the longest possible periods, possibly up to several centuries.
Currently, no cold storage chamber is capable of guaranteeing the conservation of ice cores with 100% certainty. In other words, long-term conservation is threatened by the risks of technical and economic failure.
Consequently, the IM project involves creating a repository (or series of repositories) in Antarctica, where the ice core archive can be stored on a long-term basis. The Antarctic plateau is naturally very cold and does not experience melting, even during summer in the southern hemisphere. Mean annual temperatures are such that cold storage will be possible for hundreds of years, even in the context of current global warming scenarios.
France and Italy, which jointly run the Concordia research station on the Antarctic plateau, have agreed to support the project at Concordia where ice cores collected as part of the IM project could be transported. This means to give the logistic assistance in the building and maintenance of the future repository and in the management of the access and transportation of the ice cores.  
Other interested States are warmly welcome to forward proposals to build repositories on the Antarctic plateau, provided that they have the necessary logistical capacities for construction, transportation and maintenance. The participation of other interested Parties, could lead to the creation of an international repository network, which would facilitate the constitution of ice core archives by the country managing the repository where these are stored, through its national Antarctic programme. This initiative would have therefore a beneficial effect in terms of future collaboration among Parties.
As every activity carried out in the Antarctic Treaty zone, the creation of a long-term storage repository will need to follow the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. To minimize this impact, concerning the implementation near Concordia Station, the environmental aspects will be considered since the planning activities, and the decommissioning phase will be examined too. Once the design of the repository fixed, an environmental impact assessment EIA will be carried out and will be completed in accordance with the provisions of Annex I. of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.  
Design of the ice core repository
To ensure that ice cores are stored in optimal conditions, not only must the temperature be kept below zero, variations in temperature must be avoided. For this reason, the IM project will involve storage of the cores at approximately 10 metres depth.
At this depth, the snow temperature corresponds to the mean annual temperature for any given site, meaning that seasonal variations in temperature are prevented.
At the present state for the Concordia site, two different concepts of repository are under evaluation:

The first one foresees the construction of a metallic structure, made of interconnected shipping containers with reinforced roofs to bear the weight of accumulated snowfall. 


This structure will then be covered with snow. Access to the repository will be possible by way of vertical shipping containers equipped with internal staircases. Calculations are now being made to determine the best way of structuring the repository so that its roof is able to withstand the growing thickness of snow cover. For example, at the Concordia research station, snow accumulates at the rate of almost 10 centimetres per year. It follows that, after 100 years, the repository roof must be able to withstand around 10 metres of additional snow. Inside containers, boxes of existing ice cores (made from insulating foam) will be stored on shelves with sufficient space to add new cores as the project advances.

The second one is a different concept that would accommodate a set of normal containers placed on sledges inside a set of buried ice caves of around 5 m diameter. This concept is a low environmental impact one during both construction (approximatively 7 d of work for each cave) and decommissioning, as the ice caves are obtained by putting thin layers of snow (using a snow blower) over an inflatable balloon that is deflated and removed once the roof is solid, leaving the ice cave.
The access to these caves would be initially via a slope that would be buried once the cave closed, and then via traps prepared in the upper part during construction. As the life span of an ice cave cannot be considered indefinite, this system would require that every 7-10 years the ice caves are rebuilt and the containers on sledges taken off the old ones and placed inside the new ones. 


A pilot ice cave was built this year close to Concordia. A complete 3D model was done via laser scan and sensors were placed to study the temperature profile. These data coupled with analysis of deformation and of ice cores extracted from the ice cave vault will allow to evaluate grain sintering of the snowflakes and consequently to estimate the life span of future caves.   
 

The status of the IM project
To date, the IM consortium, made up of French, Italian, Russian and Swiss scientists (others may join in the future), has drilled into four mountain glaciers with a view to collecting ice cores and achieving the project’s goals. The first drilling operation took place at the Col du Dôme glacier, near the summit of Mont-Blanc in the French Alps, at an altitude of 4,300 metres. Three ice cores were successfully retrieved down to bedrock in 2016. In 2017, another drilling operation took place on Nevado Illimani in Bolivia, at an altitude of 6,300 metres. Here, two ice cores were retrieved down to bedrock. In 2018, a Swiss-Russian team successfully drilled two ice cores at Belukha glacier in the Russian Altai Mountains. Lastly, a Russian team retrieved two ice cores from Mount Elbrus in the Russian Caucasus.
These ice cores are all stored in commercial freezers in Grenoble, France, or Russia pending the construction of the long-term storage repository in Antarctica.
Important questions for the ATCM and CEP
Could importing “foreign material” to Antarctica result in the introduction of biological material and invasive species?
Bacteria, pollen and other microorganisms are naturally present in Antarctica, transported long distances by atmospheric aerosols from places such as South America. There are very few estimates concerning the natural levels of biological material present on the Antarctic plateau. Those that do exist indicate values of around 20 to 30 pollen particles per kilogramme of surface snow. The IM project’s ice cores could introduce bacteria that are not naturally found in Antarctica, but that are present in the atmosphere over mountain glaciers in remote regions. However, as long as the ice cores remain frozen in the repository, they will not release non-native living organisms into the Antarctic environment. Specific procedures concerning packaging, transportation and handling could limit possible risks.
Who will be responsible for the ice core repositories in the long term?
We suggest that the leaders of national Antarctic programmes, who are in charge of the research station where the ice core repository is located, be responsible for securing it and granting access to future research projects.
Any sub-sampling operation would be decided on/accredited by International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS), an international group composed of all ice core scientists from around the world. It would be carried out in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty (on informing the ATCM of activities taking place in the Antarctic) and Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol (on conducting activities in Antarctica).
Suggested procedure
France and Italy, are currently evaluating the best repository option. Once agreed on the philosophy, France and Italy will complete an EIA to investigate the impacts of creating a repository at Concordia research station.
Recommendations
France and Italy recommend that the CEP and ATCM:
- Give its opinion on the project’s importance 
- Discuss the possibility of how to open up and coordinate international collaboration to all Parties interested in taking part in the storage of ice cores in Antarctica.


