





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area Activities








Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area Activities
A working paper submitted by the United States
Summary
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been prepared by the National Science Foundation (NSF) for the modernization of McMurdo Station while continuing the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) science and operational activities at the station, field sites, and facilities that the station supports. The draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with applicable provisions of Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991) and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2016).

This CEE identifies potential impacts resulting from the proposed activity, which would implement modernization projects at McMurdo Station over a period of approximately 15-20 years and continue ongoing science and operations at McMurdo Station and the area it supports. NSF has determined that the proposed activity (modernization and continuing operations) is likely to have a more than minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment and has evaluated the potential impacts of implementing the proposed activity in this CEE. The proposed activity would not expand the operational footprint of McMurdo Station or fixed facilities supported by McMurdo Station and would result in substantial improvements in environmental performance at McMurdo Station and the area it supports.  Continued and consistent use of mitigations and monitoring during implementation of the proposed activity would further minimize impacts. Benefits would include continuing substantive scientific and logistic collaboration with other Antarctic programs and increasing potential for enhanced international collaboration as new science and logistical opportunities arise.
Circulation and translation of the CEE
Notification of the availability of the CEE was circulated by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to all Parties via Circular 5 (February 19, 2019) and to the CEP via CEP Circular 5 (March 4, 2019). The draft CEE was made available on the CEP Workspace on the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: https://www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_draftcee.htm and on the National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar Programs: https://www.nsf.gov/geo/opp/antarct/treaty/modernization_cee.jsp
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report), an ICG was established, convened by the Republic of Korea, to review the draft CEE.  ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP discussion forum, which also provided the Non-Technical Summary (NTS) translated into the official Treaty languages  
Non-technical summary and CEE findings
The NTS is attached as Annex A to this working paper. The NTS includes a description of the proposed activities and the assessment of alternatives, initial environmental reference, the identification and prediction of impacts, cumulative and unavoidable impacts, mitigation measures and monitoring, gaps in knowledge and uncertainties and conclusions. 
McMurdo Station was established in 1955 on Ross Island in the southwestern Ross Sea, in the southernmost area of Antarctica accessible by ship. The station serves as a gateway to Antarctica for most United States scientific field teams and as a hub for most United States scientific activities on the continent. Much of the infrastructure at McMurdo Station supporting these programs dates back several decades and is nearing or has exceeded its intended life expectancy. The purpose of the proposed activity is to ensure that USAP resources at McMurdo Station continue to serve as viable and flexible platforms to support evolving scientific research efficiently and effectively. Proposed modernization projects would involve demolishing, constructing, renovating, and operating buildings and structures at McMurdo Station. Ongoing science and operations at McMurdo Station (and locations supported by the station) would be maintained at or near current levels throughout the approximately 15-20 year construction phase of modernization projects.
Through the environmental impact assessment process, NSF concluded the level of impact from the proposed activity is acceptable given the major benefits that the proposed action will provide, which include environmental improvements, continuing substantive scientific and logistical collaboration with other Antarctic programs, and allowing for enhanced international collaboration as new science and logistical opportunities arise. Additionally, effects on science support and ongoing USAP research programs would be mainly positive due to more efficient resources and enhanced capabilities, which would provide an improved platform for evolving scientific research in Antarctica.
Response to ICG
The United States is grateful for comments and recommendations on the CEE from the ICG convened by the Republic of Korea. The United States will present a preliminary response to comments received to date during its presentation of the CEE at CEP XXII and will address comments in the Final CEE.  
Comments raised by the ICG process, and any additional comments made during discussions at CEP XXII, will be addressed in the Final CEE.  

