





Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR)
 2018-2019









Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) 2018-2019
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom on behalf of the SGCCR
Summary
During the intersessional period, the SGCCR has developed a proposed new format for the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) (Attachment A), discussed operating functions for the group (Attachment B), and initiated implementation of the CCRWP, focusing on the priority issue of non-native species.
The SGCCR recommend that the CEP considers the following recommendations:
    1. The Committee should examine the proposed updated format for the CCRWP (Attachment A) and, if considered appropriate, agree to its application by the SGCCR to all the climate issues within the Work Programme during the 2019-2020 intersessional period.
    2. To better communicate the links between the CCRWP and CEP Five Year Work Plan the Committee should agree that:
    • issues listed in the CEP Five Year Work Plan that are relevant to the CCRWP should be labelled as such in the Five Year Work Plan;
    • research requirements listed in the CCRWP should be added to the list of science needs attached to the CEP Five Year Work Plan; and
    • during the Committee’s annual review of the prioritization of issues within the CEP Five Year Work Plan, consideration should be given to the priority status of linked issues in the updated CCRWP.
    3. To progress the implementation of the CCRWP on the priority issue of ‘Enhanced potential for non-native species (NNS) introduction, establishment and invasion’, the CEP should:
    • request that COMNAP undertake a survey of National Antarctic Programmes’ biosecurity practices, to communicate progress since the previous survey in 2008 (ATCM XXXI IP98) and share implemented biosecurity solutions; 
    • encourage CEP Members and Observers to highlight recent research on the issue of non-native species that will inform the work of the CEP; and
    • encourage CEP Members to explore funding of relevant non-native species research with national science funding bodies (see Resolution 4 (2015)).
    4. The CEP’s annual update to the ATCM on progress should include information on developments within the SGCCR.
Background
In 2015, the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was adopted by the CEP.  Through Resolution 4 (2015), the ATCM recommended that Governments:
    1. encourage the CEP to begin implementing the CCRWP as a matter of priority, and provide annual progress reports to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on its implementation;
    2. request the CEP to keep the CCRWP under regular review, with the input of the SCAR and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs on scientific and practical matters respectively; and
    3. give consideration, within their own national scientific funding systems and national Antarctic research programmes, as to how they can address the research needs and actions identified in the CEP’s CCRWP.
Following discussions within CEP regarding updating, implementation and follow-up of the Climate Change Response Work Programme, a decision was made at ATCM XL (Decision 1 (2017)) to establish a new subsidiary group on Climate Changes Response (SGCCR).
The Terms of Reference for the SGCCR are to facilitate the efficient and timely implementation of the CCRWP by:
    1. Facilitating the coordination and communication of the CCRWP between Members, Observers and Experts, highlighting actions identified for the coming year(s) and requesting relevant updates on planned activities;
    2. Drafting proposed annual updates of the CCRWP, including management, research or monitoring actions;
    3. Drafting annual progress reports on the implementation of the CCRWP for the CEP to draw on in their updates to the ATCM.
In addition to the agreed ToR, CEP XX tasked the SGCCR to develop operating mechanisms to support good participation and efficient handling of work (CEP XX Final Report, para 74). Implementing the CCRWP is a Priority 1 issue on the CEP Five-Year Work Plan.
SGCCR operation during the 2018-19 intersessional period
The SGCCR currently consists of 15 members from 11 CEP Member states (Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Romania, South Africa, Spain, UK and USA) and four organizations (ASOC, IAATO, SCAR and WMO). SGCCR maintains flexibility with regard to membership, and welcomes new members.  Key documents discussed by the SGCCR are posted on the SGCCR page on the CEP Discussion Forum, and are therefore accessible for all CEP Members and Observers.  The SGCCR conducted three rounds of discussions during the 2018-19 intersessional period. 
CCRWP formatting and updating
During the discussions that led to the establishment of the CCRWP, comments were made with regard to the utility of the format of the CCRWP, in particular seeing it in light of the updating process. The report from CEP XX noted a suggestion that ‘enhancing the format of the CCWRP itself could assist with the aims of improving effective communication with stakeholders and with the ATCM’. 
In response, the SGCCR has developed a new format for the CCRWP (see Attachment A).  The proposed approach for reformatting the CCRWP, has not been applied to the whole document, but as a preliminary example, has been applied to the first and currently the highest priority CCRWP issue ‘Enhanced potential for non-native species (NNS) introduction, establishment and invasion’.  
Preliminary definitions of some of the terms used are provided below:
    • ‘Climate-related issue’:  Description of existing or potential threat to the Antarctic environment that is affected by climate change
    • ‘Gap/needs’: Overarching requirements to help mitigate the climate-related issue
    • ‘Actions’: Specific products or work that will help mitigate the climate-related issue
    • ‘Tasks’: Steps (bulleted) to deliver the product or work described under each ‘Action’

The earlier CCRWP format had ‘Gap/needs’ separated into Management, Monitoring and Research; however, research requirements are often closely tied to specific management and/or monitoring actions.  To make it clearer how science contributes to specific actions, identified research requirements have been included within each of the Actions, but highlighted in blue to make them more prominent.  
The prioritization of Actions shall be undertaken by the SGCCR for approval by CEP.  The SGCCR propose the use of a ‘Priority: 1, 2, or 3’ system, as is currently used in the CEP Five Year Work Plan, as this is likely to be simpler and easier to communicate to stakeholders than the current system (that uses a priority range from 1.2 to 3.3).
Should the proposed updated CCRWP format, or a modified version of it, be acceptable to the Committee, the SGCCR would (i) revise the format for the CCRWP and (ii) simultaneously update all of the climate-related issues contained within the CCRWP during the 2019-2020 intersessional period.  The existing CCRWP (2016) would remain effective until the updating process has been completed for all the climate-related issue.  Following earlier discussions with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, it may be possible to produce a web-based version of the CCRWP, recognizing, of course, that this may have resource implications.
Clarifying the operational functions of the SGCCR
During the intersessional period the SGCCR engaged in a comprehensive discussion on the operational functions of the SGCCR.  The suggested prioritized role of the SGCCR included:
    1. encouraging/coordinating the use of new knowledge to produce policy and/or other outputs such as guidelines, handbooks, templates, etc.;
    2. making policy makers aware of research that enables them to move an issue forward; and
    3. communicating Antarctic climate change response-related science needs to the research community.
The SGCCR went on to discuss different elements of the operational functions of the group including: (i) communication, (ii) prioritization of actions and required research, (iii) keeping up to date with new knowledge relevant to the CCRWP, (iv) facilitating the implementation of actions, (v) CCRWP updates, (vi) linking the CEP Five Year Work Plan with CCRWP, and (vii) the SGCCR annual report to CEP.  To facilitate the work of the SGCCR, it was noted that potential financial support may be available, as the CEP and ATCM have agreed in principle with the concept of seeking/providing funding to support CEP priority activities.
A summary of discussion are found in Attachment B ‘Summary of discussions on the operational functions of the SGCCR’.  
Links between the CCRWP and the CEP Five Year Work Plan
Many of the issues and the management and research requirements listed in the existing CCRWP and CEP Five Year Work Plan are similar, if not identical.  However, their priority status in the two documents can differ greatly.   This situation could cause confusion when trying to communicate prioritization of research needs to partners, including SCAR.
To help improve clarity, the following actions have been proposed:
    1. Issues in the CEP Five Year Work Plan that are relevant to the CCRWP should be labelled as such in the Five Year Work Plan.
    2. Research requirements listed in the CCRWP should be added to the list of science needs attached to the CEP Five Year Work Plan, with the aim of making CEP research needs more transparent to science bodies.
    3. During the CEP’s annual review of the prioritization of issues within the CEP Five Year Work Plan, consideration should be given to the priority status of linked issues in the CCRWP (e.g. Biodiversity Knowledge is Priority 1 in the CCRWP, but Priority 3 in the CEP Five Year Work Plan)
Commencing the implementation of the CCRWP
Several members of the Subsidiary Group emphasized the importance of making progress with the implementation of the CCRWP.  Progress has been made on several fronts.  Individual points of contact have been identified within partner organisations, i.e. IUCN (Dorothée Herr), WMO (Mike Sparrow), SCAR (Aleks Terauds and Chandrika Nath), and ICED (Rachel Cavanagh).  Following discussion, it was decided that CCRWP implementation work should focus on the high priority issue ‘Enhanced potential for non-native species (NNS) introduction, establishment and invasion’.  The SGCCR has sought progress reports from CEP Members working on non-native species issues: those working on a non-native species response protocol reported that they were nearing the completion of their work and intend to submit the product at CEP XXII.  IUCN advised that it would be possible to provide information on biosecurity measures used in other parts of the world (Kevin Smith).  The SGCCR have encouraged CEP Members and Observers to present papers on recent developments on the issue of non-native species to the CEP.
Recommendations
The SGCCR recommend that the CEP considers the following recommendations:
    1. The Committee should examine the proposed updated format for the CCRWP (Attachment A) and, if considered appropriate, agree to its application by the SGCCR to all the climate issues within the Work Programme during the 2019-2020 intersessional period.
    2. To better communicate the links between the CCRWP and CEP Five Year Work Plan the Committee should agree that:
    • issues listed in the CEP Five Year Work Plan that are relevant to the CCRWP should be labelled as such in the Five Year Work Plan;
    • research requirements listed in the CCRWP should be added to the list of science needs attached to the CEP Five Year Work Plan; and
    • during the Committee’s annual review of the prioritization of issues within the CEP Five Year Work Plan, consideration should be given to the priority status of linked issues in the updated CCRWP.
    3. To progress the implementation of the CCRWP on the priority issue of ‘Enhanced potential for non-native species (NNS) introduction, establishment and invasion’, the CEP should:
    • request that COMNAP undertake a survey of National Antarctic Programmes’ biosecurity practices, to communicate progress since the previous survey in 2008 (ATCM XXXI IP98) and share implemented biosecurity solutions; 
    • encourage CEP Members and Observers to highlight recent research on the issue of non-native species that will inform the work of the CEP; and
    • encourage CEP Members to explore funding of relevant non-native species research with national science funding bodies (see Resolution 4 (2015)).
    4. The CEP’s annual update to the ATCM on progress should include information on developments within the SGCCR.


