





Report of the ICG on Organisational Aspects of the ATCM


English version provided by the author






Report of the ICG on Organisational Aspects of the ATCM

Working Paper presented by Argentina




Summary

This Working Paper aims to summarise Parties’ exchange of views during the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on “Organisational Aspects of the ATCM”, which was proposed and convened by Argentina as a result of organizational complications and ATS budgetary implications derived from late venue changes for ATCM XLI, which ultimately took place in Buenos Aires.  

Background

ATCM XLI agreed to establish an ICG on “Organisational Aspects of the ATCM” to discuss the need for better anticipation of the organizational aspects of ATCMs and the potential incorporation of specific issues into the rules of procedure (ATCM XLI Report, para 30). The idea of the ICG was also to consider eventual emergency procedures to act well in advance when faced with unforeseen situations anticipating, in an organized manner, the potential use that may be required of the resources of the ATS. 

You may recall that, in December 2017, it was confirmed that ATCM XLI would not take place in Ecuador as previously decided, thus the need for alternative venues and the possibility of holding the ATCM in Buenos Aires began to be considered. Eventually, the meeting took place successfully in Argentina, yet with a particularly tight schedule and having to resort to ATS budget.

Taking this into account, ATCM XLI agreed to establish an ICG with the following terms of reference: 

1) To examine the implications and lessons learned from the organisation of ATCM XLI and CEP XXI, including: 
•	Impact on ATCM and CEP matters as they relate to ensuring efficient governance of Antarctica or the maintenance of the Antarctic Treaty System;
•	Impact on Secretariat's resources.

2) To consider options for how best to manage future scenarios where, because of exceptional circumstances, the organization of the ATCM and CEP does not follow existing practice of rotation through the Consultative Parties, (unless rotation exchange has been previously arranged) including, for example:
•	The usefulness of the submission of an IP by the Host Country of the next ATCM during the previous meeting, and its contents;
•	Anticipation, regularity and deadlines for the submission of (informal) progress reports by the Host Country to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat regarding the organization of the ATCM;
•	Consider the merits of creating a guarantee fund (possibly with special contribution by the next ATCM host country) to bear the cost of any extraordinary expenses assumed by the ATS required by the organization of an ATCM in a country other than the one originally agreed;
•	Any possible implications for ATCM or CEP Rules of Procedure;
•	Any possible guidance for handling any future such scenarios; and
•	Except in cases of force majeure, the possibility of measures taken with regard to the Parties not abiding by the commitment to organise the ATCM (e.g. payment of an extra fee to compensate for unforeseen expenses, losing rights at the next two ATCMs, etc.).	

As convener, Argentina invited all Consultative Parties, to participate in the ICG.

ICG on Organisational Aspects of the ATCM 

During the first round of exchanges, comments from Germany, Russia, United States and the United Kingdom were received. From the views expressed, there was general consensus on the idea that the circumstances surrounding planning for the last ATCM are unlikely to arise regularly. However, several Parties expressed that it was helpful to carefully consider what mechanisms could be implemented to give Parties as much predictability as possible, if any exceptional circumstance were to arise in the future. 

In line with the above, there was general agreement that future Host Countries should be encouraged to submit regular informal progress reports on preparation for the next ATCM, setting out their plans and any specific arrangements made to date. In this sense, one Party suggested that quarterly reports from 9 months before the next meeting, increasing to at least monthly in the last 3 months might be useful.

Additionally, Parties also saw merit in the submission of an Information Paper (IP) by the Host Country of the next ATCM (and even of the subsequent one), during the previous meeting. One Party also suggested that, in the absence of an IP, the next Host Government should be encouraged to reaffirm their readiness to host the meeting prior to the end of the preceding meeting.

There seems to be agreement among Parties on the idea of not supporting additional payments either to create a forward-looking guarantee fund or a backward-looking fee. Likewise, Parties seem to be in agreement on rejecting the idea of automatic loss of rights or penalties if a country is unable to host an ATCM as originally planned, although the most advanced notice of such a circumstance would strongly be encouraged.

Special ATCMs and CEPs

Regarding the potential incorporation of specific issues into the Rules of Procedure (RoPs) to clarify the periodicity of ATCMs and the circumstances of when meetings may be termed “Special ATCMs”, there was no unanimity. Whereas some Parties prefer an assessment on a case-by-case basis, without amending the current rules, others consider that it is important to clarify under which circumstances an ATCM should be Special, amending the current RoP. Whatever decision Parties on this issue, it would appear to be quite relevant to, at least clarify, if a Special ATCM implies unfailingly a Special CEP or if the characteristic of each meeting should be assessed on its own merits.  

Budgetary implications 

Apart from the discussions mentioned above, another issue that still requires consideration by Parties is how to handle the impact of such unforeseen circumstances on the Secretariat's resources if there is no guarantee fund. No conclusion was reached on this matter.

No additional comments were received during the second round of discussions, whereby it would seem appropriate for this ICG to be terminated at this point, notwithstanding discussions at ATCM XLII. 

