





Compiling a manual on tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica








Compiling a manual on tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica
Summary
This working paper sets out the goals and principles for developing a manual that compiles existing and current provisions and guidelines about tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. The manual would consist of applicable Antarctic Treaty system provisions and guidelines, as well as potentially some elements from non-Antarctic Treaty system sources.  These texts would be assembled into a single, easy-to-understand document that helps inform stakeholders, operators and government authorities. The manual would note the necessity of complying with domestic legal requirements while not compiling those domestic laws. This working paper recommends that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) adopt the Decision in the Annex, which gives responsibility for drafting and producing the manual to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS), with the participation of such Parties as are willing and able, and the eventual clearance of the manual by Consultative Parties. 
Background
The ATCM’s concern with non-governmental activities, particularly tourism, in the Antarctic Treaty area began in 1966, with the adoption of Recommendation ATCM IV-27 (Santiago, 1966).
The ATCM’s approach to tourism and non-governmental activities is now mainly defined by the Madrid Protocol (especially Article 3) and its Annexes, as well as the many Measures, Decisions and Recommendations adopted by the ATCM that deal directly with tourism-related issues or that have an impact on these activities. It also includes international treaties that are not part of the Antarctic Treaty System but affect activities in the Antarctic, particularly shipping. Other relevant texts include guidelines produced by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), which apply to its members.
The document ATCM XXXI IP 83 “Regulation of Antarctic Tourism—A Marine Perspective” (2008), presented by IAATO, and the document ATCM XLI IP 61 “Anticipated growth of Antarctic tourism: Effects on existing regulation” (2018), presented by the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), show the importance and diversity of the instruments addressing Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities. Understanding this framework is complex due to the large number of texts, their many different sources, their different legal values, whether or not they are in force, and the different ways in which international instruments have been implemented at the domestic level. 
Several Parties have called for reflections on the legal framework for tourism and non-governmental activities. A number of proposals have been made as part of the ATCM and the Antarctic Treaty Meetings of Experts (ATME). The following should be highlighted:
    • A practical guide for tourism under the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol, prepared by the ATS;1 
    • An overview of applicable legislation in the field with a view to highlighting any gaps2 and ensuring its effectiveness in the future.3
In 2004 (Tromsø), the report of the Chair of the ATME specified that “establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the State Parties.”4 This approach was reiterated in Resolution 7 (2009): “Antarctic Treaty Parties should implement all existing instruments relating to tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica and aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that they continue to proactively develop regulations relating to tourism activities that should provide for a consistent framework for the management of tourism”.
At ATCM XLI (Buenos Aires, 2018), the Parties agreed that “the trend of increasing tourist numbers and diversification of tourism activities warranted their attention.”5 This issue was also raised in point 15 of the ATCM five-year workplan.
Lastly, at the Rotterdam workshop on Antarctic tourism,6 participants agreed that it would be useful to develop an easy-to-understand tool on provisions related to tourism in Antarctica.
Given these observations, France, Argentina and the United States propose that a manual be drafted, bringing together all current applicable provisions on tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
This working paper explains its principles (1) and goals (2). 
1. Principles for the drafting of the Manual
1.1 Compiling provisions as they currently exist
The manual will gather, in a single document, all relevant documents addressing tourism and non-governmental activities without modifying their meaning or scope. 
No new provisions will be added.
We propose that the manual also refer to texts that have been adopted outside of the Antarctic Treaty System and have an impact on Antarctic activities (for example, the SOLAS Convention, the MARPOL Convention, the Polar Code, etc.). 
1.2 Drafting a unique and structured document
The manual is intended to be a practical tool making it easier for users to access the different applicable provisions. In this, it would resemble the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force, published by the Secretariat of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). This Schedule publishes all measures adopted by the CCAMLR in the form of a book, which is distributed to the Parties. 
At the ATCM level, the experience gained in producing the Compilation of Key Documents of the Antarctic Treaty System (D1, 2010) following discussions at ATCM XXXIII (2010)7 could be put to good use. 
The manual could be divided into chapters (see the proposed Decision below). In not only focusing on legal aspects, this practical approach would make it easier to access and understand applicable provisions. 
The manual would contain references for the provisions included (date of adoption, entry into force, etc.). 
In order to reduce costs, facilitate updates and access, it is proposed to produce a digital Manual, accessible on the ATS's website, and available in.pdf version.

1.3 Updating the manual  
Like ongoing work carried out under Resolution 1 (2001)8 to identify and revoke measures considered obsolete or superseded, the manual would be an opportunity to identify any such provision relating to tourism and non-governmental activities. The ATCM could then consider withdrawing them. 
By definition, the manual would evolve over time. As such, we propose that the ATS be able to produce updated versions upon request by the ATCM, as it does for the Compilation of Key Documents of the Antarctic Treaty System.
All of these provisions are included in the proposed Decision in the Annex.

2. Goals of the Manual 
2.1 General goal 
The overall goal of the manual is to improve knowledge of – and therefore compliance with – the provisions applicable to tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. 
The document is intended for a wide target audience, given the risks of conflicts of use in the Treaty area. This includes:
    • National competent authorities;
    • Tour operators and visitors;
    • Other stakeholders such as IAATO and ASOC.
These stakeholders would have access to a single clear, structured document, containing applicable provisions on this topic. 
2.2 Specific goals 
    • Improve the accessibility of texts (by compiling them in a single document)
    • Identify obsolete or redundant provisions for the ATCM to consider deleting through existing procedures
Conclusion
The sponsors of this paper ask the Parties to give their opinion on the relevance of creating the manual described in this working paper, and submit the draft Decision in the Annex to the ATCM for approval.
Annex 
Draft Decision: A manual on tourist and non-governmental activities in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Noting the yearly increase in tourist numbers in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Desiring to ensure that non-governmental activities in Antarctica are carried out in full compliance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection;
Desiring to improve the efficiency of the Antarctic Treaty System and compliance with its legal framework;
Taking into consideration the outcomes of the Rotterdam workshop on Antarctic tourism, especially the Chair's Report and the Information Document submitted to the ATCM XLII;
Conscious of the relevance of a compilation of provisions on non-governmental activities in the Antarctic;
Decide:
1. To task the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (hereinafter referred to as the “ATS”) with compiling, producing and distributing to the Parties a Manual on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic (hereinafter referred to as the “Manual”); 
2. An informal working group bringing together the Parties interested in contributing to the production of the Manual could be created and coordinated by the ATS. 
3. That the Manual will be a digital document, accessible via the Secretariat's website, containing the texts listed in the Annex to this Decision.
The Manual could also take the form of a low-cost pocket booklet, if requested by Parties to the Secretariat.
4. That, apart from a general introduction, the Manual will not contain any other introductory and/or explanatory documents or materials. It will not create new obligations, but be restricted to gathering existing texts. In addition, it will present information relating to each text (date, source, etc.);
5. That the Manual will be divided into chapters, in an operational and easy-to-understand manner. The chapters will be structured around the steps usually followed by an activity in Antarctica:
    • Before embarking (i.e. provisions concerning Environmental Impact Assessments, issues related to emergency plans and insurance, checklist of yacht-specific items for preparing safe Antarctic voyages, biosecurity aspects, etc.);
    • During the activity (i.e. site guidelines for visitors, disembarking, commercial overflights, provisions for the protection of living resources, etc.);
    • After the expedition (i.e. post-visit reports, etc.);
A colour code clearly indicating the provision’s source (treaty, protocol, secondary legislation from the ATCM, or non-Antarctic Treaty system legal instruments) could also be used;
If necessary, the ATS could decide to create sub-chapters to supplement this general structure;  
6. That obsolete texts will be identified and revoked through existing ATCM procedures;
7. That the Manual will be produced in the four official languages of the Antarctic Treaty, and submitted to the Parties as a Working Paper at ATCM XLIII; 
9. That the ATS will produce updated versions of the Manual and its contents when the ATCM so requests.
Annex: List of texts to be included in the Manual
    • The Antarctic Treaty and the Madrid Protocol, particularly:
    • Article 1 of the Antarctic Treaty;
    • Excerpts from the Madrid Protocol: Articles 1, 2, 3 and 8;
    • Annexes 1 and 2 of the Madrid Protocol;
    • Excerpts from Annex 3 of the Madrid Protocol: Articles 1 to 7, and Article 12;
    • Excerpts from Annex 4 of the Madrid Protocol: Articles 1 to 10.
    • All Measures, Recommendations and Decisions adopted by the ATCM relating to tourism and non-governmental activities.
    • All relevant guidance provided by the ATCM and CEP.
    • All site guidelines for visitors.
    • References to legal instruments adopted outside the ATCM framework:
    • International Maritime Organization Polar Code;9  
    • The MARPOL Convention;
    • The SOLAS Convention.

