





Revision of Site Guidelines for visitors to Snow Hill Hut










Revision of Site Guidelines for visitors to
Snow Hill Hut
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Sweden

Summary
Argentina and Sweden propose that the CEP consider a revised version of the Site Guidelines for Visitors to Snow Hill Hut. The current Guidelines were adopted in 2007 and have never been revised until now. The experience gained over the last few years, regarding the conservation of the site and the evaluation of the visits, evidenced the need to make adjustments to the Guidelines so as to contribute to a better management of the site

Introduction
The hut of the expedition led by Otto Nordensjköld, designated Historic Site and Monument No 38, is located on the north coast of  Snow Hill Island, on the Bouchard Strait, in the Weddell Sea. During the summer, the site is visited by tour operators and occasionally, by personnel of National Antarctic programs.

After the adoption of the guidelines for Snow Hill through Resolution 1 (2007), the visits were undertaken in accordance with them, thus proving to be a very useful tool for the management of visitors and the conservation of the site. However, the experience gained in the last 10 years of work on the site and the contacts maintained with tour operators, led Argentina and Sweden to assess the need to adjust some of the measures and adapt them to current needs.

Regarding the number of visitors that the site receives, although the statistics do not allow us to properly discern between   landings in the area of ​​the hut and those that occur in other places on the island, an average of 450-500 visitors per season can be estimated, with a maximum of 1600 visitors (season 2008/2009).

With respect to conservation, Argentina carried out tasks aimed at enhancing the historical heritage of the hut during the 2008/09, 2009/10 and 2010/11 seasons, reported to CPA XIII (Punta del Este, 2010) through IP  21 ( Argentina) and CPA XIV (Buenos Aires, 2011) through IP 130 (Argentina). Work was resumed during  the 2015/2016 and 2018/2019 seasons.

Review of the SGVs for Snow Hill Hut
The historical importance of the site, its state of conservation, the visits received in recent years, as well as the development of scientific projects in the area, have made evident the need to review the current guidelines, within the framework of the site management strategy undertaken by Argentina and Sweden, in their role as Parties in charge of the management of    Historic Site and Monument No. 38.

In particular, this review focuses on improving the management of tourism activity in the area of ​​influence of the hut and making the development of tourism compatible with the proper development of management tasks, scientific tasks and on-site conservation which includes the hut, the objects and the slope where the hut is located, which is subject to erosive processes.

The revised version is attached in Annex 1, for consideration by the CEP. The modifications are related, mainly with:

1. Security measures for visitors,
2. The need to protect, through the establishment of a new closed area, another sector near the hut, which has archaeological value
3. Establish, with greater clarity, the communication channels for the coordination prior to each visit.
4. The update of the map and the photographs.

Recommendation

Argentina and Sweden recommend to the CEP that it should:

1. Adopt the revised guidelines and request the ATCM to update Resolution 1 (2018) to include this revised version of the Visitor Guidelines for Snow Hill Hut and,

2. Request the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to publish the Guidelines for Snow Hill Hut on its website.


