





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island








Cover Sheet for a Working Paper on ASPA No. 171 Narębski Point
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No.
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No.
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes.
First designation:
Measure 13 (2009)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 13 (2009)
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
Measure 11 (2014) ASPA No. 171
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes, small changes to boundaries with updated digital maps.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See summary of amendment in WP and Section 1 & 6 (i), Section 7(ii), 7(iii), 7(v) of the revised management plan.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A.
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant CCAMLR Final Report should be given
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(c) areas with major colonies of breeding native birds, (e) areas of particular interest to ongoing scientific research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the 'Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes, Domain A (Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic)
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))?
Yes, ACBR 3 (North-west Antarctic Peninsula Regions)
If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
N/A 



Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island
Summary
The Republic of Korea has conducted the second review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island. Since only minor amendments are required, the Republic of Korea recommends that the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) approves the attached revised Management Plan.
Background
ASPA No. 171 Narębski Point (62° 13’ 40”S - 62° 14’ 23”S, 58° 45’ 25”W - 58° 47’ 00”W) is located at the Barton Peninsula on King George Island in South Shetland Islands, and the Area was designated as ASPA under Measure 13 (2009), following a proposal by the Republic of Korea, and the management plan was first revised under Measure 11 (2014). Given its outstanding environmental values and to facilitate ongoing and planned scientific research, the Area should be protected and subject to minimal disturbance by human activities with the exception of occasional monitoring studies including vegetation, bird populations, geological and geomorphologic studies.
The Republic of Korea has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 171, Narębski Point, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. This review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. 
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 171 is provided at Attachment A. The amendments are summarized as bellows:
    • Editorial amendments have been made for consistency with the provisions of other ASPA Management Plans and with the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011).
    • Information on preparation of copies of this Management Plan is inserted according to the guide.
    • Allowance for scientific research and scientific support activities and prevention of the introduction of non-native species and pathogen were specified 
    • New information on meteorological data and faunal changes, such as the number of breeding penguins and the list of reported species confirmed through recent monitoring activities, is updated (Section 1 & 6(i)).
    • Permission for Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) is inserted with the Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v 1.1) appended to Resolution 4 (2018) (Section 7(ii)).
    • New information for activities for educational or outreach purposes is updated (Section 7(iii)).
    • New information on location of field camps for scientific purposes is updated (Section 7(v)).
    • Maps (including both captions and graphics) are digitized and improved with detailed boundary and updated information on fauna.

Recommendation
The Republic of Korea recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 171, Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island (Attachment A).

