





Improving Safety of Air Operations in Antarctica









Improving Safety of Air Operations in Antarctica 

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom



Summary

The growth, and potential growth, in the number of aircraft operated in the Antarctic Treaty Area means it is essential that Treaty Parties take steps to consider whether the air safety measures in place within the Treaty Area are fit for purpose. Crucial to this is Resolution 1 (2013) and COMNAPs Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM). Updating Resolution 1 (2013) could provide a solution to improving the safety of aircraft operations in Antarctica and could potentially reinforce the importance of the AFIM for all aircraft operators. Additionally the improvement of aircraft tracking systems to increase the ability to conduct search and rescue and a minimum level of safety equipment taken aboard an aircraft in Antarctica would also improve survivability in the event of accident.
	
Background

    1. Despite being only 6 years old, ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) Air Safety in Antarctica is already widely considered to be in need of review to reflect more recent developments, both in technology and in the growth of non-governmental air activities in Antarctica.

    2. In 2017 Norway, Australia and the United Kingdom presented ATCM XL/WP46 Non-governmental operators Infrastructure & Operations related to Air operations – Possible impact on National programs in Antarctica. The paper described the growth in non-governmental air operations and the need for the ATCM to take a strategic look at this issue.  Aviation matters were included in the Multi-Year Strategic Workplan, and it was agreed that ATCM XLII would have a specific focus these issues.

    3. This paper proposes further measures to ensure a common set of requirements for all aircraft operating in Antarctica, in order to underpin the safety of Antarctic air operations.

Antarctic Flight Information Manual

    4. The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) remains crucial in presenting a common set of guidelines for air operations in Antarctica. Recent updates of the AFIM have improved its usefulness further, as has the introduction of an electronic/web version. 

    5. ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) currently recommends certain actions by Parties in relation to the AFIM; however, it is not being followed by all operators and requires revision in order to ensure it is both current and used consistently. The mandatory use of the key safety elements of the AFIM for all personned aircraft, whether National Antarctic Programmes (NAPs), military aircraft supporting National operations, or non-governmental operators, would ensure this happens.

Tracking/Search and Rescue Response

    6. Advances in technology have meant satellite tracking systems are available for a few thousand dollars that allow aircraft to be tracked. All the aircraft operated by National Antarctic Programmes (NAPs) have this capability. COMNAP has developed a position reporting system that can utilise such automatic tracking data but unfortunately, not all aircraft are choosing to participate. 

    7. The COMNAP tracking system allows both air and ship assets to be visualised, improving situational awareness. This has huge benefits in the possibility of scientific collaboration and in response to an emergency. It allows a much quicker assessment of assets available to any response, and hence enables the user including Rescue Coordination Centres to contact the appropriate “owner” of an asset.

    8. The system is at an early stage of development, and COMNAP should be encouraged to continue this work, including incorporating information from non-governmental operators. 

Safety Equipment

    9. National aviation authorities often mandate equipment to be carried for specific operations where risks are increased, for example flights over water. However, in specific scenarios, various industries have codes of practice, which go beyond the minimum mandated equipment required, often because of unusual or specific risks associated with the operation. Examples of this are the oil and gas industry and mining industries, which commonly charter air services and expose their staff to higher than normal aviation risks.

    10. Recent years have seen an increase in the use of small, private aircraft in Antarctica, in addition to aircraft operated by NAPs and larger non-governmental operators. The higher risk of these operations and risks associated with mechanical failure and lack of redundancy increase the likelihood of an unplanned incident. As such, the carriage of suitable amount of safety equipment, taken against a recognised list would make any unplanned event more survivable. 

    11. If Parties felt that such a list were appropriate, the COMNAP could be requested to produce guidance on the equipment, which should be carried if flying personned aircraft in Antarctica. 

Recommendation

    12. The United Kingdom would recommend that the ATCM:

    i) Request COMNAP to review ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) and provide advice to ATCM XLIII on whether elements of the Resolution should be updated or strengthened. This should include consideration as to whether there are elements within the Antarctic Flight Information Manual that should be made mandatory for all (Government and non-governmental) operators of personned aircraft in the Treaty Area; Encourage Parties to share flight-planning information and position reporting through the COMNAP systems;

    ii) Urge COMNAP to continue work on its position reporting system including incorporating information from non-governmental operators;

    iii) Request COMNAP to produce a list of safety equipment to be carried by all personned-flight operators within the Treaty Area.
