





Revision of the Management Plan  for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea








ASPA No. 161, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2003)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 14 (2008)
Measure 15 (2013)
Current management plan:
Measure 15 (2013)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, in the graphics: inclusion of the position of the gravel runway under construction in the vicinity of the Area
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
New introduction, minor revision to text and update of scientific literature
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, the reference to the relevant paragraph of the relevant CCAMLR Final Report should be given
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary 
reason for designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2 (e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the 'Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
No, these classifications are based on terrestrial criteria and the area is completely marine
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))?
No, these classifications are based on terrestrial criteria and the area is completely marine
If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
Penguin colony outside the area listed as IBA criteria  A4iii





Revision of the Management Plan  for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea

Working Paper submitted by Italy
Summary
Italy presents the review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) n. 161 Terra Nova Bay, in accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011). Minor amendments are proposed and are described in the following sections of this document. Italy recommends that the CEP considers the attached revised management plan.

Background
Terra Nova Bay was designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 161 through Measure 2 (2003) after a proposal by Italy. CCAMLR considered and approved its designation during CCAMLR XXVI, Hobart 2007. The management plan has been revised in 2008, through measure 14 (2008) and in 2013 through measure 15 (2013). The area consists of a narrow strip of coastal waters extending approximately 9.5 km in length to the South of the Italian Station Mario Zucchelli, and up to a maximum of 7 km offshore, in Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea. The primary reason for the designation of Terra Nova Bay as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is its particular interest for ongoing and future research. The area has high ecological values and a potential vulnerability to disturbance from scientific oversampling and from an expected increased human pressure caused by the vicinity of the new gravel runway (Final CEE, 2017), currently under construction and whose end  will be about 1.8 km from the penguin colony of Adelie Cove.

Review of management plan
The review of the management plan involved consultation with the scientists who had worked in the Area during the last 6-7 years, to assess if the values to be protected are still relevant. From an editorial point of view, the Management Plan has been modified according to the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. An introduction section and more recent literature has been added in chapter 8. References and relevant supporting bibliography. The Appendix 2 (issued permits) has been removed and Map 1 updated with the position of the new gravel runway and with the observed leopard seals area. References to the 'Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008) and to Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012) were removed  as these classifications are based on terrestrial criteria and the area is completely marine.
Recommendation
Italy recommends that the Committee for Environmental Protection consider the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 161 Terra Nova Bay,  Ross Sea and recommend its adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Attachment A).

