





The Benefits of Conservation Management Plans for Antarctic Heritage








The Benefits of Conservation Management Plans for Antarctic Heritage

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom



Summary

Following a discussion at ATCMXLI relating to the new Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica, as annexed to Resolution 2 (2018) the CEP added to its Five Year Work Plan the need for discussions at the 2020 meeting relating to the issue of Conservation Management Plans. This paper gives details of how conservation management plans might work in an Antarctic context with examples of existing conservation management plans. It encourages the development of advice for Parties regarding the ongoing care and stewardship of Antarctic heritage sites.

Background

    1. The protection of historic sites in Antarctica has been recognised as an important component of the Antarctic landscape since the early days of the Treaty with the first historic sites designated in 1972. This process has been formalised since the Protocol for Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty came into force in 1998.

    2. To date 92 Historic Sites or Monuments (HSMs) have been listed, although four have been subsequently de-listed. These HSMs are under the custodianship of 19 different treaty nation proponents.  

    3. The types of heritage that have been designated range from locations of historic events without known physical locations (HSM 80 Amundsen’s Tent, buried somewhere near the South Pole) through memorial features (crosses, cairns, plaques and sculpture) to buildings in various states of repair (HSM 38 ruins of Nordenskjold’s hut or the still-operational HSM 61 Port Lockroy).

    4. Under the Annex V to the Protocol, “Listed Historic Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed”. However, unlike Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), there is not currently a requirement to issue a conservation management plan for any HSM. Any plans, which have been issued, have been voluntarily created by the treaty nation responsible and are almost exclusively for sites, which have been included in Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) or Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA), like the huts in the Ross Sea.

    5. Whilst all HSMs are of course protected from damage or loss by the terms of the Environmental Protocol, their management does not always comply with best international standards and guidelines for the stewardship of such globally significant heritage. Instead, the responsible care of these sites is determined by the relative interest and expertise of the proponent nations.

    6. As a result, the long term care and condition of these sites remains largely invisible, but for a few pockets of excellent practice. Treaty nations responsible for heritage exercise that responsibility in relative isolation and there is little in the way of coherence when it comes to our shared responsibility for heritage in Antarctica.

    7. There is an opportunity for treaty parties with responsibility for heritage sites in Antarctica to collaborate more closely on heritage management approaches suitable for the Antarctic region, and to draw on experience and practices applied in heritage management elsewhere in the world.

    8. ATCMXLI WP20 from the United Kingdom and Norway reported on the two year ICG in relation to developing guidance material for conservation approaches for the management of Antarctic heritage objects. Following discussions on this paper, as well as approving the new guidelines, the CEP added to its Five Year Work Plan the need for discussions at the 2020 meeting relating to the issue of Conservation Management Plans.   

Discussion

    9. Good heritage management is to take a long view on the ongoing sustainability of the heritage assets in your care. The objective of course is to be able to hand on the heritage to future generations so that they might understand, appreciate and learn from the stories it represents.  It is often about managing change and not necessarily about preserving the heritage in a static condition or fossilised state. Heritage or conservation management plans are a tool for the effective and visible stewardship of heritage, which can offer accountability, reassurance and provide a route map for the long term care of heritage.

    10. A conservation management plan can be defined as a document, which explains why a place is significant and how that significance will be sustained through its ongoing use and management. Such plans can be multi-volume tomes for the most complex heritage sites, or two pages for simpler heritage assets. The merit of such a document is that it shows how the significance for which the heritage site or asset has been recognised is going to be sustained into the future. Such documents are used around the world to communicate the management and significance of heritage of all scales.

    11. The usual format is for such a document to describe what it is, why it matters, what is happening to it and the principles by which it will be managed. After that, a more or less detailed plan for its ongoing management can be set out and this could include monitoring and recording, maintenance and repair, access to it and its use.

    12. This format will be recognisable from that which is used for the management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs, but we would suggest that a more flexible approach be adopted for heritage, which is scalable to the size and complexity of the heritage in question.

    13. Much of the work to define the significance of each HSM has already been completed. In order to achieve designation as HSM a case was made for each site and this information could form the basis of the conservation management plan. While the Guidelines agreed at ATCMXLI suggest a new HSM should “Describe management and/or monitoring actions planned for the object/site in question”.

    14. The conservation management plan should then set out the stakeholders, the risks faced by the heritage, what management and observation strategies might be adopted to monitor the effect of those risks, how the heritage might be used/accessed/visited, how that heritage and its stories might be communicated more widely and plans for ongoing physical management or maintenance, if relevant.

    15. Such a document is a working document, which will evolve over time and should be responsive to changing circumstances. It is, however, an excellent tool for communicating with stakeholders, potential donors and supporters as well as peers and authorities. It can also be as simple as a statement of significance with no intention for intervention beyond intermittent monitoring.

    16. The benefits of such an approach lies chiefly in its use as a tool to communicate how a treaty nation is exercising its responsibilities for the heritage it has deemed of such significance for it to be listed. Collectively, such plans allow us to be visibly taking this responsibility seriously and resourcing it appropriately – this is, after all, heritage we are custodians of on behalf of the next generation. The future of this vulnerable heritage depends on our generation making the best possible decisions, so that it might be sustained into the future.

    17. There is some excellent practice already in existence in this space. As perhaps anticipated, those heritage sites which have obvious global significance and inherent complexity – the huts of Scott and Shackleton, British Base A, Mawson’s Hut – all have exemplary Conservation Management Plans. These are detailed, lengthy documents with decades-long ambitions for the ongoing care and management of these sites. We would recommend viewing these documents as examples for all Antarctic heritage but would strongly advocate a proportional approach to plans for the more straightforward sites. Examples of approaches to Antarctic conservation management plans are available on the websites of the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust www.ukaht.org, the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust www.nzaht.org, and the Australian Antarctic Division www.antarctica.gov.au/environment/cultural-heritage/mawsons-huts-cape-denison.

    18. Good custodianship of the globally significant heritage on the roster of the Antarctic Treaty deserves to be cared for to the standards seen for heritage in other part of the world. Similarly, the physical evidence of human endeavour which remain and is protected under the protocol also deserves to be managed to similar standards seen for sites of natural, scientific or wilderness significance. Good conservation management planning is a simple and effective tool, which offers accountability, transparency, and opportunities for collaboration. 


Recommendations

The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP:

    i) Notes that a number of examples of Conservation Management Plans have already been developed for Antarctic HSMs, and that these have proved a useful tool to direct and inform the ongoing management of HSMs;

    ii) Recommends that Parties undertaking management of HSMs consider whether it would be helpful to develop Conservation Management Plans, in a format and style tailored, as appropriate, for each HSM (noting that some HSMs are unlikely to need such plans); 

    iii) Encourages Parties to share Conservation Management Plans, or other examples of best practice tools developed to underpin the future sustainability of Antarctic HSMs.

    iv) Consider at CEPXXIII whether to endorse additional guidance in relation to Conservation Management Plans.

