





Proposal for designation of a new Historic Site and Monument "C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn"








Proposal for designation of a new Historic Site and Monument "C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn"
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom

COVER SHEET 

The following information is provided in accordance with the “Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments”, as annexed to Resolution 3 (2018):

1. Has this site or monument been designated by a previous ATCM as a Historic Site or Monument? Yes/No (If yes, please list the relevant Recommendations and Measures.) 

2. If the proposal is for a new Historic Site or Monument, please include the following information, worded for inclusion in the Measure:

Introduction
    (i) Name of the proposed HSM, to be added to the list annexed to Measure 9 (2016): “C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn”, in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula 
    (ii) Original proposing Party; List proponent(s):  Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom
    (iii) Party undertaking management: Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom
    (iv) Type: Site/ expedition cairn. 


Description and documentation of the site
    (v) Site Location: 64°14’13.06"S - 56°35’7.50"W, northeast of the Argentine Station Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula.

Physical features & local/cultural landscape: The site consists of a rock cairn installed in 1892 by Norwegian Capt. Carl Anton Larsen during the first land-exploration of the area around the current location of the Argentina's Marambio Station, where the first Antarctic fossil discoveries were made. The cairn used to have an attached wooden pole (2m high and 5cm diameter) of which nothing remains. The site is located in the vicinity of  Argentina´s Marambio Station.  The islands within the James Ross Archipelago are comprised of shallow marine shelf deposits that date back to the Late Cretaceous.  
(pictures below)

Historical/ Cultural features: 
Whaling captain C.A. Larsen brought home abundant scientific results from his exploration of the region.. The  fossils he brought home from this area — the first to be obtained from the Antarctic regions – were of particular interest. Since then, this region has been considered a keystone in paleontological and geological research since its first exploration. The establishment of Marambio Station (Argentina), a year- round station since 1969, made it possible to further develop research projects that are currently ongoing, even expanding to other areas of knowledge such as biology and history, in collaboration and cooperation between several Parties.

    (vi) Description of the historical context
The 1892/1893 Norwegian whaling expedition was the first to conduct a land exploration on the island, and also the first to collect Antarctic fossils in the area, setting a precedent for Antarctic paleontological research. During this expedition, in 1892, Norwegian whaler and explorer Carl Anton Larsen, commander of the Jason, set up a cairn with a wooden pole – 2m high and 5cm diameter – northeast of the location of the Argentina's Marambio Station, on which the name of the ship and the year of the expedition were carved. 

Ten years later, on October 1903, Argentine Alférez José María Sobral and Swedish geologist Gunnar Andersson, both part of the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld, found the cairn and also carved their names and date on the wooden pole. Few days later, on November 7th, 1903, during the rescue operation led by Argentine commander Capt. Julián Irizar on board the Corvette Uruguay, two Argentine Navy officers (Doctor José Gorrochátegui, and Lieutenant Felipe Fliess -) found the cairn and thus realized that Sobral and Andersson were still alive. A note was left for the explorers indicating the presence of the Argentine rescue operation (Figure 4).  

Forty-two years later, on August 30th, 1945, during Operation Tabarin, a British expedition re-discovered and photographed the cairn (Figure 1). The expedition report describes other objects found at the site including a wooden box and a rusty can filled with frozen sand and a piece of paper, corresponding to the note written by the two Argentine navy officers. The note was taken to the former British ‘Station D’ on the Trinity Peninsula and then sent to London. In 1949, it was delivered to the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) where it remains to this day.

Photos and maps:
  
    
Figure 1. Comparative photographs of the cairn and its surroundings from 1945 (British Antarctic Survey AD6/19/1/D1229/7 and AD6/19/1/D1229/8) and 2016 (Instituto Antártico Argentino – Dirección Nacional del Antártico)





Figure 2. Satellite image of the precise location of the cairn





Figure 3. Provisional fence placed around the cairn during 2015-2016 season. Its removal is proposed once the site is recorded as a Historic Site and afforded appropriate protection. 




Figure 4. Note left by two Argentine navy officers during the rescue operation led by Capt. Julián Irizar (Scott Polar Research Institute, reference: SPRIMS730). The note reads: “Les soussignés, de l’ Expedition Argentine de Secours, commandant Capt. Julian Irizar, ont reconnu cette station le 7 Novembre, 1903 en trouvant seulement un point indiqué avec des pierres et au milieu une canne en bois avec la  signature de Andersson et Sobral; faite une enquête complete et minutieux dessous et autour de pierre ont y trouve aucun écrit.  José Gorrochátegui - Doctor ; Felipe Fliess -­ Lieutenant“. The note obverse reads: “ont prie de les laisser dans le point pour le cas que Les Expeditions Francaises on soude arrivé. Avis Important 1» 



Management

    (vii) Describe management and/or monitoring actions planned for the object/site in question:

The following management actions will be applied by the Parties undertaking the management of the HSM:

Actions in the short term:
1. Due to the proximity of Marambio Station, Argentina will communicate to those responsible for its operation about the site designation and will make sure to inform and train the Station's current personnel about the designation, location, historical relevance and conservation guidelines.

2. Argentina will post information at Marambio Station.

3. Parties undertaking management will post information in the vicinity of the HSM.

Actions on a regular basis:
4. Argentina will annually instruct and train personnel assigned to Marambio Station, regarding the designation, location, historical relevance and conservation guidelines.

5. Parties undertaking management will coordinate actions of monitoring, control and preservation of the HMS under a perspective of “minimal intervention and controlled deterioration”. Due to the nature of the object, the conservation tasks are considered low demand.

6. Parties undertaking management will work and promote scientific research relevant to the historical events linked to the HMS.

7. A photographic record of the Site will be maintained.

Actions linked to dissemination and education:
8. Parties undertaking management will work together to disseminate information about the historical events linked to the HSM .

Tourism management actions:
9. The site does not currently receive recreational visits, but the designation as HSM could generate interest and become a new site for visitors, taking into account, also, that the place is accessible by sea. The Parties undertaking management will monitor the tourist interest and any visits to the HSM. Site Guideline for visitors would be developed if visitation and interest increases substantially.

Measures which will be taken to limit any environmental impacts that the management of the HSM may cause:
10. Any conservation measure for the site will be previously assessed and must contemplate the environmental impact that it could cause.

11. Access to the HSM will only be on foot. No objects / rocks that are part of the site are to be damaged or removed. Constructions will not be erected in the vicinity. No fuel will be stored nearby.

12. Visitors arriving by sea should clean their footwear before disembarking. No food is to be taken on land.

Proposal for designation of a new Historic Site and Monuments "C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn"
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom

Summary
In the framework of the recent adoption of "Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica" adopted by the Committee in 2018, Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom resume the proposal for the designation of a New Historic Site and Monument in the vicinity of Marambio Station. The notification of the finding was presented in 2016 (WP 48 Rev.1) and the site received the interim protection afforded by Resolution 5 (2001). This WP summarizes the reassessment carried out within the framework of the Guidelines adopted in 2018 and proposes to the Committee the designation of this Site as a new Historic Site and Monument.

Background
During  ATCM XXXIX / CEP XIX (Chile. 2016), Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom presented WP 48 Rev.1, notifying the CEP / ATCM about the precise location of historical remains from the Norwegian whaling expedition led by Norwegian whaler and explorer Carl Anton Larsen in 1892 in the vicinity of the Argentina's Marambio Station. These remains were also the scene of historic events linked to the presence of Argentine Alférez José María Sobral and Swedish geologist Gunnar Andersson (members of the Swedish Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld in 1903), to two members of the Argentine rescue operation led by Capt. Julián Irizar on board Corvette Uruguay, also in 1903 (José Gorrochátegui and Felipe Fliess), and to the British Operation Tabarin, in 1945.  
	
In this document, the co- proponents recalled the discussions held during the CEP XVIII in 2015, about the need to put on hold new designation of HSM until some further guidance has been established in this regards (CEP XVIII , para. 177). Also, the Parties co-sponsoring the paper understood that this did not invalidate the presentation of a proposal for a new HSM. In this sense, taking into account the historic relevance of this site as a testimonial part of the heroic era of the Antarctic history, Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom recommended the CEP to consider any of the following two options to proceed: 

    • Recognize the historical value of the site and recommend applying the interim protection afforded by Resolution 5 (2001), until it is ready to designate new HSMs; or
    • Consider its designation as a Historic Site and Monument during CEP XIX.

As indicated in paragraph 164 of the Final Report of the CEP XIX, the Committee thanked Argentina, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom for notifying the discovery of this significant historical site consistent with the provisions of Resolution 5 (2001), and commended the Argentine researchers for locating the site. There was broad recognition that in the future this site would very likely be worthy of HSM designation. The Committee recommended that the interim protection measures afforded by Resolution 5 (2001) be applied to the site and looked forward to further considering the HSM proposal following the development of guidance on approaches to protect historic heritage in Antarctica. 

Such guidance was developed by the Parties during the following two intersessional periods and were finally adopted during the last meeting (ATCM XLI / CEP XXI) by Resolution 2 (2018) “Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica”. 

In this context, and in light of the new guidance material, the co-proponents present the proposal for the designation of a new Historic Site and Monument.

Re-evaluation of the Site in light of the “Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica”

The co-proponents reevaluated the site in light of the Guidelines. Likewise, the information that should accompany the proposals is included in the Cover Sheet.

The following is a summary of the analysis performed, in accordance to Resolution 2 (2018):

    1. Determining and assessing heritage and historical values: Under this point, it was evaluated whether the object/ site has heritage value as specified in Resolution 3 (2009). This point had already been assessed and informed in WP 48 Rev. 1 (2016). The proposed site comprises one of the oldest sites yet discovered in Antarctica, and addresses several of the points raised in the Annex to Resolution 3 (2009) “Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments”  to nominate a particular Historic Site and Monument, mainly:

    1. A particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica that occurred at the place: this area was first land-explored by the Jason expedition that set up the cairn, which was also the first to collect Antarctic fossils on the island, an outstanding location for paleontological research since then ;
    2. A particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science or exploration in Antarctica: the cairn was installed by Cap. Larsen in 1892, used by members of the Otto Nordenskjöld expedition and served as a key feature during the rescue operation by Capt. Julian Irízar in 1903. The cairn was re-discovered during British Operation Tabarin in 1945.
    3. A particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement: the cairn was involved in the history of the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld, which was forced to stay for two years in Antarctica. It was also a key feature of the rescue operation led by Capt. Julian Irizar. 

Under this context, it was evaluated that the site/object should be conserved and merits its designation as Historical Site and Monument, as the Committee also indicated during its deliberations in 2016.

Consider in situ or ex situ conservation: The fact of having merit for its designation as HSM already leads us to consider its conservation in situ. Also, the site/ object can best be understood and appreciated in full in its original setting, where all the historical events related to expeditions from four countries took place. Moreover, the transfer of the rocks that constitute the cairn would be a difficult and impractical task.

The proximity of Marambio station also generates local interest and enthusiasm for protection and enables easy access on foot to undertake  management activities. The site is also accessible from the coast, by small boats from vessels, generating a potential for site visitors.

The environmental impact associated with this site and its future management was also analyzed. This analysis is in the last point of this section.
All these considerations reinforce the relevance of the in situ conservation of these remains.

Determination of management actions for the HSM: 

The site / cairn requires minimal maintenance and intervention due to its structure, built from local rocks. The potential damage is linked to the loss of its structural form due to the fall of the stacked rocks or their removal.

One of the aspects analyzed is related to the potential of becoming a new site for tourist visits, once the site is designated as HSM and its historical value has been disseminated. The other HSMs located on the island, HSM 60, receive visits only sporadically, due to their difficult access, in the middle of a colony of Adélie penguins. However,other HSMs, located in the neighboring islands such as the HSM 38 "Snow Hill" on the homonymous island and HSM 41 on Paulet Island receive a greater number of visitors and have Guidelines for Sites that receive Visitors. This situation has led the co-proponents to propose a series of management measures, which are included in Annex I.

Environmental considerations
Regarding the environmental impact, the cairn itself is composed of local rocks, so the environmental impact would be generated by their removal, rather than leaving them in place. Also, its location, close to Marambio station ensures easy access on foot without using vehicles, also minimizing from this point of view the environmental impact of its maintenance. Its surroundings do not show flora and fauna values nearby.  The minimum maintenance requirements also reduce the possible environmental impact.

Education and outreach
The discovery of this site is framed in the research project of Argentine historians described in WP 48. Rev 1 (2016). These tasks resulted in partnerships with peers from the co- proponent Parties, to work together in the conservation of this and other linked historical sites. As an example, Argentina and Sweden are working on a Heritage conservation project that will include field work next austral summer season, on the historical sites of the Swedish Antarctic Expedition of Dr. Otto Nordenkjöld. These joint investigations will be accompanied by dissemination and education tasks which are described in the management section of the Annex.

Argentina will train personnel assigned to Marambio Station to ensure that they have full knowledge of the historical relevance of the site and the conditions for its management and conservation.


Recommendation

Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom, recommend to the CEP that it approves the designation of the site "Multiexpedition cairn" as the new Site and Historical Monument of the Antarctic Treaty.

