





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, 
Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea









ASPA No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 17 (2013)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 17 (2013)
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 173, Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor in terms of overall policies, although major in terms of revisions to the scientific description of the marine environment and biology of the Area based on new research results.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No change to captions. Minor updates reflecting current status of nearby stations.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment U – North Victoria Land Geologic
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 8 – Northern Victoria Land
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))? 
Yes. IBA No. 176

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea was first adopted in 2013 following a proposal by Italy and the United States. Accordingly, the first review of the management plan was commenced in 2018. A number of minor revisions have been made, both as a result of new data and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. The Area at Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay was originally designated primarily for its ecological and scientific values. In particular, the Area hosts one of the largest emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colonies in Antarctica, and the first documented ‘nursery’ and hatching area for Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarctica) is located at Silverfish Bay. The Area also has important volcanic rock exposures from Mount Melbourne, which are of geoscientific value.
    4. Scientists have continued to carry out research within the Area by permit since designation, and the outstanding ecological and scientific values are considered to have been maintained and to remain valid.
    5. Since first adoption of the management plan there have been several important developments in national Antarctic program activities in the vicinity. In particular, Jang Bogo Station (Republic of Korea) has been completed and now operates year round with up to ~60 personnel. In addition, China has commenced building a new station on nearby Inexpressible Island, which is expected to be operating year-round by ~2021 with up to ~80 personnel. Italy continues to operate Mario Zucchelli Station in Terra Nova Bay, usually with a summer complement of ~90 personnel including with research ship support, and Germany periodically opens nearby Gondwana Station.
    6. In the context of increasing multinational scientific and logistic activities in the local region, it is important that the Antarctic Specially Protected Area is continued so that the outstanding values of the Area can be protected and maintained.
    7. No changes to the boundaries or maps of the Area have been made. Minor updates to facilities have been made on the maps.
    8. The minor changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Revisions to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the Management Plan was first adopted;
        b. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the Area was updated to include information on recent station developments. Numerous updates were made to sections describing the marine environment, and ecology based on new scientific research results since the previous management plan;
        c. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The policy on air access was revised to achieve consistency with Resolution 4 (2018) Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica. The current overflight ceiling limit of 2000 ft without a permit continues and applies both to piloted and remotely piloted aircraft, with permits required to operate <2000 feet. This provides a consistent set of rules on overflight limits;
        d. (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). The reference list was updated.


Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  We recommend that the revised Management Plan for ASPA 173 Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, be adopted by the CEP.
