





Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at the Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago








ASPA No. XXX Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A 
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Measure 1 (2008), Measure 2 (2009), Measure 14 (2010)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
Yes
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Yes
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
Submission for approval in progress
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment B – Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern latitudes geologic’ and ‘Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and other islands
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2017))?
Yes. Region 3 – Northwest Antarctic Peninsula
11) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))? 
Yes. IBA 088 Islet [sic; peninsula] south of Gerlache Island.
Proposal for a new ASPA at the Rosenthal Islands, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
    1) The Rosenthal Islands are located on the western coast of Anvers Island, in the Palmer Archipelago, Antarctic Peninsula, at 64°15'W, 64°36'S. The site was first formally recognised for its exceptional ecological and scientific values when it was designated as a Restricted Zone under Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No.7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin in Measure 1 (2008). The purpose of the Restricted Zone under the ASMA was to provide protection to sensitive bird colonies throughout the breeding season, and also plant communities, by limiting access to those conducting essential scientific research, monitoring or maintenance between 1 October to 15 April inclusive. The Restricted Zone was also designated because it was considered important to protect the near-pristine state of the Rosenthal Islands, which fewer than ~60 people are estimated to have ever visited. The Restricted Zone was applied to the Rosenthal Islands under the ASMA while more detailed information was being assembled with a view to proposal of the site as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) because of its exceptional qualities.
    2) Since designation of the site as a Restricted Zone in 2008, tourism on the Antarctic Peninsula has continued to increase, and a greater diversity of sites is now being visited. The number of yachts visiting Antarctica has also increased over this period. Already it is known that several tourist yachts have visited the site. In view of the near pristine state of the Rosenthal Islands, and that such sites are becoming increasingly rare in the Peninsula region, the United States is concerned that strict protection is now put in place to ensure that this value is not compromised or lost.
    3) The United States has now gathered additional scientific information on the site, and proposes designation of the Rosenthal Islands and the adjacent islands, coastline and associated marine area as a new ASPA. The proposal is strongly supported by world renowned ornithologist Dr William Fraser, who has particular knowledge of the Rosenthal Islands, having been one of the first people to have visited the area in 1975, and who has conducted repeated but infrequent research in the region since. 
    4) The United States has undertaken a review of the published and unpublished literature on the site, compiled available scientific data on birds made available by Dr Fraser, examined high resolution remote sensing imagery indicating the likely presence of bird and vegetation communities at sites where visits have not yet proven possible, has examined records of all known past visits, and has consulted with scientists who have visited the area. A brief field visit was made in December 2016 to gather up-to-date data on breeding birds, make the first survey of terrestrial invertebrates at the site, improve mapping, and to make a first-hand evaluation of site values under Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
    5) The Rosenthal Islands were identified to meet a number of criteria for designation as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area under Annex V to the Protocol, in particular as an area:
        a. with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals; 
        b. that is a representative example of regional avian and marine ecosystems, in particular because of the diversity of breeding birds present;
        c. of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific research;
        d. to be kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities; and
        e. of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
    6) With respect to Criterion (d) listed above, it is intended to protect the relatively undisturbed state of the Area to the maximum extent practicable, although not to prohibit, prevent or unnecessarily impede well-conceived and justified scientific research.
    7) Following the appraisal of site values, a proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area and draft Management Plan and maps for the Rosenthal Islands were prepared. A number of boundary options were evaluated, including the more limited scope of the existing ASMA Restricted Zone, and the proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) was defined to include all of the Rosenthal Islands, and the ecologically associated adjacent islands, peninsulas and local marine environment, to encompass a total area of approximately 111 km2.
    8) Enlargement of the original Restricted Zone is considered justified because there has been an observed close relationship between fauna breeding on the islands and peninsulas and the adjacent marine environment, which appears to be important as a local foraging area. While more data on this ecological relationship are needed, it was considered prudent and precautionary to include the marine embayment south of the Rosenthal Islands, associated faunal communities around this embayment, and a one-kilometer buffer from the islands as the boundary of the Area. 
    9) On Anvers Island, the boundary has been defined to follow the boundary of ASMA No.7, which is a one-kilometer buffer inland from the coastline. In part this is for pragmatic reasons to maintain consistency with the ASMA boundary, and in part in recognition of the constantly and rapidly changing ice coastline, which is receding in response to a changing climate, and which is also exposing new areas of ice-free ground.
    10) The primary reasons for designation of the Area are:
        a. The outstanding diversity and number of breeding birds, which are representative of the region;
        b. The exceptional importance of the Area for ornithological and ecological research;
        c. The unusual Imperial shag (Leucocarbo atriceps bransfieldensis) colony, which appears to have maintained a resident breeding population at a similar level since first surveyed in 1975, in contrast to a regional trend of population decline for this species;
        d. The apparently extensive vegetation communities, although it is acknowledged that more research on this aspect is needed;
        e. The value as a reference site for comparative studies and long-term monitoring; 
        f. The almost pristine condition of the Area because it has been rarely visited; and 
        g. The exceptional aesthetic and wilderness values.
    11) The proposed area is not the subject of any actual harvesting of marine living resources, and the potential for harvesting within the proposed area is also extremely limited and remote owing to its rugged coastline and numerous shoals, which are potentially dangerous.
    12) However, the proposed Area is nevertheless approximately 75% marine, and it was considered appropriate to provide CCAMLR with the opportunity to review the proposal because it is intended that any potential taking of marine living resources other than for scientific research would be prohibited under the ASPA management plan.
    13) The United States intends to forward the ASPA proposal to the Chair of the Commission of CCAMLR for consideration by the appropriate scientific and technical bodies and receive their advice to the ATCM.
Proposal
The proposed Management Plan and maps are attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
