





Revision of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the South Shetland Islands: Revised Guidelines for Yankee Harbour and Half Moon Island








Revision of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the South Shetland Islands: Revised Guidelines for Yankee Harbour and Half Moon Island
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom (in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators)
Summary
The United Kingdom propose a revised set of visitor site guidelines for Yankee Harbour and Half Moon Island following proposals agreed by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) at their annual meeting in May 2019. The United Kingdom, in conjunction with IAATO, recommend that the CEP endorse the revised Site Guidelines.  


Background

    1. Site Guidelines for visitors are a crucial tool in organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic. 

    2. Keeping site guidelines up to date and regularly reviewed is crucial to their effective use. Resolution 1 (2018) sets out that “Site Guidelines for each site must be reviewed and revised promptly in response to changes in the levels and types of visits, or in response to any demonstrable or likely environmental impacts.”

Proposal

    3. With this in mind, the United Kingdom notes the decision by IAATO at their recent annual meeting in Cape Town to amend their own site guidelines for Yankee Harbour and Half Moon Island. These changes are either factual or increase protection for the site. Given that IAATO operators regularly visit both these sites and have taken proactive steps to seek amendments to site guidelines where they recognise a change is required, it seems reasonable to follow these changes across into Antarctic Treaty site guidelines so that they apply to all visitors to the sites. Future opportunities for reviewers from Antarctic Treaty Parties to visit these sites will enable them to reassess the IAATO changes. 

    4. The site guidelines at Yankee Harbour have been changed to include references to sealing remains at the site to ensure remains are not trampled by visitors; a cautionary note relating to ice potentially blocking the landing site; and amendments to the map to reflect the location of the sealing remains and the removal of a navigational mast.

    5. The change to site guidelines for Half Moon Island is a factual correction. In ATCM XLI WP32, the committee agreed to changes to the visitor site guidelines for Half Moon Island that closed a section of one of the guided walks during a period in the season when penguins heavily extend into this area. The position of the closed section has been corrected on the map.

    6. The proposed new guidelines for Yankee Harbour are attached with tracked changes so the committee can clearly see the proposed changes. A revised map for Half Moon Island is also attached.




Recommendation

United Kingdom, in conjunction with IAATO, recommend that:

    i) the CEP endorses the revisions to the Visitor Site Guidelines for Yankee Harbour and Half Moon Island (provided as attachments) and advise the ATCM accordingly; and

the Secretariat replace the versions currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised versions.
