





Two Hundred Year Anniversaries of the discovery of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Continent









Two Hundred Year Anniversaries of the discovery of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Continent

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom



Summary

The UK is working to promote the two hundred-year anniversaries of the first recorded discovery of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic continent. This started by marking the first recorded sighting of the South Shetland Islands in February this year and will culminate in 2020 with activities to mark the discovery of the Antarctic continent. The UK encourages parties to use these historical anniversaries to promote Antarctica to a wider audience, focusing in particular on the need to preserve the continent’s environment and encouraging greater diversity in Antarctic science. The UK encourages Parties to share experiences on the Education and Outreach forum.


Background

    1. In the early 1800s, the possibility that there might be a great southern continent had fascinated explorers and seafarers for centuries. The celebrated British explorer James Cook had nearly discovered Antarctica during his 1772-75 expedition. He sailed as far south as 71°10´ S, in one of the few places in the Southern Ocean where land cannot be seen. 

    2. It took nearly another fifty years before the first recorded sighting of any of the territory within what is now the Antarctic Treaty Area. That first sighting occurred on 19 February 1819 by the British Master Mariner William Smith on-board his ship, Williams. Smith had sailed from Buenos Aires, Argentina, bound for Valparaiso, Chile and like many before and after had found contrary winds in the Drake Passage. Unusually Smith decided to bear south and west in a higher latitude than usual. The result was that he and his crew were the first humans recorded as having set eyes on what are now the South Shetland Islands. 

    3. The exact location is uncertain but it was probably what is now Williams Point on Livingston Island. Smith did not linger in those uncharted ice covered waters and promptly departed the newly discovered islands.  However, after an unsuccessful attempt to return in the middle of the year, it was during his voyage which began that September that he succeeded in re-finding the islands, and on 16 October, he sent a small boat ashore at what is believed to be Esther Harbour on King George Island. 

    4. The following year, 1820, is undoubtedly more auspicious in the history of Antarctica, with the continent itself being sighted within days of each other by Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Edward Bransfield (aboard Williams with Smith again as Master). However, it was Smith’s initial discovery of the southern islands, which prompted further expeditions. Sealing ships landed on the islands before the end of 1819 and were the precursors to well over a hundred sealing voyages there in the 1820s. 

    5. Smith’s achievement was little known, but significant.  His discovery was also a tragedy for the animals of the islands he discovered. Within a few short years, the seals of the South Shetland Islands were hunted to near extinction. The early human history of the Antarctic Treaty area was largely one of devastation of the continent’s biodiversity. It was 179 years later that humankind finally decided to protect rather than exploit Antarctica’s biodiversity, signing the Antarctic Treaty’s Protocol for Environmental Protection in early 1991.



Activities

    6. Given this year marks two hundred years since Smith’s discovery, the UK has been seeking to use the opportunity to interest people in Antarctica more widely, as well as to promote greater inclusivity in Antarctic science and policy.  Through a series of events, public outreach and scientific engagement activities, throughout 2019 and into 2020, the UK aims to highlight both the history of human activity in, and understanding of, Antarctica, and to highlight future challenges and the ongoing need to protect the continent.

    7. A number of activities have been conducted and/or are planned in order to highlight the anniversary:

        ◦ UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office has sponsored a Fund to encourage underrepresented groups into Antarctic science. This will involve an internship scheme within the British Antarctic Survey for those identifying as being from an under-represented group, leading in to a workshop to discuss how the wider UK science community can best attract and support wider diversity in the future. We are keen to engage SCAR in this process;

        ◦ The UK has been working with WWF UK to highlight the need to redouble our efforts to protect Antarctica, including from the impacts of climate change; and

        ◦ Articles relating to the discovery are being published in a range of publications and series of lectures are planned at organisations such as the Royal Geographical Society in London.

    8. As we approach 2020 and 200 years since the discovery of the Antarctic continent, the UK will be scaling up its outreach and educational activities. The UK Antarctic Heritage Trust is coordinating plans, which are aimed at enabling audiences across the UK to engage with a variety of projects across real and digital platforms. Young people will be the focus, and activity will spread across the year noting the key historic and significant dates, supported by a wider communications and social media campaign. The programme will comprise exhibitions, performances, lectures, artist-led events and publications. The programme will use history to highlight how human activity in Antarctica has moved from exploitation and near decimation of its biodiversity to protection and study, with a clear message that there is still more to do to ensure the protection of the continent.

Recommendations

    9. The United Kingdom recommends that the ATCM:

    i) Encourages Parties to promote the anniversary of the discovery of Antarctica as a significant event in world history. Using the 200th anniversaries as an opportunity (coupled to the 60th anniversary of the Treaty) to highlight how human activity in Antarctica has moved from exploitation to protection and study;

    ii) Urges Parties to share examples and best practice of such activities on the Education and Outreach forum; and

    iii) Considers the merits of doing more to encourage underrepresented groups to engage and work on Antarctic science and policy issues.

