





Revisions to the Visitor Site Guide for Site No. 26 Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, southwest Anvers Island








Revisions to the Visitor Site Guide for Site No. 26 Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, southwest Anvers Island
Working Paper submitted by the United States

    1) Torgersen Island is located in Arthur Harbor at 64° 04.55' W, 64° 46.39' S, close to the southwestern coast of Anvers Island and approximately 1 km from Palmer Station (United States). The island lies within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No.7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin and 0.3 km east of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 113 Litchfield Island.
    2) A Restricted Zone and a Visitor Zone were designated at Torgersen Island under the management plan for ASMA No.7 through Measure 1 (2008), each zone comprising around half of the island. The purpose of the Restricted Zone under the ASMA was to provide protection to sensitive bird colonies and scientific research during the breeding season, while the purpose of the Visitor Zone was to provide a site within Arthur Harbor suitable for tourism and recreational visits. The Restricted Zone was also used as a ‘control’ site in studies monitoring the potential impacts of tourism.
    3) In addition to designation of the Torgersen Island Visitor Zone under ASMA No.7, guidance for tourist visits to the site was prepared in the form of an Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide, which the United States submitted for consideration in WP 017 at the XXXIII ATCM, 03-14 May 2010, Punta del Este, Uruguay. This meeting adopted the Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island as Site No.26 through Resolution 1 (2010).
    4) Approximately 12 tour ship visits are made to Palmer Station each season, all by prior arrangement. Around 6500 tourists per year visited between 2003-16, of which an annual average of ~2000 landed.  Tourists typically visit Palmer Station and make short small boat cruises around nearshore islands. In the same period an average of ~500 tourists per year landed at the Torgersen Island Visitor Zone. Since the mid-2000s kayaking has become popular in Arthur Harbor, with an average of ~50 visitors undertaking this activity per season. Yacht visits are common in the summer season. 
    5) The United States has recently undertaken a comprehensive review of ASMA No.7, which included consideration of the provisions for access to the Torgersen Island Visitor Zone. The revised management plan for ASMA No.7 has been submitted for consideration at the current ATCM.
    6) Owing to recent declines in the local breeding population of Adélie penguins, it is now recommended that the Visitor Zone is closed to all visits except for scientific or management purposes during the main breeding period of 01 October to 15 January inclusive. It is proposed that the Visitor Zone remain open to tourist and recreational visits in the period 16 January to 30 September inclusive. Access to the Torgersen Island Restricted Zone in the southwestern part of the island continues to be restricted year-round to those conducting essential scientific research, monitoring or maintenance.
    7) Revisions to the Torgersen Island Visitor Site Guide have been made to take account of these changes. In addition, new maps have been prepared for the site using the latest data on local coastlines and islands, many of which have significantly changed as a result of recent glacial recession. The new maps include the latest information on local infrastructure, small boat guidance, management zones where restrictions apply, and protected areas in the Arthur Harbor region.
    8) The provisions, including the restricted periods, are consistent with those in the revised management plan for ASMA No.7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin which has also been submitted for consideration at the current ATCM, in particular provisions for the Torgersen Island Visitor Zone.
Recommendation
The attached revised Antarctic Treaty Site Guide for Site No.26 Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, southwest Anvers Island, is recommended for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection and adoption by the ATCM.

