





Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula 









Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula 
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands
Summary
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands have prepared a draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula, following support from the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) at CEP XXI. The United Kingdom and the Netherlands recommend that the CEP refer the draft Management Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plan for intersessional review.
Introduction
At CEP XXI, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands submitted ATCM XLI WP018 rev.1, which provided a prior assessment for a proposed new ASPA on the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula.  The information was provided in a form consistent with the purpose and provisions of the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs and outlined the environmental, scientific, wilderness and aesthetic values of a proposed multi-site ASPA. The proposed ASPA would afford protection to c. 8.1% of the global population of south polar skuas (Stercorarius maccormicki), c. 2.2% of the global population of Antarctic shags (Phalacrocorax [atriceps] bransfieldensis), and rich areas of terrestrial vegetation. It would also protect important long-term and ongoing biological research, as well as provide a control area against which to compare human impacts at Rothera Research Station. The proposed area also has considerable wilderness and aesthetic values.

The Committee welcomed the comprehensive information presented in the paper, agreed that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, and expressed its support for the development of a draft management plan for the area, led by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.
Development of the draft Management Plan
During the intersessional periods, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands have prepared a draft Management Plan for the proposed ASPA (see Attachment A) in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the Protocol and the Revised guide to the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to Resolution 2 (2011).

The comments of CEP Member expressed at CEP XXI were taken into consideration during the preparation of the draft Management Plan. Specifically, (i) no huts or refuges are located within the boundaries of the proposed ASPA and (ii) the extent of the proposed Area will not inhibit scientific research but, rather, result in a reduction in the risks to scientific activities within its boundaries.  

In a further development, and following discussion and consideration of how best to protected wilderness and aesthetic values in the area, a further site was added to the proposed multi-site ASPA, i.e., the Horton, Hurley and Turner Glaciers.  The additional site is located on Adelaide Island, and lies to the west of the Léonie Islands where the other sites are located.  The Horton, Hurley and Turner Glaciers provide a dramatic backdrop to the Léonie Islands, thereby enhancing the aesthetic values of the wider area.  Furthermore, in contrast to the high levels of visitation to some of the other sites within the proposed ASPA over the past century or more, visitation of the Horton, Hurley and Turner Glaciers has been almost non-existent, meaning the site has outstanding wilderness value.

Recommendations 
The draft Management Plan is submitted for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection. Consistent with the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft Management ASPA and ASMA Management Plans, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands recommend that the CEP refer the draft Management Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plan (SGMP) for intersessional review.


