





Non-native Species Response Protocol








Non-native Species Response Protocol

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Spain, Argentina, France and New Zealand

Summary
The United Kingdom, Spain, Argentina, France and New Zealand have further developed the Non-native Species Response Protocol first submitted in ATCM XLWP 5.  The Response Protocol is intended to help decision-making in the event that a suspected non-native species is discovered within the Treaty area.  The co-authors recommend that the CEP considers the Response Protocol (Attachment A) and, if deemed acceptable, request that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat append it to the CEP Non-native Species Manual.  
Background 
Until recently, Antarctica has been little impacted by non-native species, compared to other regions of the Earth. However, reports of species introductions are increasing as awareness of biological invasions as a major conservation threat, within the context of increased human activities and climate change scenarios, has grown within the Antarctic community (ATCM XXXVIII IP46).  
The CEP Non-native Species Manual (Resolution 4 (2016)) notes that the response to a non-native species introduction should be undertaken as a priority, to prevent an increase in the species’ distribution range and to make eradication simpler, cost effective and more likely to succeed.  Therefore, the production of guidelines to assist Parties’ thinking during their response to a non-native introduction may help facilitate a more rapid and appropriate response, and thereby help reduce the risk to Antarctic ecosystems.
Non-native Species Response Protocol
The CEP has repeatedly recognised the importance of developing further guidelines to help Parties respond to potential non-native species introductions, including in the Non-native Species Manual, the CEP Five Year Work Plan and the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP).
At CEP XX, the United Kingdom and Spain introduced ATCM XL WP 5 Non-native Species Response Protocol, which presented a draft non-mandatory Non-native Species Response Protocol to facilitate decision-making in the event that a suspected non-native species is discovered in the Antarctic Treaty area. Following discussion at CEP XX, some Members indicated their desire undertake further discussions on the development of the document. Since CEP XX, the United Kingdom, Spain, Argentina, France and New Zealand have worked on the updated draft Non-native Species Response Protocol, which is provided as Attachment A to this Working Paper.  
The Response Protocol has two main components:
    • A flow diagram to guide response actions under the headings ‘Immediate Response’, ‘Immediate Eradication’, ‘Long-term Eradication’ and ‘On-going Control’
    • A Table describing in more detail the different potential elements of a response, including, for example, the initial response, wider communication, species identification, etc. 
Recommendation
The United Kingdom, Spain, Argentina, France and New Zealand recommend that the CEP considers the draft Non-native Species Response Protocol (Attachment A) and, if deemed acceptable, request that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat append it to the CEP Non-native Species Manual.  




