





General recommendations of the joint inspections between Argentina and Chile, in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection

English version provided by the authors









General recommendations of the joint inspections between Argentina and Chile, in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
Working Paper presented by Argentina and Chile


SUMMARY

Between February 17th and March 2nd of 2019, a multidisciplinary team of observers from Argentina and Chile conducted joint inspections of four foreign facilities located on the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula, in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. 

Together with the bi-national inspection team, an observer from the Oriental Republic of Uruguay and one from the Republic of Korea were invited to join the inspection.

As a result of the inspections, and taking into account the experience of previous joint inspections in 2016 and 2017, the following observations and recommendations are put forward for consideration by the ATCM. 


INTRODUCTION

To carry out the inspections, the Governments of each Party informed the designation of observers through diplomatic means in accordance with the procedures established by Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Furthermore, and pursuant to the Decision 7 (2013), the notification of the designation was also conducted through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat via Circulars 02/2019 and 04/2019, for the observers from Argentina and Chile, and 19/2019 and 03/2019 for Uruguay and the Republic of Korea.

The final detailed report of the inspections will be presented separately as an Information Paper (IP 83), for its distribution during XLII ATCM.


DESCRIPTION OF THE INSPECTION

During the joint inspections, four foreign facilities were visited, sequentially: Palmer (United States), Akademik Vernadsky (Ukraine), Port Lockroy (United Kingdom) and St. Kliment Ohridski (Bulgaria).

The inspections were carried out employing logistical support provided by the Republic of Chile, through its Air Force and Navy.

The team of observers flew from Punta Arenas on a Lockheed C-130 of the Chilean Air Force (FACH) to Chilean Antarctic station “Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva”, where they boarded the AP-41 “Aquiles”, a Chilean Navy vessel, for the itinerary to the inspected facilities.
The methodology employed by the team of observers included the use of “Checklist A: Antarctic Stations and Subsidiary Installations” (Resolution 3, 2010) as a guideline, and was complemented by interviews with the staff present at the stations and in situ inspection of the facilities. Prior to the inspections, the observers gathered information through the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES), the database of Environmental Impact Assessments of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, the COMNAP website, reports from previous inspections, as well as from the corresponding National Antarctic Programs´ websites. 
The United States, Ukraine, United Kingdom and Bulgaria submitted comments and observations to the respective inspection reports, which are included in the final document. 

Consequently, we present to the ATCM and CEP the following general recommendations for consideration and to evaluate future courses of action. 

    a. The need for increased attention to radio, satellite phone and/or E-Mail communications. Prior to the inspections, the observer team encountered difficulties in establishing contact with the stations to be visited. In this regard, it would be advisable to keep the COMNAP Antarctic Telecommunications Operator Manual (ATOM) updated with the stations’ contact information, and for it to be published in a more accessible way, as well as for such updated information to be provided to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS), to be made available to all Parties.

    b. Availability of information: It was noted that the resources available for the exchange of information are currently being underutilized. In some cases, the information provided by National Antarctic Programs on their own websites is not updated, which in turn is the one reflected on the COMNAP and ATS websites. 

    c. It would seem desirable to have a wider circulation of “Checklist A: Antarctic Stations and Subsidiary Installations” (Resolution 3, 2010), as well as better training of Antarctic station personnel regarding its proper use. Taking into account the usual limited time for conducting inspections, it is advisable that stations have a completed “Checklist A” available for the inspection team prior to the inspection, to assist in the process. It must be highlighted that of four inspected stations, only one provided a complete and updated checklist for the inspectors, making a decisive contribution to the visit.  

    d. It would also be beneficial for National Antarctic Programs’ websites to carry completed station checklists, which would improve the availability of that useful information prior to inspections, while at the same time enhancing transparency. 

    e. Consultative Parties might wish to consider discussing the possibility that inspected Parties provide feedback to the following ATCM about the consideration given to the particular recommendations made during inspections. The lack of proper follow-up to the recommendations seems to undermine the effectiveness of the inspection system, with the consequent misuse of significant resources allocated to logistical deployment. Of the four inspected stations, only one had adequately addressed all of the observations made as a result of previous inspections.

    f. Regarding medical issues, it would be desirable that the Consultative Parties make available as much updated information as possible on medical facilities they have at their stations, for example, X-ray equipment. This would be a substantive contribution both for the operative and safety coordination between isolated stations, in case of a medical emergency, and for information exchange under COMNAP.  

    g. The inspections become a very useful exercise for the inspected Party, considering that the recommendations received are an encouragement for improvement and an incentive for resource allocation at the domestic level. 

    h. Sites and stations that receive visitors should make sure their appropriate personnel are fully available for the inspection team, giving priority to the inspection over attention afforded to tourists whose visits, ideally, should be suspended during inspections. Particularly considering that reasonable notification in advance is provided as to the arrival of the inspection team. 

    i. As a result of the present recommendations, and should there be consensus among Consultative Parties, an ICG could be established to discuss general recommendations intersessionally, in order to improve the inspection system established by Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, including aspects pertaining to the follow-up of past recommendations made by the different inspection teams. 

    j. Parties are encouraged to have relevant documentation, for example, documents related to station operation or contingency plans, in at least one of the Treaty languages, so as to facilitate the observers´ task, as well as to assist potential foreign visitors that may arrive at the station. 

    k. Regarding renewable energy sources, the inspection team was pleased to confirm the use of solar panels on two of the inspected facilities. Such use, however, corresponds with reduced infrastructure and scientific deployment of low energy consumption, which can therefore rely on this type of energy. In cases of larger stations and scientific deployment, which involve sophisticated monitoring equipment working 24hs, with significant energy consumption, the use of solar panels at this stage may be more symbolic. Perhaps the employment of more efficient construction materials, as well as the implementation of rationalization measures and consumption reduction plans of the larger operations, could be of value, considering that one of the most important goals National Programs should seek is the reduction of fuel consumption in Antarctica, and not only the replacement of the energy source. 

    l. Of the four inspected stations, two of them have ATCM designated Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs). In this regard, we believe that the inspector team’s field observations regarding what defines an HSM, as contained in the inspections report, could be a valuable input for ATCM ongoing discussions about HSM designation. Moreover, the inspection team would like to recall that designation of HSMs implies further responsibilities beyond the mere designation, for those Consultative Parties responsible for the HSM management.


