





Notification of pre-1958 historic remains: The Spanish shipwreck “San Telmo”




Notification of pre-1958 historic remains: The Spanish shipwreck “San Telmo” I
Working Paper submitted by Spain.
Abstract
The working paper submitted by Spain recommends to the CEP the protection, as part of the historic Antarctic heritage, of the remains of the San Telmo, a ship from the Royal Spanish Armada that vanished in the Drake Passage in September 1819, pursuant to Resolution 5 (2001) “Guidelines for handling of pre-1958 historic remains whose existence or present location is not known”. In view of possible non-governmental expeditions whose objective would be to locate the wreck, and in the event that such expeditions are successful,  Spain, as this relates to a State Vessel and a Mass Military Grave, states its intention to guarantee the protection of the boat and requests of the CEP that such remains, if they are found, receive provisional protection in accordance with the provisions of Resolution 5 (2001).
Historical background
The San Telmo, a third-class (74-gun) ship of the line, was built in the Esteiro shipyard in Ferrol, Spain, in 1788. The vessel had two decks and 74 guns, was 190 feet long, with a beam of 52 feet and a depth of 25 feet. Its approximate displacement was 2,750 tons and it had a crew of 644 men, sailors, soldiers and naval officers.
By Royal Decree of 23 March 1819, the San Telmo set sail from Cádiz on 11 May alongside the Prueba frigate and the Primorosa Mariana merchant frigate, for El Callao (Peru), where 1,400 soldiers were due to disembark as reinforcements for what was then known as New Spain.
During the journey they reached the ports of Rio de Janeiro and the Montevideo Naval Base, reaching and rounding Cape Horn in September while facing raging winds from the Drake Passage. At first the three ships stayed together but they later lost contact in the middle of the stormy weather, as they headed south in search of favourable winds which never arrived. We know through archive documents that on 2 September the San Telmo suffered damage to the rudder, the stem and the main yard, which suggests that it was adrift and impossible to steer. The Mariana tried to tow it but was unsuccessful as the cables were broken. On 4 September, the San Telmo found itself alone and adrift in the middle of a terrible storm.
The documents from the “Don Álvaro de Bazán” General Archive of the Spanish Navy indicate that the other two frigates were unable to provide any aid, mainly due to the serious damage suffered by the rudder. Both frigates managed to arrive at the port of El Callao. From the Mariana, we have the reference to the last sighting of the San Telmo at a latitude of 62º south and longitude of 70º west, a point where the winds and the currents inevitably lead to the north of Livingston Island in the South Shetlands. Those at the ports awaited news of the journey, but it never came. On 27 December 1821, almost three years after the last sighting by the Mariana,  Minister of the Navy Antonio Valdés signed a document pronouncing that the San Telmo had been lost in order to provide state aid to the orphans and widows of its crew.
Evidence of the shipwreck of the San Telmo
The first evidence is provided by contemporary British documentation from the time of the loss, followed by other evidence from commercial seafarers from the same time period, though with lower documentary value.

It can be deduced from the documentation that once land was sighted, Captain Smith travelled up the coast to draw sketches of what he could see. Once he arrived at King George Island, he descended in the opposite direction. He made two landings in the Shirreff Cove and found remains of a shipwreck that included inscriptions from the sunken ship (the San Telmo). He also found part of an anchor that he took with him to England with a view to using it later for his own coffin.
These incidents are taken from the manuscript of Captain Robert Fildes, written one year later: “(...) in Shirreff Cove were the “Williams” brig from Blythe, the “John” from London, the “Mercury” from London, the “Lady Frances” from London, the “Dragon” from Valparaiso and two American brigs (...) if you walk across the land you shall find a beautiful sandy beach or bay of three quarters of a mile long in the shape of a crescent and called Half Moon; here were found an anchor from a ship of 74 with a copper-wired iron knocker; booms with sails attached and other yards were found here as the melancholic remnants of some poor unfortunate individuals”.
A footnote adds: Captain Smith took the anchor home to make himself a coffin. It has  proven that it belonged to a Spanish 74-gun ship that was sent around the Cape Horn with 1,400 men to fight against the Patriots, and from which nothing has been heard until now.
In 1845 a British pilot chart reported the same news, this time in an official specialised manual published by the British Admiralty’s Hydrographic Office in which the following paragraph is included: “The remains of the shipwreck were found by the sealers in 1820, with no survivors, on Livingston Island in the South Shetlands”. 
For his part, James Weddell, who was in those locations between 1822 and 1824, recounts that a great number of seal bones were found dispersed on a beach on said island and linked that with the prior incident. He deduced that they were animals that were used for food by some of the castaways who survived the sinking, prior to their deaths due to the harshness of the Antarctic climate.
According to Spanish investigators1 who carried out an archaeological investigation project in the 1990s, the evidence found at the site and the toponymy left by the British - Telmo Island, Half Moon Bay, Shirreff Cove - corresponds fully with the old documents. The time that passed between those events and the emergence of commercial navigators especially sealers, in those waters, caused the remains of the shipwreck to be continuously reused and over time they either disappeared, were consumed, or were transformed. The wood was used for camp fires, and parts of the sailcloth, metals, etc., were used as utensils and to make small shelters. Some of the shelters, including those of the shipwreck survivors, were reliably identified by Spanish archaeologists between 1992 and 1995. 
Interpretation of the results
The documentary and archaeological evidence, such as the excavation as well as the analysis of organic materials, especially the wood and the remains of utensils, means that many of these objects prove the presence, albeit temporary, of shipwreck survivors who managed to live for a small period of time. Presumably, they would have risked their lives on some of the ship’s auxiliary vessels, departing for a terrible, inescapable fate that was unknown to them as they perished in the attempt. 
The geophysical studies carried out in the zone using magnetometry, bathymetry and cartography point to the same conclusion. Significant magnetic anomalies suggest that somewhere in this location, at depths of between 25 and 80 metres, lie the remains of the ill-fated San Telmo, or at least part of it. This is because the fact that Smith found one of the anchors on land may indicate a tow line to land from parts of the wreckage or a life rope used to try to save some of the crew. The chance to make the badly damaged ship lighter by removing the heaviest objects, such as the artillery, would also support this hypothesis. Then the ship, or part of it, could have attempted to find a way out from the trap of those waters for an uncertain, unknown fate. However, some later explorers point to other remains found in other parts of the South Shetlands. 
Proposal
If the exact location of the wreckage of the San Telmo is found, during any expedition planned in the waters of the Antarctic Treaty, Spain requests that the site immediately be granted protection pursuant to Resolution 5 (2001), which offers provisional protection to pre-1958 historic artefacts/sites.
The definition of wreckage would include all parts and accessories associated with the vessel, armaments, equipment, supplies, as well as the ship itself and the crew and military staff transported in it. The definition also includes all the personal objects that the crew would have left in the ship when it sank.
It is Spain’s intention that the ship acquire the status of Historic Site and Monument, with the end of the voluntary moratorium of designations, following the approval of the new Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica. Regardless of whether the site is found, it is important that this objective is achieved, especially if the precedent is taken into account: HSM n.80, Roald Amundsen’s camping tent, the exact location of which is not known either.
We are not proposing the drafting of a full Management Plan for the site while its location and conditions remain unknown, although the site must remain intact and no item should be removed from it, except after the relevant exhaustive assessment. 
The site must be managed in accordance with the international principles established for underwater cultural heritage management and international best practices for the protection and management of the site. 
Recommendation
Spain recommends that the CEP:
    • Guarantees that, should the exact geographical location of the wreckage of the San Telmo and all of the associated objects and goods be identified, it will receive provisional protection pursuant to Resolution 5 (2001).
Considers Spain’s intention to present a proposal to officially include the ship as a new Historic Site and Monument, following the guidelines approved in Resolution 2 (2018).
