





EIES – Improving availability of information on non-governmental aviation activity








EIES – Improving availability of information on non-governmental aviation activity


Summary

In this paper we seek to highlight the possibility for Parties to include detailed information on aviation activity through the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES). We propose that Parties agree to enter information for both non-governmental aviation activity and national expedition aviation activity into the EIES under the “Aircraft Activities” heading, and that they to as large degree as possible detail individual flights.


Background

As noted in WP 60 on aviation, the trend over the last decade indicates that there is an increase in both intercontinental flights from Antarctic gateway cities to the continent, as well as an increase in intracontinental activity. IAATOs IP 71 to ATCM XLI show that there was an expected increase in “Deep-Field Tourism” in the last season. 

AT ATCM XXXIX, the Information Exchange Requirements were updated in Decision 5 (2016) to include more detailed information on aircraft activities. In EIES it is possible to enter information on operator, type of flight, number of flights, period of flights and then to enter each individual flight under the heading “Aircraft Activities”. This can be entered for both intra and inter-continental flights, for both National Programme activity, and non-governmental activity. 

As far as we can tell from our short study of the 2018-19 entries into the pre-season report, and the 2018 annual report, few parties seem to enter this information for non-governmental aviation activity. Parties seem to instead enter this activity under the heading “Non-Governmental Expeditions – Land-Based Operations” together with other activities, instead of putting aviation activities under the “Aircraft Activities” heading. The Parties that do enter activity under the “Aircraft Activities” heading often do not detail individual flights, or write individual flight information into the description box instead of entering the individual flights. We also note that some Parties enter the number of flights, but do not enter information on the individual flights. This lack of information can be a challenge to competent authorities when assessing permits/authorizations as they are not able to get full overview of air activity.  

At present it is difficult to get a complete overview of air activity in Antarctica. No database or repository covers all air operations on the continent (both national programme activity and non-governmental activity). The repository that comes the closest to providing an overview over activity is the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES). However, when Parties do not enter information in the same manner, or do not enter detailed information on individual flights, this information is less useful. It also means that the secretariat cannot produce summarized report on aviation activity, as the information has not been entered into the database in a manner that allows these automated reports to be made.  This makes the EIES information on aviation activity less useful for Parties and their Competent Authorities.  

We do note that Parties generally enter this information for national programme aviation activity. 


Proposal

Norway proposes that Parties agree to enter information for both non-governmental aviation activity and national expedition aviation activity into the Electronic Information Exchange System under the “Aircraft Activities” heading, and that they to as large degree as possible detail individual flights.

Having this information will allow the secretariat to make summarized reports for both non-governmental and national programme aviation activity, which in turn will give Parties a better overview of activities and developments in their work
