





Air Operations in the Antarctic – challenges and possible way forward









Air operations in the Antarctic – challenges and possible way forward
Working Paper submitted by Norway



Summary

In this Working Paper, Norway presents two possible ways forward to meet the challenge of increased levels of air operations, and more diversified air operations in Antarctica. We recommend that:
    • Parties discuss whether the ATCM could task COMNAP and IAATO to look at the existing communication and information exchange routines between non-governmental air operators, and report back to the meeting on how this might be implemented for both governmental and non-governmental air operations;
    • Parties discuss the possibility of requiring Air Operators to have national authorization from their national aviation authorities to operate in the Antarctic. 


Background

At ATCM XL Norway, Australia, and the United Kingdom proposed that ATCM should look into challenges that might occur in relation to increased air operations in Antarctica. The meeting agreed to place the topic of air operation on the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Plan for further consideration and discussion. 

The discussions on aviation were set to take place at last years ATCM, but given the special circumstances of ATCM XLI, it was decided to postpone the aviation discussion to this years ATCM XLII. 

As stated in ATCM XL WP46 (submitted by Norway, Australia, and the United Kingdom), the trend over the last decade indicates that there is an increase in both intercontinental flights from Antarctic gateway cities to the continent, as well as an increase in intracontinental activity. 

In the report from the Norwegian inspection conducted in 2018 (ATCM XLI, WP 26), we noted that

    • there was an observed increase and diversification in activities and actors that might entail a higher level of risk both with regard to environmental incidents (such as transport of fuel for flight operations) and human safety (such as large-scale air accidents). 
    • The inspection team recommended that the ATCM look into safety issues related to flight operations and the increasing air traffic in Dronning Maud Land, in particular in areas where multiple flight operations take place. Mechanism to ensure an appropriate level of transparency and cooperation between all operations and operators are important to ensure that human and environmental risks are minimized. 
    • The inspection team noted that with a more diverse field of interests and actors, partly disassociated with national program structures, the spatial development of infrastructure, facilities and operations in Dronning Maud Land and surrounding areas is taking place without a strategic assessment of the carrying capacity, values and operational limitations of the area. In due course it may be relevant to consider more strategically the implications of the overall development and management in light of the current trends

In Norway’s IP 151 to this years meeting, we outline our national process through our national civil aviation authorities for obtaining flight permits to Troll Airfield, as well as our routines for flight following and monitoring in the Troll Airfield area. This information could be of interest to Parties as an example of organisation of air operations. 

COMNAPs IP 2 to ATCM XLII gives us an overview of aviation activity in Antarctica. The paper shows that there has been an increase in the total number of inter-continental flights to Antarctica from 1995 to present, but that the increase has remained relatively constant in the last years. The IP also shows that there are currently 55 active airfields, and 13 inactive airfields. In IAATOs IP 71 to ATCM XLI, they show a predicted increase in “Deep-Field Tourism” from 580 persons in the 2017-18 season to 761 persons in the 2018-19 season. These numbers indicate that there is an increase in air operations and diversification in Antarctica, and it is therefore timely to discuss the safety aspect of air operations, both in terms of human safety and environmental safety.  


Recommendations

Based on our observations during the inspections, as well as discussions over the previous years, we have chosen to initially focus on safety issues, in terms of both environmental and human, in our recommendations to the Meeting. To meet the challenge of increased and more diversified air operations, we have, as a first step, looked at solutions that might improve communication between operators, as well as ensure that operations are held to the highest safety standards. In the future we hope to look further into the possibility of developing an Antarctic aviation framework that could cover all relevant aspects of air operations.


    1. Improved communication

Increased air traffic in the Antarctic increases the risk of unwanted incidents. Good communication and information exchange, preferably in real time, is important to reduce risk. At present there are well established, and to a large degree, robust communication and information exchange routines between national operators with operations in the same area of the continent. As such the risk associated with air activities is generally regarded as low. It is unclear to which degree these routines include non-governmental operators, and this could be a challenge as the range of operators and operations increases. We therefore regard it as timely for the ATCM to discuss the routines for communication and information exchange related to air operations. As we see it, the current framework is not well placed to meet future changes.


We recommend that Parties discuss whether the ATCM could task COMNAP and IAATO to look at the existing communication and information exchange routines between non-governmental air operators, and report back to the meeting on how this might be implemented for both governmental and non-governmental air operations. 


    2. Cohesive code and standards for Air Operators in Antarctica 

Standards and codes for Air Operators operating in Antarctica can differ since ICAO’s legislation in general does not cover Air Operations in Antarctica to the same degree that it applies elsewhere.  National Civil Aviation entities can, however, request national registered Air Operators to perform to specific standards, based on ICAO’s universal standards. National Civil Aviation entities can therefore authorise operations, and limit this authorisation to a specific operation, or a range of operations, as specified in the given permit. An operator with national authorisation is therefore more inclined to have a higher safety level than an operator that has not gone through a national permitting process. 

If Parties required all air operators operating in the Antarctic to go through a permitting process leading to an authorisation from their national aviation authorities, this could lead to a higher standard and safety level for flights to and within the continent. 


We recommend that Parties discuss the possibility of requiring Air Operators to have national authorization from their national aviation authorities to operate in the Antarctic.
