Norwegian supervision scheme for Antarctic cruise operators
Norwegian supervision scheme for Antarctic cruise operators
Background
To inform ongoing discussions on onboard observer schemes for
Antarctic cruise operators, Norway here presents the established
system we have in place for supervisions of Norwegian Cruise
operators.
The legal framing
The Norwegian Polar Institute, as the Norwegian competent
authority for activities in Antarctica, conducts supervisions
pursuant to the Norwegian Antarctic Regulations article 38, stating:
“The Norwegian Polar Institute or a party authorised by the
Norwegian Polar Institute shall supervise the implementation of
these Regulations.
The supervising authority shall have unrestricted access to all
installations, means of transport and areas where activities that fall
within the scope of these Regulations are conducted.”
The reason for conducting a supervision, is to make sure the activity
is conducted in line with the plans from the operator, and of course
in line with the national regulations. Following a supervision,
remarks on the activity can be made, in addition to some
suggestions for improvements. If activities are found to not be in
line with the regulations, there is a legal basis for reporting the
activity to the police.
The Norwegian supervision framework
The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) has previously conducted five
supervisions (2002, 2005, 2007, 2013, 2019) onboard Norwegian
cruise ships in Antarctica. With basis in the regulations, any
Norwegian activity may be subject to a supervision, but until now
the cruise industry is the only activity where supervisions have
taken place, as other vessel-based activities typically are small sail
expeditions.
Norway has recently developed short guidelines and templates to be
used for our supervisions. We intend to conduct supervision on one
vessel from one of the Norwegian Antarctic cruise operators every
3rd year. From the coming season there will be two Antarctic cruise
operators who are accountable under the Norwegian Antarctic
regulations. This entails that a supervision will be undertaken for
each cruise operator every 6th year.
How a supervision is conducted
Before departure on a supervision, there are several preparations
that are required:
Supervisory personnel must be formally appointed in advance.
It is recommended that two supervisors be appointed, based on the
experience our former supervisors have presented. With two
colleagues, it is possible to have discussions, cover all activity better
and get a second opinion on different matters. In all former
inspections, only one supervisor has been appointed.
Preparation of checklist, following a template.
Print / store on PC all of the documents needed for the inspection.
There is often poor internet access on board so all documents must
be stored on a PC or printed.
Example of relevant documents to bring:
visitor site guidelines
IAATO guidelines
other guidelines
letter of approval
any formal decisions
Notification / IEE / SAR / SOPEP / other attachments to the
notification
On board the ship:
Contact the captain / expedition leader. Arrange a first meeting to
review the checklist during the crossing.
Ask to be allowed to present supervisory personnel and the
supervisory method.
Go through the checklist along the way. Verify through
examinations / inspections.
Participate in all activities / landings. Be sure to make observations
both at the start, during and at the end of all landings. Follow
checklist for landings. Plan the inspection in advance, read site
guidelines and participate in guide and passenger briefings.
Many things may change during a landing that can take more than
5 hours (eg. wind / weather / personnel and more). It is often
interesting and valuable to see how the guides / expedition
management plan the disembarkation (before passengers go ashore)
and how they leave a landing site. There is often time pressure at
both start and end.
Watch how passengers wash boots / equipment / clothing during
the crossing and before landing.
Ask to attend all the meetings that the guides conduct.
Be present on the bridge when the expedition management and
captain plan landing operations, etc.
Attend meetings to which passengers are invited.
Make notes on all observations daily. Take photos and save photos
daily. It is difficult to remember details afterwards. This
information is important documentation.
Summarize and present main findings on the crossing back to the
mainland. Invite everyone who has been interviewed. All guides
should be included.
After the supervision:
Write a preliminary report following the template and present it to
the operator to get a check on factual errors.
Follow up any findings in next year's follow-up of the report and
annual meeting, possibly separately (depending on whether
deviations or remarks are made).
Using these simple, but detailed guidelines together with templates
for reporting during the supervision aids in securing quality and
equal treatment of the different cruise operators.
Summary and conclusion
Norway views supervision to be an important part of the
management of tourism in Antarctica, as it gives us on ground
observation and experience of the activities. We experience a good
cooperation with the cruise operators in relation to the supervision.
During the last supervision only minor remarks were made, and the
operator performed the activity in accordance with their
notification and plans.
In addition to supervisions, we conduct annual meetings with the
Antarctic cruise operators, usually in May, to discuss the cruise
season that has passed, and to hear about the coming season. In
addition to the previous and upcoming cruise seasons we also
discuss relevant points from the IAATO meeting and CEP and
ATCM. This instrument is important in conjunction with the
supervisions, as the dialogue is important for both the cruise
operator and to us.
