Education & Outreach Activities of Turkey in 2020-2021
Education & Outreach Activities of Turkey in 2020-2021
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the polar regions and global
climate related education and outreach activities carried out in
Turkey in 2020-2021.
Background
Informing society about polar regions is considered to increase
public interest in polar research. It is also taken into account that
motivating children, who will become the scientists of the future is
of great importance. Education activities and outreach at early ages
will provide them with the opportunity to understand the
importance of polar sciences and how to conduct research in these
regions in the future. In this context, the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), Marmara
Research Center (MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI) spends
continuous effort to hold events such as training and seminars, to
issue publications books/journals, documentaries and animation
films.
Turkey’s polar related education and outreach activities are
currently coordinated by TUBITAK MAM PRI. Within this scope,
APECS Turkey (as the APECS National Committee) and “Turkish
Students’ Polar Research Team (PolSTeam)”, which is a body of
İstanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (ITU PolReC,
the former national operator) take an active role in these activities.
2020-2021 Activities
The First Polar Sciences Festival was organized by TUBITAK MAM
PRI in October 2020. The festival was designated to present polar
sciences to the younger generation in a fun environment in a venue
full of entertaining activities. However, due to the Covid-19
pandemic, the event was held on the online platform. The festival
brought a total of 30 speakers together with 2000 students from 70
schools from 20 different cities of Turkey. Experienced researchers
talked about the current trends in polar regions and explained their
scientific studies to middle and high school students and teachers in
a popular science language. The first session of the festival was
broadcasted live on the TUBITAK YouTube channel.
The first “Polar Research Projects Contest for High School Students”
was organized by the TUBITAK Directorate of Science Fellowships
and Grant Programmes and PRI. The contest, in which the students
will develop and present polar science projects attracted great
attention with over 700 applications. During the call period, PRI
gave seminars to 6000 people, including students and advisor
teachers from 30 different cities. These seminars involved not only
the details on the contest and submission but also contained general
information on polar regions and polar research.
In addition to these activities, the documentary titled “The Black
Box of the Planet: Antarctica” which was prepared within the scope
of the fourth Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-IV) was aired on
national TV channels and as well as YouTube. The importance of
the polar regions and, thus of polar science, for our planet was
emphasized throughout the documentary.
During this period, PRI researchers contributed to both printed and
digital publications on polar regions from an educational aspect.
Along with the Science and Society Department of TUBITAK, PRI
prepared written and visual material to support the content of the
magazines targeting children over 3 years of age. Two TUBITAK
magazines for different age groups with special issues for polar
regions were published in December 2020. In addition, a digital
book with drawings on the first Turkish Arctic Scientific Expedition
(TASE-1) was published in 2020. Besides, a comic series on the
adventures of a researcher in Antarctica continues in a TUBITAK
magazine for kids with the contributions of PRI researchers.
Conclusion
TUBITAK MAM PRI keeps working in cooperation with PolSTeam
and APECS Turkey to conduct education & outreach activities
related to polar regions and global climate change. Although the
Covid-19 pandemic considerably impacted polar activities, online
platforms and publications have served well in terms of
dissemination of information to the public and especially the
younger generation.
