Concept study for Troll station
Concept study for Troll station
Summary
Norway is in the process of completing a concept study for Troll
station to identify future upgrade needs. The Ministry of Climate
and Environment has tasked Statsbygg, who is the Norwegian
government’s building commissioner, property manager and
developer, with undertaking this concept study. The study will
consider the future needs of Troll Station, and asses the upgrade
needs. The concept study will produce three alternatives for a
future version of Troll research station in Antarctica, with three
different ambition and investment levels. This information paper is
meant to serve as information to Parties of the ongoing national
process that is projected to be concluded November 2021.
Background
Troll station is an all year station. After more than 10 years as an all
year station, it has been decided that there is a need to consider
future upgrades of the station. On the basis of this the Ministry of
Climate and Environment has tasked Statsbygg to undertake a
concept study to identify future upgrade needs for Troll Station.
The Concept Study has the following requirements framing its work:
The station will continue to have the same location
Troll station will continue to be an all year station, and it has been
decided that the station must be able to function as an all year
research station also during a possible construction period.
The station must have good research facilities and be able to
facilitate the need for increased research capacity.
Energy security is of importance, and the station should to as large
a degree as possible, rely on renewable energy.
The alternatives must be suitable for the Antarctic environment.
The station must have a refuge for use in case of evacuation needs.
The concept study will produce three alternatives for future
upgrades to Troll station. These alternatives will have different
ambition and investment levels. It is a goal that Troll be on par with
the leading stations of Antarctica in developing and implementing
environmentally friendly solutions including for energy use, waste
handling, transport and other aspects of its operations. All relevant
Norwegian actors are involved in the work with the Concept Study,
with the Norwegian Polar Institute as the responsible user. The
work with the Concept Study is set to conclude November 2021. If
Parties wish to receive more information on the progress and
results, we will be happy to provide this to interested Parties.
