Report on the scientific activity of the Argentine Antarctic Institute
– 2020
English version provided by the author
Report on the scientific activity of the Argentine Antarctic Institute
– 2020
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Introduction
The Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) is a scientific-technological
institution and a dependency of the National Antarctic Directorate
(DNA), within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade
and Worship, under Argentine guided by the political norms of the
Argentine Republic. It is an active stakeholder of Argentina's
National Scientific and Technological System, and pioneer on an
international level in the development of Antarctic scientific
research.
The IAA staff is composed of approximately 100 scientific, technical
and administrative personnel. 60% of them are researchers from a
diverse range of scientific disciplines including Life Sciences, Earth
Sciences, Social Sciences and Humanities, Physics, Chemistry and
Environmental Sciences. Currently, the IAA is engaged in 55
research projects. 70% of the activities carried out by the IAA in
Antarctica are conducted jointly with researchers from national
universities and scientific-technological organizations, while 60% of
its projects include some kind of international scientific cooperation
in association with national Antarctic programmes from other
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as universities and research
centres from over 20 countries.
The year 2020 was marked worldwide by the difficulties emerged
from the COVID-19 pandemic, which affected all human activities;
and scientific activities in Antarctica were not an exception.
Argentine scientific activity, coordinated by the IAA, had to be
significantly reduced, and a very limited number of researchers
participated in the 2020/21 campaign. In addition, all scientific
encampments originally programmed in the Annual Antarctic Plan
were suspended, and summer stations, many of which host research
projects, remained closed.
These strict sanitary measures yielded positive results, as no
COVID-19 cases were detected in the Argentine Antarctic stations
nor on national vessels that entered the Antarctic Treaty area.
Notwithstanding the difficult situation produced by the pandemic,
the IAA continued its scientific activity. This report provides a
summary of the main results of the IAA’s work during the year
2020.
Production of the Argentine Antarctic Institute
A summary is provided below, containing the results achieved by
the IAA during 2020 in terms of scientific production, Antarctic
Campaigns, capacity building, training, scientific advisory, scientific
articulation and outreach activities:
Scientific production: During 2020 the IAA published 74 scientific
peer review articles in specialised magazines, 7 book chapters, and
made 45 presentations in national and international conferences. In
particular, five works were published in the prestigious Nature
magazine, showing that the IAA and its researchers are present at
the highest level of their areas of expertise. Regarding presentations
in conferences, these were severely affected by the cancellation of
many events which could not be conducted in a virtual format; for
this reason, they were reduced by 60% in comparison with those of
2019. The highest participation (with 20 presentations) took place
at the SCAR Open Science Conference 2020, a virtual event. It is
important to note that scientific production of specialised
articles, peer-reviewed and included in international publications,
has remained within the parameters of past years, slightly
diminished as a result of the decrease in activity due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Antarctic Campaigns: As the 2020 ATCM was cancelled and the
Antarctic Campaign that started in 2019 ended in March 2020, we
are providing a brief summary of both the 2019/20 and the
2020/21 Campaigns.
Antarctic Campaign 2019/2020: 180 research, technical and
logistical personnel were deployed, in groups working on 40
scientific projects. The groups were distributed between stations
and the icebreaker Almirante Irízar (RHAI). Around two thirds of all
personnel undertook their activities at Carlini and Marambio
stations (both inside the stations and in nearby encampments and
refuges). 21 projects were carried out in the areas of Marambio and
Esperanza stations (8 in Marambio station, 5 in Esperanza station
and 8 in encampments) by 77 scientists, technicians and logistical
personnel. Additionally, 56 scientists and technicians were deployed
at Carlini station to work on 20 projects, primarily on biological
sciences, oceanography and environmental science. Further, 11
wintering personnel (engineers and technicians in computer science
and electronics) were hired to operate and verify the functioning of
scientific electronic equipment during 2020 in the permanent
stations Belgrano II, Orcadas, San Martín, Marambio and Carlini, as
well as its proper registration in data acquisition recorders and
computers, and the management of computer networks and satellite
data links. A wintering biologist was present as well in 2020, who
was in charge of scientific-technical tasks in the field and in the
laboratory at Carlini station, to support ongoing scientific projects
especially during winter.
Antarctic Campaign 2020/2021: Pre-season 2020 campaign
(September-November) had to be suspended given the restrictions
imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. For this reason, as
was mentioned above, the deployment of personnel and equipment
and thus the scientific activity were severely reduced. In Carlini,
only a small interdisciplinary group of 15 researchers and
technicians could be stationed, to carry out essential research tasks
involving international commitments and completing Bachelors and
PhD theses. Additionally, at Marambio station only 3 researchers
participated in the summer campaign and no encampments were
deployed. Similarly, only two researchers were present at Esperanza
station. Contrary to the usual practice in summer campaigns, due to
the pandemic, it was not possible to welcome foreign researchers to
the Argentine Antarctic stations.
Capacity building: Regarding human resources, during 2020 IAA
personnel directed 26 theses (including Bachelors, Masters and PhD
degrees) in Antarctic scientific affairs. Further, as part of their
professional training, IAA researchers participated in 40
specialisation courses in different scientific disciplines related to
their positions. In total, over 1600 hours were dedicated to capacity
building activities. In addition, IAA researchers participated in
numerous training activities in Antarctic disciplines directed
towards the Joint Antarctic Command personnel, among others.
Research career: During 2019, in the framework of a special call for
admission into the Scientific Researcher course of the National
Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET), focused
on institutional strengthening, the IAA drafted 5 profiles for vacant
areas, and 3 researchers were admitted in August 2020. In a new
special call by CONICET in 2020, 5 more profiles were drafted. The
results of these evaluations will be available in mid-2021.
Scholarships: During 2020, 5 PhD scholars and 1 post-doctoral
scholar from CONICET continued their work at IAA. One new PhD
scholar was incorporated to work on the subject of detection by
molecular biology of bacteriophages present in the different
Antarctic environments.
Additionally, an IAA researcher was awarded a CCAMLR
scholarship (2019-2021), and 3 scholarships from the Program for
Training and Support to Research and 2 scholarships for Work
Experience as Stimulus for Scientific Vocations for students were
awarded by the Natural Science and Museum Faculty of the
National University of La Plata. In 2020 a young IAA researcher
completed a 5 month internship at the Bioscience Division,
Functional Ecology Area at the Alfred Wegener
Institute (AWI) in Germany. It was financed by the Federal Ministry
of Education and Research of Germany (BMBF) in the framework of
a bilateral Project with the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Innovation of Argentina for IAA researchers. During her internship,
scientific data was analysed, results were discussed and an article
was prepared on the tolerance to temperature of the macroalga
species Desmarestia menziesii.
External financial support for research projects: Tasks were
continued in relation to grants awarded in previous years through
national and international financing mechanisms for an amount of
over U$S 300.000, covering the development of multi-year projects.
It is worth noting that the CoastCarb Project, “Coastal ecosystem
carbon balance in times of rapid glacier melt”, financed by the call
H2020-MSCA-RISE-2019 of the Marie Curie Actions program
(European Commission Research Executive Agency “REA”) and
formed by 105 researchers from 16 institutions from 7 countries,
including the IAA, postponed the start of field work planned for
summer 2020/21 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The first
workshop of this project, programmed for March 23rd to 27th,
2020 in Punta Arenas, Chile, was carried out in virtual format.
Scientific advisory: During 2020, IAA scientists drafted 5 scientific
advisory reports for international negotiation fora on Antarctic
affairs, which in turn generated Working and Information Papers
submitted by Argentina to SCAR, CCAMLR and the Meeting of
Administrators of Latin American National Antarctic Programs
(RAPAL).
Scientific networking: In the course of 2020, the IAA participated in
virtual format in the monthly meetings of the Interinstitutional
Council for Science and Technology (CICYT), the main institutional
forum for networking and joint work for national institutions
dedicated to science and technology in Argentina. The IAA also
took in several working commissions organized by the Ministry of
Science and Technology (MINCyT).
At the international level, the IAA participated in 2020 in the
virtual meetings of the Ad-hoc Committee Argentina-Chile on
political coordination in Antarctic Affairs, the XXXII Annual General
Meeting of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP), the XXXI RAPAL meeting, the XXXVI Meeting of
Delegates of the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR)
and the 39th CCAMLR Meeting as well as the activities of its
Scientific Committee.
Outreach activities: A Youtube channel for the IAA was created,
coordinated by the Department of Social Sciences, Communication
and Outreach. On this channel the IAA presented a documentary
series on its scientific projects, called “Laboratorio Antártida”
(Antarctica Laboratory), as well as a series on Antarctic history
called “Huellas de hielo” (Ice Footprints) and series of film material
from Antarctica recovered by the IAA in cooperation with the Film
Museum (Buenos Aires).
URL: https://www.youtube.com/channel/
UCcLZP9FacMQmckjoNhsr1Ew
The IAA has also incorporated an Instagram profile, in which it
publishes content related to scientific activities as one step further
in its social media presence and the promotion of IAA activities for
the public’s knowledge:
https://www.instagram.com/instituto_antartico_argentino/?hl=es.
In order to encourage Antarctic careers, the IAA participated in
2020 in some 50 outreach activities in different formats such as
conferences, master classes, magazine articles, television, journals,
social networks and documentaries. These activities were directed
towards equally varied audiences, including primary education
(also in rural areas), secondary school, university students and
teachers, military personnel and the general public. All of the
aforementioned activities were carried out in virtual format.
Conclusion
In a year marked by the COVID-19 pandemic, the results of the
IAA’s work in scientific production, advisory, human resources and
outreach have been satisfactory and show a trend for growth. Our
institution, which has celebrated seven decades of scientific activity
in April 2021, is committed to continuing development of quality
science in the Antarctic continent, contributing to support the
standing and interests of Argentina in the region and the position of
our country as a protagonist
