The Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
The Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Background
In 2017, the United Nations proclaimed a Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development (2021-2030) to reverse the cycle of
decline in ocean health, and globally strengthen the international
cooperation needed to develop the scientific research and
innovative technologies that can connect ocean science with the
needs of society. By gathering stakeholders worldwide, the initiative
intends to set up a common framework to ensure ocean science can
fully support countries in achieving the sustainable management of
oceans across the globe.
The vast, remote and harsh environment of the Southern Ocean
means that no single nation can sustain a research and data strategy
alone to understand and manage this region. The Southern Ocean
community of stakeholders is globally unique in its operation
within the context of the Antarctic Treaty System, which is based
on scientific understanding and environmental protection. It is
imperative to strengthen international collaborations to improve
scientific understanding of this remote region.
The Decade Societal Outcomes are strongly affiliated with the remit
of the Antarctic Treaty. The Southern Ocean community therefore
recognises the need to develop and implement a coordinated,
international plan that builds on an understanding of how human
interactions with the Southern Ocean can benefit society in ways
that will also protect and conserve the unique characteristics of this
region.
The Southern Ocean process
Based on the recommendations in the global Ocean Decade
implementation plan, the Southern Ocean community engaged in a
stakeholder-oriented process to develop the Southern Ocean Action
Plan (Figure 1).
Coordinated by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR), the Southern Ocean Task Force (currently involving SCAR,
SCAR Antarctic Biodiversity Portal, SOOS, ICED, SCOR, EPB, IODE,
IAATO, CLIVAR and PewTrusts) launched a series of workshops and
meetings to identify key research priorities for the Southern Ocean
– the first of which was held in February 2020 in San Diego (USA).
The 30 participants, from 11 countries, included individuals
representing all career stages and expertise in ocean science, policy,
governance, and science communication. The workshop provided
input for 3 of the 7 Ocean Decade Outcomes, namely a Healthy and
Resilient Ocean, a Predicted Ocean, and a Sustainable and
Productive Ocean. The full report of this first workshop can be
found here.
During the first semester of 2021, an extensive desk study was
conducted to collect information from partners’ implementation
plans as well as previous polar and Antarctic initiatives, including
the SCAR Horizon Scan, EU-PolarNet, and COMNAP Antarctic
Roadmap Challenges. This desk study generated a report of
identified strategic and scientific priorities for the Southern Ocean
which served as a basis for the Southern Ocean survey, launched in
May 2021.
In view of reaching a broad audience and engaging a maximum
number of stakeholders for the public consultation of the plan, the
Southern Task Force launched its website in April 2021 and
established a social media presence on Twitter. A newsletter was
also established to keep the community up-to-date with the latest
news and progress.
This stakeholder-oriented consultation aims to identify gaps within
the report and prioritize Southern Ocean objectives to ensure the
well-representation of all groups. Additionally, stakeholders will
provide input on the activities and contributions that should be
developed in the context of the Decade. Working Groups will then
be set up for each of the Decade’s Societal Outcomes. Here,
Antarctic challenges will be identified to
develop concrete strategies to achieve the Decade’s mission. The
input from each Working Group will be synthesised into a Draft
Southern Ocean Action Plan, which will then be jointly consulted
by all stakeholders.
The process will culminate at the Second Southern Ocean Regional
Workshop, to be held from 20-22 September 2021 in The Hague
(NL) Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the format of the second
workshop might be adjusted and transformed into a (semi-) online
set-up., which will bring forward a community consensus on how
the Southern Ocean community will engage within the Ocean
Decade Framework. Following the 2nd Workshop, the Task Force
will review and finalize the Southern Ocean Action Plan.
The 2nd Southern Ocean Regional Workshop will be co-located and
co-organised with the 4th Polar Data Forum (PDF IV) which will
focus on polar oceans (22-24 September 2021). This will enable
PDF IV to be aligned with the launch of the UN Decade of Ocean
Science and support its activities in the Southern Ocean.
The development process of the Southern Ocean Action Plan aims
to engage a broad community spanning from the scientific research
community, to the business and industry sector, and governance
and management bodies. Through this combined effort, we will
identify synergies in priorities over the next decade and identify
tangible actions and deliverables to achieve these priorities as a
community.
Figure 1 The Southern Ocean Process (https://www.sodecade.org/
southern-ocean-process/)
The Southern Ocean Task Force for the UN Ocean Decade invites
Parties to contribute to the Southern Ocean Process and to spread
the word about the initiative. Anyone interested in being informed
of activities and progress of the Southern Ocean community
contribution to the UN Ocean Decade should subscribe to the
newsletter.
