Antarctic Publications by Turkish Scientists (2020/2021 Update)
Antarctic Publications by Turkish Scientists (2020/2021 Update)
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents up to date information on the scientific
publications on the Antarctic by Turkish scientists for the
2020/2021 season.
Background
Turkey has been progressing in polar sciences in line with the goals
of the National Polar Science Program 2018-2022. To this aim, five
Antarctic expeditions were organized since 2017. These expeditions
hosted many scientists with individual scientific projects from
different disciplines. As a result of the conducted projects, scientific
publications have been published for sharing the obtained
knowledge from the White Continent.
Publications
The number of scientific publications on the Antarctic published by
Turkish scientists, which are supported by Turkish Antarctic
Expeditions, since the announcement of the National Polar Science
Program 2018-2022 is shown in Figure 1. As seen in the figure, an
increasing momentum has been observed in terms of contribution to
the polar sciences literature. These articles were published in SCI
journals such as Polar Science, Marine Policy, Climate Dynamics,
Advances in Polar Science, Advances in Atmospheric Sciences,
Geomicrobiology Journal, Polar Biology, Quaternary Science
Advances, Antarctic Science, Lithos and Czech Polar Reports. It
should be noted that the conducted studies in Antarctica mainly
involve fieldwork and the finalization of these studies in
laboratories may take years after the expeditions. Therefore, it is
expected that the number of publications will increase through the
following years.
Figure 1. The number of publications since 2017 to present.
The dominancy of the life sciences is evident when these
publications are categorized according to the scientific disciplines of
SCAR (Figure 2). This is interpreted as a result of the intense
interest shown by scientists studying life sciences to project calls
and hence to Antarctic expeditions. For the other scientific
disciplines, a balanced distribution is observed. In addition to these
publications, 7 undergraduate thesis, 15
master thesis and 2 doctoral dissertations on polar sciences have
been completed in Turkish universities since 2017.
Figure 2. Distribution of publications according to the four SCAR
scientific disciplines.
Conclusion
Following the goals of the National Polar Science Program
2018-2022, Turkey has been increasing polar research activities and
thus contributing to the polar science literature. However, the
Covid-19 pandemic has impacted the polar research activities
worldwide, and it is expected that it will negatively affect the
number of publications for the following years as well.
