Chilean Antarctic Science Program (PROCIEN) and challenges of the
2020-2025 Five-Year Plan
English version provided by the author
Chilean Antarctic Science Program (PROCIEN) and challenges of the
2020-2025 Five-Year Plan
Background
The Chilean Antarctic Science Program (PROCIEN) of the Chilean
Antarctic Institute (INACH), is composed of the projects that it
finances, organizes, coordinates and executes directly or in support
of other agencies in the country. Scientific activity comes from a
variety of public, transparent and international peer-reviewed
competitive funds.
On the 25th anniversary of the National Funding for Antarctic
Scientific and Technological Research Projects of the INACH, one of
the fundings with the longest tradition in polar science, the country
shows a stable scientific development over time, mature in terms of
its scientific productivity and in constant renewal in terms of the
number of researchers that make up the national Antarctic
community.
As of September 2020, PROCIEN includes 87 research projects,
which mainly include initiatives financed by INACH and the
National Research and Development Agency (ANID), as well as
other international cooperation projects.
Chilean Antarctic science presents clear strengths in the study and
understanding of the polar environment and its surroundings under
the climate change scenario, its physical and biological dimensions,
past, present, and (modeling) future scenarios, and social and
humanities studies to understand the national Antarctic identity.
Thus, INACH maintains seven research lines, aligned with the
priorities of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR):
(i) The state of the Antarctic ecosystem, (ii) Antarctic thresholds:
ecosystem resilience and adaptation, (iii) Climate change in
Antarctica, (iv) Astronomy and Earth Sciences, (v) Biotechnology,
(vi) Human Footprints in Antarctica and (vii) Social Sciences and
Humanities.
PROCIEN numbers:
78 researchers lead 2020 PROCIEN’s research projects;
22 Chilean national institutions are involved (INACH included);
327 personnel make up the PROCIEN network and community,
including principal researchers (PI) and their collaborators;
43 years old is the mean age of PIs ;
72.4 % of the projects involve fieldwork and 27.6 % are office/
laboratory-based;
INACH 61 % of the projects (53) were funded through INACH´s two
funding programs and 31% of the projects (27) were funded
through ANID’s 5 funding programs;
8 % of the projects received funding from other sources, national (1
project) or international (6 projects);
INACH transferred to national institutions a sum of $M 648.237;
ANID is expected to transfer a sum of $M 2.117.-
The cost of logistical support is added to these amounts, not
included in these ciphers;
Ten years of PROCIEN´s science
Changes in the development of Chilean Antarctic science since 2005
have had a positive impact on PROCIEN's scientific productivity.
The number of Antarctic scientific publications have gradually
increased from 21 articles in 2009 to 95 articles in 2019.
The analysis of scientometric indicators of articles produced by
Chile between 2009-2019, a total of 541 Antarctic publications with
authorship belonging to Chilean institutions were published in WoS
journals. Chilean scientists published in 221 journals during this
period. The journals with most publications were: Polar Biology
(13.88%), Antarctic Science (4.13%), PLoS ONE (3.38%) and
Revista Chilena de Historia Natural (3.11%). Other journals hosts
less than 2% of publications. The number of publications increased
significantly
throughout the period with an increase rate of 8 articles per year.
The research lines associated with the state of the Antarctic
ecosystem, biotechnology and geosciences produced the largest
number of studies, and the research line on climate change in
Antarctica published more studies in journals with the highest
impact factor.
The increase in the number of articles was greater in the first
quartile Q1 impact factor journals. Research lines with an increase
in articles in Q1 correspond to Antarctic ecosystems, biotechnology
and geosciences, and a similar trend was observed in the total of
citations. During the period analyzed, the Antarctic ecosystems and
biotechnology lines contributed the highest number of articles in all
quartiles. The Social Sciences and Humanities research line had the
least number of articles since it is a recently incorporated line. The
increase in the number of publications was greater in the journals
belonging to the first quartile (Q1). Most of the studies received
support from more than one source, demonstrating the high
diversification of Chile's financing.
Most PROCIEN fieldwork studies have been developed in the South
Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. Fieldwork data was
the main source of scientific article production, while Escudero,
O'Higgins and Arctowski (Poland) research stations concentrated
most of the work. The diversification of funding sources, the
implementation of improvements in the peer review mechanisms of
the selection process and the alignment of Chile with the SCAR
programs have contributed to improve Chilean Antarctic science.
However, it is necessary to improve the efficiency in the use of big
data (for example, databases and information produced by satellites
or remote sensors). In addition, an increase in the production of
oceanographic data is expected with the incorporation of a new
icebreaker. The addition of renovations at Chilean research stations
will also significantly improve the scope of Chilean Antarctic
science over the next three decades to contribute to the study of
climate change in the Antarctic Peninsula.
International cooperation
A network analysis revealed that 72 countries collaborated with
Chilean PROCIEN projects. A total of 24 countries participated in
10 or more publications, grouped in 5 clusters. The most important
countries in each cluster (besides Chile) were the United States, the
United Kingdom, Germany, France, Spain, and Australia. In
addition, changes in the network map over time show more intense
collaboration between 2012-2017. Papers with co-authors from the
USA constituted the main contribution, followed by four European
countries (Germany, France, United Kingdom, Spain) and two South
American countries (Brazil and Argentina). This phenomenon is the
product of the use of competitive funds that encourage the linking
and strengthening of global research networks. From the total, 44%
of the projects had international scientists in their teams. Therefore,
148 foreign researchers are participating in PROCIEN, from
Germany, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Korea, Denmark, United States, Spain, France, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
Norway, New Zealand, French Polynesia, Poland, Czech Republic,
Russia, South Africa, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
Challenge to the INACH’s Strategic for 2020-2025
To continue strengthening PROCIEN's quality science indicators, it
is necessary to face different challenges. One of these is the
modernization of the scientific infrastructure administered by
INACH in Antarctica. The scientific station remodeling program
consists of two stages: design and execution. Currently, the design
stage that is being carried out has allowed dimensioning the spaces
and basic requirements for habitability, scientific infrastructure, and
operation for these new bases. This program has a duration of 10
years and will allow the modernization of the main scientific
stations of the country: Prof. Julio Escudero, Yelcho and Carvajal.
On the other hand, the pandemic has caused a delay in the progress
of the construction of the new Oscar Viel icebreaker ship, with an
estimated delivery date of 2024. This new icebreaker will increase
the logistical and scientific capacities to carry out oceanographic
studies. Currently, work is being done on the design of the
laboratory spaces and infrastructure, for their subsequent
acquisition.
Another major challenge is the digital connectivity of Antarctica. In
this sense, we can report that the Austral Fiber Optic (FOA) project
has been concluded and allowed the connection of the southern
part of Chile, culminating in the arrival of the FOA to the city of
Puerto Williams in Navarino Island. The extension of this
infrastructure towards Antarctica would allow to increase the
coverage of data transmission and help to make up for the low
satellite coverage and the absence of high-speed data flow that
today affects the area of the Antarctic Peninsula, technological gaps
and challenges that have been detected by COMNAP and SCAR.
Currently, the project of the International Antarctic Center of the
city of Punta Arenas is being evaluated by the central government
for the financing of its construction. Meanwhile, INACH continues
working and developing scientific-educational content that allows
the further development of this project.
Finally, Chile is currently working on the development and
installation of a decentralized sensor network - from Visviri in the
north, to Antarctica in the south, covering 8,000 km - that is part of
the Climate Change Observatory promoted by the Chilean
Government and that will make it possible to understand, predict
and project the effects, risks and threats of changes of the
ecosystems. This collaborative work is carried out between the
ministries of Foreign Affairs; Science, Technology, Knowledge and
Innovation; Environment; Defense and Transport and
Telecommunications.
