Using treated wastewater for hydroponic cultivation of vegetables
in the Antarctic
Using treated wastewater for hydroponic cultivation of vegetables
in the Antarctic
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal and Bulgaria
Summary
Here we describe the development of a process for treatment of
wastewater for the production of a nutrient solution for use in
Antarctic hydroponic systems.
Introduction
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
states that activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area shall be planned
and conducted to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and to avoid
significant adverse effects on air and water quality (Article 3).
Challenges in wastewater treatment in the Antarctic have been
recognized, exacerbated by a lack of local technical expertise that
would be available in most other areas in the World (ATCM XXV
IP51, ATCM XXIX IP60, ATCM XXXVIII IP74). The CEP, Parties and
the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
have shared information on wastewater treatment, emphasized the
need for monitoring in areas near sewage treatment plants and
acknowledged the value of information sharing on environmental
challenges and solutions (ATCM XXV IP51, ATCMXXXVIII IP74,
ATCM XXXIX BP8, ATCM XL IP38).
Hydroponic cultivation systems have been considered an alternative
biological technology for the reuse of wastewater and nutrient
recovery without the environmental consequences of traditional
cultivation methods (Prazeres et al., 2017). With the introduction of
non-sterile soil to the Antarctic Treaty area prohibited under the
Protocol, hydroponic cultivation systems have proven to be a viable
alternative option for in-situ food production.  Here we report the
development of a process whereby wastewater is treated by
chemical precipitation for the subsequent production of hydroponic
nutrient solutions. The process was tested at the Bulgarian Antarctic
Base, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands (Correia et al.,
2020).
Wastewater treatment system
A recent study (see: Correia et al. (2020) has developed a low-cost
process for wastewater treatment that produces nutrient solutions
for hydroponic cultivation of fresh foods on Antarctic stations. The
wastewater treatment system involved the manual addition and
mixing of lime, to generate a high pH solution and kill pathogenic
microorganisms. The pH of the nutrient solution is then reduced by
bubbling through air (which contains atmospheric CO2) to make it
suitable for plant cultivation.
Lime is widely available and inexpensive, the use of air to reduce
the alkalinity the lime solution is a relatively simply process, and
the manual agitation of the solution allows it to be performed
where energy supply and specialized equipment are not readily
available. The resulting nutrient solution had macronutrient values
(nitrogen and phosphorous) below the values of commercially
available nutrient solutions and pH of 8.0, but was still suitable for
lettuce production. The treatment also removed all coliform
bacteria, thereby reducing risks associated with pathogens (Correia
et al., 2020).
Testing of the new system on the Bulgarian Antarctic Base using the
nutrient solution generated from wastewater was successful and
supported the growth of four lettuce plants during the 14 days that
the system was fully operational in February 2019. The plants’
lengths increased by an average of 11%, the diameter by 50%, the
number of leaves by 46%, and we observed a 62% increase in
weight (Figure 1).
A
B
A
B
Figure 1. Lettuce plants aerial size on day 0 (A) and day 14 (B) of
cultivation tests at the Bulgarian Antarctic Base.
The process described here had several benefits:
It can reduce the quantity of wastewater released into the Antarctic
environment.
It is technically simple and is largely unaffected by temperature
changes and variable input loads (Semerjian & Ayoub, 2003).
Reusing treated wastewater as nutrient solution in hydroponic
cultivation systems reduces the need for importation of commercial
nutrient solutions thereby reducing the importation of chemicals
and use of precious freshwater supplies.
In summary, this study has provided preliminary data which
demonstrates that lime-treated and air neutralized wastewater can
be successfully used to cultivate fresh foods. Following further
exotoxicological and plant growth studies, the system could be
scaled up for use in larger hydroponic cultivation facilities within
Antarctica, or other remote locations.
References
Bamsey, M. T., Zabel, P., Zeidler, C., Gyimesi, D., Schubert, D.,
Kohlberg, E., Mengedoht, D., Rae, J., & Graham, T. (2015). Review
of Antarctic Greenhouses and Plant Production Facilities : A
Historical Account of Food Plants on the Ice. 45th International
Conference on Environmental Systems, July, 1–36.
Correia, T., Regato, M., Almeida, A., Santos, T., Amaral, L., &
Carvalho, F. (2020). Manual treatment of urban wastewater by
chemical precipitation for production of hydroponic nutrient
solutions. Journal of Ecological Engineering, 21(3), 143–152.
https://doi.org/10.12911/22998993/118286
Prazeres, A. R., Albuquerque, A., Luz, S., Jerónimo, E., & Carvalho,
F. (2017). Hydroponic System: A Promising Biotechnology for Food
Production and Wastewater Treatment. In A. Grumezescu & A.-M.
Holban (Eds.), Food Biosynthesis (1st ed., pp. 317–350). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/10.1016/C2016-0-00180-8
Semerjian, L., & Ayoub, G. M. (2003). High-pH–magnesium
coagulation–flocculation in wastewater treatment. Advances in
Environmental Research, 7(2), 389–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1093-0191(02)00009-6
