Second Edition of the Wildlife Awareness Manual
Second Edition of the Wildlife Awareness Manual
Information paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Germany and
IAATO
Summary
This Information Paper is submitted by the United Kingdom,
Germany and the International Association of Antarctica Tour
Operators (IAATO), to inform Parties about the publication of the
Second Edition of the Wildlife Awareness Manual.
The Wildlife Awareness Manual
Production of the First Edition of the Wildlife Awareness Manual
(WAM) (published 2006) was an initiative undertaken by the
United Kingdom, in recognition of the potential for helicopters to
disturb wildlife in Antarctica. Helicopters typically operate at lower
elevations than fixed-wing aircraft and also have greater flexibility
in where they can land.
The WAM provides aircraft pilots operating in the Antarctic
Peninsula, South Shetland Islands, and South Orkney Islands with a
practical guide to the main wildlife breeding site locations in a form
suitable for field use. The manual enables pilots to plan and fly
missions avoiding, as far as practical, sites of elevated wildlife
sensitivity.
The Second Edition (2021)
The First Edition of the WAM found a broader audience than
originally anticipated, including with scientists, tourists, expedition
leaders and station personnel. This new Second Edition was jointly
commissioned by the United Kingdom, Germany and IAATO with
the aim of supporting this broader audience.
While still focused on its primary purpose of providing guidance for
helicopter pilots, the Second Edition also includes a wider range of
information that will be of use to other users. Additional
information is included on sites with Visitor Site Guidelines,
Important Bird Areas, and hydrography (recognising that most users
are likely to be ship-based).
In this new edition the base maps have been comprehensively
revised, with more detail provided on wildlife, offshore islands,
topography and geographical names. New maps have been included
for a number of areas not previously covered, and new protected
areas have been added. The second edition also includes some
guidance on the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
near wildlife.
The WAM refers users to the Guidelines for the Operators of Aircraft
Near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica (Resolution 2 (2004)) as
well as the Environmental Guidelines for Operation of Remotely
Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (v1.1) (Resolution 4
(2018)) and COMNAP’s Antarctic Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) Operator’s Handbook (v.25 Oct 2019).
The Second Edition of the WAM will be available on the website of
Environmental Research and Assessment (ERA) Ltd. (http://
www.era.gs/resources/wam/).
