Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2020–21
Japan’s Antarctic Research Highlights 2020–21
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in the Japanese Antarctic
Syowa Station area, three topics are introduced; (1) High-resolution
observations of the Antarctic atmosphere with the PANSY radar and
complementary instruments; (2) Start of year-round observation of
precipitation in the vicinity of Syowa Station using precipitation
radar; (3) Demonstration of the Antarctic Mobile Base Unit during
the Antarctic winter.
Introduction
The headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(JARE), Japan’s national Antarctic program, was established in
1955 by the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (now the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, or
MEXT). The headquarters comprises departments and agencies of
various government ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defense;
the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The scientific
research and observation programs of JARE are considered and
adopted as midterm research plans at general meetings of the
headquarters.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from
scientific projects carried out by overwintering and summer
members of the 61st and 62nd JAREs, respectively, at and around
Syowa Station (69°00′ S, 39°35′ E) during the 2020-21 season.
Although there was a significant reduction in the number of
scientists and projects in the summer activities in the 2020-21
Antarctic season because of precautionary measures against the
COVID-19 pandemic, the JARE 62nd wintering team is conducting
as many year-around science projects at Syowa Station as in
previous winters.
Selected Research Highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering
JARE personnel at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal observations
are also carried out by summer expedition personnel aboard the
Shirase of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force for oceanographic
observations and in the vicinity of Syowa Station.
High-resolution observations of the Antarctic atmosphere with the
PANSY radar and complementary instruments
A study on the global atmosphere system based on high-resolution
observations of the Antarctic atmosphere is subtheme 1 of the
prioritized project of JARE’s term IX (2016-2022) which was
planned and lead by the headquarters of JARE. This project aims at
understanding the atmospheric teleconnection in the vertical and
meridional (i.e., inter-hemispheric) through intensive observations
with the large-aperture atmospheric radar PANSY (Program of the
ANtarctic SYowa Mesosphere, Stratosphere, and Troposphere/
Incoherent Scatter [MST/IS] Radar), resonance scatter lidar,
millimeter-wave radiometer, etc. at Syowa Station and the
international observation network composed of radars, lidars,
imagers, etc. from the Antarctic to the Arctic.
The PANSY radar has continued its standard observation of the
troposphere, stratosphere, and mesosphere, which reached 5 years
with the full system and 9 years with the partial system. The 6th
Inter-hemispheric Coupling Study by Observations and Modeling
(ICSOM6; see http://pansy.eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/icsom/) campaign
was successfully conducted from December 26, 2020, to January
20, 2021. The ICSOM6 campaign was based on a combination of
GCM simulations and simultaneous observations by several MST/IS
radars around the world, including PANSY (Fig. 1), with some
complementary instruments at Syowa Station, such as medium-
frequency (MF) and meteor radars, lidars, imagers, etc. This
campaign was approved as a project for ROSMIC (Role Of the Sun
and the Middle atmosphere/thermosphere/ionosphere In Climate)
of the Scientific Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP)
under the International Science Council (ISC). International
collaborative studies based on the four ICSOM campaigns are
ongoing.
Figure 1. Global MST/IS radar network participating in the ICSOM6
campaign.
Start of year-round observation of precipitation in the vicinity of
Syowa Station using precipitation radar
In order to clarify the amount of precipitation near Syowa Station
as well as fluctuations and changes in precipitation clouds and
blizzards, precipitation radar units were installed at Syowa Station
in January 2021, and radar observations have been caried out.
On December 30, 2020, work on the construction of the radome
(6.1 m in diameter and 3.7 m in height) to house the precipitation
radar units began, and the assembly of the radome itself was mostly
completed on January 14, 2021. After that, the assembly of the two
radar units and a rotation test were conducted, then the radar
transmission and reception tests were successfully carried out at the
end of January. Since this precipitation radar comprises two X-band
Doppler radars, one scanning horizontally and the other vertically
at the same time, it is expected to provide information on the three-
dimensional structure of clouds and the changes in structure from
the onset to the disappearance of wind-driven phenomena such as
ground snowstorms and blizzards. In the coming two winters,
continuous year-around observation by radar is planned.
Figure 2. Assembly of the radome of the precipitation radar at
Syowa Station.
Demonstration of the Antarctic Mobile Base Unit during the
Antarctic winter
The Antarctica Mobile Station Unit (AMSU) is a residential unit
built based on the joint project of the Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency (JAXA), the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR),
Misawa Homes Co. Ltd. (Misawa Homes), and Misawa Homes
Institute of Research and Development (MHIRD), aiming at
developing a sustainable housing system that withstands the
extreme environment at Syowa Station in Antarctica, from February
2020. The AMSU was brought to Antarctica, and during the
wintering period, two residential units on a sledge were connected
and assembled into one base unit to conduct demonstration tests of
(1) flexible expansion and contraction of the structure, (2)
optimization of energy use, and (3) monitoring using sensors. The
demonstration experiments were conducted by the JARE 61st
wintering team during 2020 and will be continued by the JARE
62nd wintering team. After the completion of the demonstration
experiments, the AMSU will be transported to Dome Fuji in the
Antarctic plateau, at an altitude of 3,800 meters, where it is
planned to be used as a living space for up to 18 people for the 3rd
Dome Fuji Deep Ice Core Drilling Project.
Figure 3. Completion of assembling test of the Antarctica Mobile
Station Unit (AMSU).
Figure 4. Two covered AMSU residential units on a sledge.
