Time-lapse camera monitoring of species in the Antarctic Treaty
area
Time-lapse camera monitoring of species in the Antarctic Treaty
area
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom presents a summary of remote camera
monitoring in the Antarctic Treaty Area and workflows for raw data
processing into policy-ready summaries.
Background
Many of the species in decline around the world are subject to
different environmental stressors across their range, so large-scale
monitoring programmes, with replication of sites, are necessary to
disentangle the relative impacts of these stressors. This is certainly
true of the Antarctic Treaty area, where threats overlap, particularly
on the Antarctic Peninsula.
For those sites where a single vantage point can be used to observe
individuals or ecological processes, time-lapse cameras can provide
a cost-effective way of collecting time series data. This can be
replicated at variable spatial scales that would otherwise be
impossible with conventional monitoring approaches. Such targets
include penguin and shag colonies, seal breeding beaches, fine scale
sea-ice monitoring and glacial monitoring sites.
Networks of time-lapse cameras covering such a range of species or
processes creates a problem in that the scale of data collection
generates a significant overhead for processing the raw imagery.
Citizen science and machine learning provide solutions to scaling
data extraction and analysis (such as locating all animals in an
image). Within Antarctica, several such citizen science projects now
exist including Penguin Watch, Happy Whale, Weddell Seal Count,
and Seal Watch (launching soon).
Camera Networks
Camera networks are now employed (for example) by the
Australian Antarctic Division, Antarctica New Zealand and by
members of the CEMP camera network.
A UK camera network, currently running out of Oxford University,
operates and maintains 95 cameras located on terrestrial sites
around the coastline of the Southern Ocean, with 60 sites in the
Antarctic Treaty area. Each camera captures images once per hour
during daylight hours year-round. Data collection from such
networks is now routine, with the network’s ability to collect data
far outstripping its ability to process all the useful information from
it.
Steps for effective camera monitoring
Data collection: A number of camera networks have now been
established following the pioneering work of the Australian
Antarctic Division1,2, meaning that the data collection step is now
routinely used, although opportunities exist to increase data
collection. However, no standard repository for such high volume
data exists and may be necessary for continent-wide studies.
Processing: Three possibilities exist; researcher-extraction3, citizen
science4, computer vision5 – or a combination of all three6. The
ability of existing computer vision tools to identify penguins should
in turn encourage researchers to be much bolder in their data
collection.
Analysis: Methods of analysis are highly dependent upon individual
research questions, from mark recapture to movement analysis7.
Many parameter estimates, such as first arrival, will not be
consistent between studies and will require standard definitions to
allow consistent long-term monitoring between sites, some of which
have already been proposed3. Open access data are available4,6
that will enable the further development of such standard measures
and cross-validation of studies.
Interpretation: To be useful at the continental scale, there is a need
for a general repository of sites, metadata and summary data.
Conclusion
The processes to enable mass processing of image data are well-
developed, at least for most Antarctic penguin species, and there is
substantial progress in the development of equivalent processes for
seals and other seabirds. There is also scope for much more data to
be collected on traditionally sensitive and hard to monitor species
such as shags. Additionally, the frequency of monitoring could be
increased so that environmentally sensitive behaviour could be
monitored.
Cited Literature
1 Newbery, K. & Southwell, C. An automated camera system for
remote monitoring in polar environments. Cold Regions Science and
Technology 55, 47-51, doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2008.06.001
(2009).
2 Southwell, C. & Emmerson, L. Remotely-operating camera
network expands Antarctic seabird observations of key breeding
parameters for ecosystem monitoring and management. J Nat
Conserv 23, 1-8, doi:10.1016/j.jnc.2014.11.002 (2015).
3 Hinke, J. T. et al. Estimating nest-level phenology and
reproductive success of colonial seabirds using time-lapse cameras.
Methods Ecol Evol 9, 1853-1863, doi:10.1111/2041-210x.13015
(2018).
4 Jones, F. M. et al. Time-lapse imagery and volunteer
classifications from the Zooniverse Penguin Watch project. Sci Data
5, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.124 (2018).
5 Arteta, C., Lempitsky, V. & Zisserman, A. in European conference
on computer vision. 483-498 (Springer).
6 Jones, F. et al. Processing citizen science- and machine –
annotated time-lapse imagery for biologically meaningful metrics.
Sci Data, doi:10.1038/s41597-020-0442-6 (2020).
7 Zitterbart, D. P., Wienecke, B., Butler, J. P. & Fabry, B.
Coordinated movements prevent jamming in an emperor penguin
huddle. PLoS one 6 (2011).
8 Humphries, G. et al. Mapping Application for Penguin Populations
and Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD): Data and tools for dynamic
management and decision support. 53, 160-166 (2017).
