Detection and eradication of a non-native Lepidoptera incursion in
a food deposit at Carlini Station
Detection and eradication of a non-native Lepidoptera incursion in
a food deposit at Carlini Station
Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Germany
Summary
On December 9, 2020, specimens of a non-native species (insect)
were detected in the food storage facilities of the Dallmann
Laboratory. During the first observations, it was determined that
the stored flour contained different stages of the life cycle (eggs,
larvae, pupae and adults) of these insects, but they had also
reproduced and colonized the whole facility. Based on this finding,
the scientific staff and personnel from the Environmental
Management and Tourism Program (PGAyT) of the National
Antarctic Directorate (DNA) applied the pre-established Response
Protocol for implementation upon discovery of a potential non-
native species introduced inadvertently to the Antarctic Treaty area
(Response Protocol - 2019): immediate response, immediate
eradication. For long-term eradication and continuous monitoring,
information was forwarded to the German Environment Agency
(UBA).
Non-Native Species Detection
On December 09, 2020, the presence of specimens of a possible
non-native species of insect (Lepidoptera) in different stages of its
life cycle, was detected at the Grocery Depot facilities of the
Dallmann Laboratory at Carlini Station (GPS coordinates -62.23,
-58.66). Immediately the scientific staff of the Argentine Antarctic
Institute (IAA) brought the episode to the attention of the DNA's
PGAyT staff to coordinate the measures to be taken. The scientific
staff were made aware of the provisions of the Response Protocol
(2019) and caution was taken, until further information was
obtained, to consider the species observed as NNS and therefore to
apply the aforementioned protocol.
This decision was based on the fact that, as established in the
document ATCM33_att011, there are no winged insects native to
continental Antarctica but that there is a high probability of transfer
of winged insects by means of human activities. As stated in the
mentioned document, winged insects will probably survive in
Antarctica for more than a few days if they are in research station
buildings.
As a first measure, the origin of the appearance of this NNS was
established. The scientific staff verified that the most significant
presence was found in some bags of flour located in the depot
(Figure 1). On the other hand, it was determined that specimens
(adults, pupae, larvae and eggs) were only observed within the
depot, and that they were not recorded in other dependencies or in
the surroundings of the station.
Immediate Response
PGAyT staff requested station personnel to collect all information
set out in the Response Protocol. Photographs (Figure 2) of the
specimens were received and this material was immediately sent to
scientific staff of the Patagonian National Center (CENPAT) in the
city of Puerto Madryn (Argentina), who through consultations with
specialists determined provisionally that it was the species Ephestia
kuehniella (Zeller, 1879) (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae) known as The
Flour Moth. Given the association with a food product, a
consultation was carried out with the scientific and technical staff
of the National Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) at their
Río Gallegos Office in the Province of Santa Cruz (Argentina), who
determined that it was the aforementioned species.
Both assessments were made with the photographic material
provided and are therefore taken as provisional. To obtain the final
classification, station personnel have preserved material in their
different stages to be sent
to specialists in Lepidoptera and thus obtain the final classification.
The preservation of the material was carried out in accordance with
the Response Protocol established by the specialists.
The general characteristics allowed to deterimine that it belongs to
Lepidoptera, widely distributed in all temperate, tropical and
subtropical regions across the planet. Very harmful because it
destroys flours, its favourite food, also attacks stored grains, bran,
cookies, chestnuts, nuts, chocolate, dried fruits, meat and bee hive
wax. Adults are moths with a wingspan of 18 to 25 mm. The fore
wings are plump grey, crisscrossed by dark zig-zag lines and there
are also some apparent dark maculas. The hind wings are greyish
white, bordered with visible hairs (Urretabizcaya, Vasicek and
Saini, 2010).
Eggs are laid on or near the food of future larvae in a number of
approximately 200; a week later these hatch and at their maximum
development reach 15 mm, they are whitish or pink; both in the
protorax and in the last uromera they show a darker coloration than
in the rest of the body. After weaving the cocoon, they remain in
that state for 10 to 15 days. It takes them 8 to 10 weeks to reach
adult status (Urretabizcaya, Vasicek and Saini, 2010).
Immediate Eradication
Based on consultations with CENPAT and INTA specialists and
confirmation of NNS status, the station´s scientific staff was told
what immediate measures were necessary for eradication. In this
way, all packages of flour contaminated with the presence of the
moth were introduced into closed bags to ensure that they do not
continue to colonize the depot. The entire depot was then cleaned
and disinfected by collecting all the material and put it in the bags
along with the contaminated flour bags for further incineration
(Figure 3).
To ensure the elimination of all specimens and stages of the ENN,
the depot's heating was shut down for more than a month so as to
achieve the drastic decrease of the temperature of the site below the
known values for the survival of the specimens of this species
(Pakyari et al, 2018). The specialists consulted suggested that this
was the most environmentally appropriate measure as it did not
involve the use of chemicals (insecticides) and therefore the
environmental impact was non-significant (Annex I of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol)).
The specialists consulted ensured that at a temperature below 7 to
10°C, the species does not develop its life cycle and would therefore
affect the specimens of this species present in the depot. For this
reason, it was decided to extend the shutdown of the depot's
heating for more than a month to ensure the full effect of the
measure. This thermal stress was considered especially sufficient to
eliminate, the eggs and larvae found in the depot. As for adults it is
considered that there is no oviposition at less than 7°C and the
latest published results indicate that the lower limit for immature
stages is 9°C (Pakyari et al, 2018).
Finally, the collection and introduction into bags of all
contaminated flour packages plus all specimens collected inside the
depot (and their subsequent incineration), together with the
disinfection and cleaning of the facilities and finally to the control
of the biological cycle by lowering the temperature below the
known values for the species, ensured the immediate eradication of
the NNS through measures with an appropriate level of
environmental impact as required by Annex I of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. To date, no other
specimens have been found again.
Long-term eradication
From what is suggested by specialists and the implemented
measures (collection, cleaning, incineration and temperature drop),
these actions are feasible in the medium and long term to ensure
the eradication of the found NNS. In case the presence of this
species might become recurrent in the depot, INTA staff has
suggested the use of some insecticides that are commonly used for
this species. However, depending on continuous measures of low or
no environmental impact, the use of chemicals will not be
implemented until it is verified that the species has not been able to
be disposed of efficiently.
For additional control, a periodic monitoring of the facilities and
the environment is undertaken to determine the effectiveness of the
eradication measures, particularly cautious for remaining eggs as
these could cause the recurrence of the species. If eradication did
not achieve satisfactory results, further eradication efforts or,
alternatively, permanent control and biosecurity measures will be
considered.
As a result of this event, control and biosecurity measures will be
coordinated with the German Environmental Agency in the
reception and subsequent storage of foodstuffs to try to ensure that
the species is not reintroduced at the station.
Based on consultations with INTA personnel in Argentina UBA in
Germany was informed about the following long-term control
measures are established, considering that it is not possible to
detect the presence of eggs in the flour in advance:
Use of an anti-aphid mesh to prevent dissemination within the
warehouse.
Installation of chromatic traps to attract adults, preventing their
dissemination and functioning as an early warning for the presence
of this or other insect species.
Control and monitoring of the areas and buildings surrounding the
Dallmann Laboratory to ensure that no specimens of this species are
observed.
Conclusions
Non-native species discovered in the Antarctic Treaty Area may be
imported anthropogenic species (associated with human activities).
According to Annex II of the Protocol, human-introduced species
must be eradicated, while natural populations and long-term
residents must be protected.
The detection at Carlini Station of a possible and then confirmed
allochthonous species (Ephestia kuehniella), was notified to the
national authorities and this allowed coordinating the necessary
tasks for an immediate response, immediate eradication,
preservation and identification of specimens, long-term eradication
and monitoring and control of the detection site. The main task is
the establishment of mitigation measures to be incorporated into
logistical procedures to avoid the reintroduction of this or other
food-associated species.
Bibliography
Pakyari, H., Amir-Maafi, M., Moghadamfar, Z., & Zalucki, M.
(2019). Estimating development and temperature thresholds of
Ephestia kuehniella: toward improving a mass production system.
Bulletin of entomological research, 109(4), 435-442.
Urretabizcaya, N, Vasicek, A y Saini, E. (2010). Insectos
perjudiciales de interés agropecuario: 1. Lepidópteros. Buenos Aires,
INTA Ediciones.
Figure 1: packages of flour containing the specimens of Flour Moths
in the Dallmann depot.
Figure 1: packages of flour containing the specimens of Flour Moths
in the Dallmann depot.
Figure 2: specimens of the non-native species found in the Dallmann
laboratory depot.
Figure 2: specimens of the non-native species found in the Dallmann
laboratory depot.
Figure 3: presence of different stages in the tank material.
Figure 3: presence of different stages in the tank material.
