Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of
activities during the 2019/21 intersessional period
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of
activities during the 2019/21 intersessional period
Information Paper submitted by the CEP Chair
Summary
The 22nd meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP XXII) was held in Prague, Czech Republic, from 1 to 5 July
2019. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities
arising from CEP XXII, as identified in CEP Circular: 1 / CEP XXIII.
Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to
CEP XXIII are provided. It should be noted that i) the global
covid-19 pandemic has impacted work and progress on some tasks
and ii) Members have been encouraged to show restraint in
submitting papers and proposals on lower priority issues at CEP
XXIII.
Priority*
Action
Report Para #
CEP Member/Observer
Related papers to CEP XXII / comments
Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations
Dr Antonio Quesada (Spain), Dr Polly Penhale (United States) to
represent the CEP at COMNAP XXXI and SC-CAMLR XXXVIII
respectively.
29
Spain and United Sates
The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as
follows: COMNAP XXXI – Dr Quesada (Spain); SC-CAMLR XXXVIII –
Dr Penhale (United States).
Note that COMNAP XXXII and CAMLR XXXIV were held virtually in
2020 without nominated CEP representation present.
Agenda Item 6. Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2: Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Continued work on development of new techniques or guidelines
for repair and remediation in context of Clean-Up manual.
5YWP
All Members
2: Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Brazil to provide an update of the incident with a Brazilian
container (cf. IP 118 [2019]) at CEP XXIII.
35
Brazil
Agenda Item 7: Climate Change Implications for the Environment:
Implementation and Review of the CCRWP
1: Climate change implications for the environment
The SGCCR to continue work in accordance with its Terms of
Reference, as well as applying the updated format for the CCRWP to
relevant climate issues within the Climate Change Response Work
Program (CCRWP).
52-53
5YWP
SGCCR
WP014 Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change
Response (SGCCR) 2019-2021 (United Kingdom)– submitted under
CEP 7b
1: Climate change implications for the environment
Consider status of implementation of actions arising from 2016 joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop.
5YWP
All Members
1: Climate change implications for the environment
SCAR to update ACCE report, with input as appropriate from WMO,
ICED and SOOS
5YWP
SCAR
Agenda Item 8a: Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Consider any changes required to EIA database to improve its
utility.
5YWP
All Members
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Work on further guidance with regards to commenting processes
related to CEEs.
5YWP
All Members
2: Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Initiate thinking around work required to ensure EIA Guidelines are
consistent, fit-for-purpose and regularly reviewed to ensure that
environmental assessments of coming modernisation projects reach
high standards.
59, 65
All Members
Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
1: Tourism and NGO activities
Work on developing a framework for conducting pre-assessments
relating to new, novel or particularly concerning activities, focusing
on the environmental aspects.
14, 17
5YWP
Members and Observers
IP096 Framework for assessing ‘New, Novel or Particularly
Concerning Activities’ (United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 8b
Agenda Item 9a: Area Protection and Management Plans:
Management Plans
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area
management plans
SGMP to continue its intersessional review of the management plans
for ASPA 125, ASPA 145, ASPA 146, and ASPA 150.
78, 161
SGMP, Chile, interested Members and Observers
WP062 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities
during the intersessional period 2019-2021 (Argentina) – submitted
to CEP 9a.
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area
management plans
SGMP to review the draft management plan for the three new
proposed ASPAs: Rosenthal Islands, Léonie Islands & south-east
Adelaide Island and Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay.
110, 161
SGMP, interested Members and Observers
WP062 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities
during the intersessional period 2019-2021 (Argentina)– submitted
to CEP 9a
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area
management plans
SGMP to conduct work under its terms of reference 4 & 5, including
further considerations of options for supporting proponents to
conclude revisions of management plans that remain for several
intersessional periods under the scope of SGMP.
161
SGMP
WP062 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities
during the intersessional period 2019-2021 (Argentina)– submitted
to CEP 9a.
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area
management plans
Norway to lead further work on guidance / criteria for delisting of
ASPAs.
164
5YWP
Norway, interested Members
WP005 Suggested guidelines for the de-designation of Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) (Norway, Australia, China, New
Zealand, United Kingdom, United States) – submitted to CEP 9e
Agenda Item 9b: Area Protection and Management Plans: Historic
Sites and Monuments
2: Designation and management of Historic Sites and Monuments
United Kingdom to lead informal discussions relating to guidance
material in relation to conservation management plans as tools to
protect Antarctic heritage.
125
5YWP
United Kingdom, interested Members
2: Designation and management of Historic Sites and Monuments
Members to provide information relevant to HSMs they have
information about, interest in or responsibility for, to facilitate the
drafting of a list of HSMs (current and the newly approved listings)
in the adopted new format for HSMs.
127
5YWP
All Members
WP060 Rev1 Reformatting of the list of Historic Sites and
Monuments in line with Decision 1 (2019) (Argentina, Norway,
United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 9b
Agenda Item 9c: Area Protection and Management Plans: Site
Guidelines
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
All Parties to engage in the development of additional site-specific
visitor guidelines and in the regular review of existing ones, with
further consideration given to elaborating seasonal considerations
in site guidelines.
14
All Members
WP007 Revised Visitor Site Guidelines for Site No. 28 Seabee Hook,
Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea (United States)
WP044 Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guides for important historic
sites in the Ross Sea region (New Zealand and United States)
WP056 Proposed Visitor Site Guidelines for Argentine Islands,
Wilhelm Archipelago (Ukraine)
- all submitted to CEP 9c
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Participate in ICG to address the existing guidance for visitors to the
continent, with a view to strengthen that guidance and ensure that
activities from visitors, including from tourism and non-
governmental activities, singularly and cumulatively, have less than
a minor or transitory impact (lead by Germany)
15-16
5YWP
Germany, interested Members and Observers
WP011 Report from the Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on
strengthening the existing guidance for visitors to Antarctica –
Proposal to adopt updated General Guidelines for Visitors to the
Antarctic (Germany) – submitted to CEP 9c
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
IAATO to review the list of current camping locations, as reported
in IP 98 (2013) and update the committee as appropriate.
171
IAATO
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Work toward developing guidelines for short overnight stays to
ensure consistent application of best practices and minimise impacts
to the Antarctic environment.
5YWP
All Members
IP104 Guidance on Short Overnight Stays: Consistency and
Coordination through Knowledge Sharing (United States, Canada)
submitted to CEP 9e
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Spain to work with IAATO to prepare site guidelines for Elephant
Point
146
Spain, IAATO
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
SCAR to work on developing criteria, with reference to IAATO’s
camp site selection criteria, that can be used in considering new
camping areas.
171
SCAR, relevant experts
1: Tourism and NGO activities
Continued work on methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of
sites to visits by tourists, including trial of methodology (cf. IP 100
[2019]).
230
5YWP
Australia, interested Members and IAATO
Agenda Item 9d: Area Protection and Management Plans: Marine
Spatial Protection and Management
2: Marine spatial protection and management
New Zealand to lead informal intersessional work on ATCM
Resolution 5 (2017) and CEP Five-Year Work Plan action “to
consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary
measures that could be undertaken by Parties with respect to
MPAs”
153
New Zealand, interested Members
WP021 Report on informal discussions on marine protection
measures (New Zealand) – submitted to CEP 9d
Agenda Item 9f: Other Annex V Matters
2: Overview of the protected areas system
United Kingdom to lead discussion with interested Members and
Observers, on Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Important
Bird Areas.
5YWP
United Kingdom, interested Members and Observers
WP043 and IP023, both entitled Important Bird Areas and Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas: Toward the development of selection
criteria (Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, United
Kingdom, United States) and IP – submitted to CEP 9e
2: Overview of the protected areas system
Undertake work to advance actions agreed by the Committee from
discussions on the protected areas workshop.
183
5YWP
All Members, Observers
Agenda Item 10a: Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna:
Quarantine and Non-Native Species
1: Introduction of non-native species
Initiate work to develop a non-native species response strategy,
including appropriate responses to diseases of wildlife.
5YWP
All Members
1: Introduction of non-native species
COMNAP to prepare a report on the implementation of quarantine
and biosecurity measures by its members as input to assessing the
effectiveness of the NNS Manual.
5YWP
COMNAP
1: Introduction of non-native species
SCAR to prepare information on existing mechanism to assist with
the identification of non-native species.
5YWP
SCAR
Agenda Item 10c: Other Annex II matters
2: Biodiversity knowledge
Informal intersessional discussions relating to assessing the
protection of Antarctic seals.
227
5YWP
Interested Members
Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
1: Tourism and NGO activities
SCAR to design an environmental monitoring programme to assess
the impacts of tourism, which includes a scoping assessment.
14
5YWP
SCAR (COMNAP, IAATO, ASOC) and interested Members
Agenda Item 13: General Matters
Interested Members to contribute to and interact with France and
Italy on providing input on environmental aspects in the further
planning process of the Ice Memory project.
247
France, Italy and interested Members
Note that IP106 The Ice Memory Programme (France, Italy) –
submitted to CEP 13
has relevance to the issue
Interested Members to contribute to the further consideration by
China on developing a Code of Conduct for the exploration and
research in Dome A area.
254
China, interested Members
3. Protection of outstanding geological values
SCAR to present Code of Conduct on Geosciences Field Research
Activities in Antarctica.
.
67-68
5YWP
SCAR with contribution from interested Members
WP033 SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field
Research Activities in Antarctica (SCAR) – submitted to CEP 8b
3. Outreach and education
Bulgaria to consider any outcomes from the ICG on Education and
Outreach of direct relevance to the work of the CEP.
5YWP
Bulgaria
