Winter Targeted Observing Periods and Further Plans of the Year of
Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
Winter Antarctic Targeted Observing Periods and Further Plans of
the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
Summary
Recent activities undertaken in the Antarctic as part of the World
Meteorological Organization's (WMO) Polar Prediction Project
(PPP) are summarized. The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP), which
is a hallmark activity of the PPP, galvanised extra observation and
modelling efforts in both the Arctic and Antarctic.
From July 2019, the Polar Prediction Project moved into its
Consolidation Phase. This final phase of PPP (until end of 2022) is
crucial to synthesize the data and research from the Preparation
and Core Phases, to determine the long-term success of YOPP.
YOPP-SH is currently planning a second SOP, mid-April to mid-July
2022, coinciding with the rapid expansion of the sea-ice cover.
During the 11th annual PPP Steering Group meeting, it was agreed
to extend the YOPP-SH effort to the end of 2024 due to the YOPP-
SH Targeted Observing Periods (TOPs) scheduled for mid 2022.
Introduction
PPP is coordinating international research with the main goal of
significantly improving weather and sea-ice prediction capabilities
in the polar regions, on time scales from hours to seasonal. It is part
of the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) of WMO, with
close links to its sister programme, the WMO/IOC-UNESCO/ISC
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP).
The YOPP Core Phase and – to some extent also its Consolidation
Phase – included Special Observing Periods and a Target Observing
Period (aligned with the MOSAiC ice drift) in the Arctic and
Antarctic to increase the number of atmospheric and oceanographic
observations. Extra radiosondes were launched from polar
meteorological stations, and additional buoys were deployed from
research vessels. The additional data enables improved
representation of polar key processes in uncoupled and coupled
models used for high-quality prediction in polar regions.
Contributions to the Antarctic Special Observing Period
The first Antarctic Special Observing Period (SOP) took place from
16 November 2018 to 15 February 2019. An overview of the
activities during the YOPP-SH SOP is available from the PPP
website, in particular from the YOPP Observations Layer.
An evaluation of global model forecasts during the Antarctic SOP
confirmed that extratropical Southern Hemisphere forecast skill is
lower than in the Northern Hemisphere with the contrast being
greatest between the Antarctic and Arctic (Fig. 1). Observing system
experiments show that the additional radiosondes yield a better
description of atmospheric conditions over Antarctica and as a
result improve the forecasts of strong cyclones impacting the
Antarctic coast. SOP data have
been applied to study an atmospheric river event that was
challenging to forecast and that impacted southern South America
and the Antarctic Peninsula (Bromwich et al., 2020). Seasonal
predictions by coupled atmosphere–ocean–sea ice models struggle
to capture the spatial and temporal characteristics of the Antarctic
sea ice minimum.
Figure 1: Anomaly correlation coefficient of operational global
models for the 500-hPa geopotential height field for (top)
Antarctica (solid lines) vs the extratropical Southern Hemisphere
(dashed lines), and (bottom) the Arctic (solid lines) vs the
extratropical Northern Hemisphere (dashed lines), during the
respective summers. Verification is against each model’s own
forecast. Notice the superior forecast performance for the Arctic
shown by the larger anomaly correlation coefficients vs the
Antarctic (solid colors). The Australian BOM SH performance (gray,
top) is degraded during the SOP because of numerical instability
over Antarctica. Subsequently, their new ACCESS-G model version
has a forecast performance approaching that of the related UKMO
(source: Bromwich et al., 2020; Fig. 5).
Winter Antarctic Special Observing Period in 2022
Concrete plans are now underway for a second Antarctic Special
Observing Period (SOP) scheduled for mid-April to mid-July 2022,
coinciding with the rapid expansion of the Antarctic sea-ice cover.
The goal of the winter SOP is to improve forecast capabilities
during the non-summer months as nations contemplate expanding
to year-round scientific field investigations. In recognition of
limited personnel and resources at this time of year, the Targeted
Observing Period (TOP) approach from the MOSAiC TOP (see
above) is being adopted.
Four TOPs of ~5 days duration will be scheduled during the SOP
with the focus on major oceanic cyclones, atmospheric rivers, and
related events. The Antarctic Peninsula and Weddell Sea along with
the greater Ross Sea region are of particular emphasis. The primary
additional observations will be radiosonde ascents. Expanded
oceanic observations are also planned.
Extension of YOPP-SH until 2024
During their 11th annual session held from 19 to 21 February 2020
in Bremerhaven, Germany, PPP-SG members agreed to extend
YOPP-SH to the end of 2024 due to the YOPP-SH Targeted
Observing Periods scheduled for mid 2022.
Overview Paper in BAMS and Special Issue on Antarctica in
Advances in Atmospheric Sciences
Activities to enhance forecast capabilities in the Antarctic and the
Southern Ocean around the Special Observing Period (SOP) during
the Antarctic summer 2018/2019 have been summarized in the
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (BAMS).
The overview paper on the YOPP in the Southern Hemisphere effort
published in 2020 in BAMS has nicely added to the YOPP special
issue (‘Towards improving understanding and prediction of Arctic
change and its linkage with Eurasian mid-latitude weather and
climate’), published already in 2018.
Bromwich, D., Werner, K., Casati, B., Powers, J.G., Gorodetskaya, I.,
Massonnet, F. et al.: The Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern
Hemisphere (YOPP-SH). Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 101(10), E1653–
E1676 (2020), doi.org/10.1175BAMS-D-19-0255.1
Zhang, X., Jung, T., Wang, M., Luo, Y., Semmler, T., Orr, A. (2017):
Preface to the special issue: Towards improving understanding and
prediction of Arctic change and its linkage with Eurasian mid-
latitude weather and climate. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences,
35, 1-4, doi.org/10.1007/s00376-017-7004-7
YOPP-SH Data
The YOPP Data Portal is a metadata catalogue that connects to data
held by the different data centres contributing to YOPP, including
data centres that are connected to the WMO Information System’s
(WIS) Global Telecommunication System (GTS).
A GTS monitoring page set up by Kevin Manning (NCAR, Boulder,
CO) has proven extremely useful for planning the data denial
experiments. This archive has led to the decision to collect all the
detailed radiosonde ascents from national operators and
reformatted into a standard format by Steve Colwell (BAS FTP site).
YOPP-SH Modelling and Forecasting
Modelling efforts, e.g. with the Polar Weather Research and
Forecasting model (PolarWRF) are based around the YOPP
Supersites with enhanced verification and data assimilation efforts.
Data denial experiments by different operational centres, such as
Météo France, were carried out using extra observations during the
YOPP-SH Special Observing Period. Extra observations from the
SOP were also used in a range of data assimilation techniques to
evaluate the forecast impact in the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction
System (AMPS). The work includes data denial experiments
resulting in a more advanced data assimilation approach. The
Chilean Weather Service is using the Polar WRF model for its
Antarctic Peninsula forecasts.
YOPPSiteMIP
In order to best use observations to understand the sources of
forecast error in polar regions, the YOPP Supersite Model Inter-
comparison Project (YOPPsiteMIP) aims to use observations from
YOPP Supersites to do process level assessment of the performance
of different forecast models in the Arctic and Antarctic. Efforts are
carried out to synergistically combine information from Arctic and
Antarctic Observatories and Numerical Weather Forecasts to further
both the understanding of the mechanisms of the polar environment
and to improve model forecast skill.
Sea ice prediction in Antarctica
One of the flagship activities of YOPP-SH is the Sea Ice Prediction
Network South (SIPN South), initiated in 2017 and that has run
without interruption since then. SIPN South was launched due to
the increasing need for sea ice information in the Southern Ocean,
the existence of predictability mechanisms for summer sea ice
recently suggested in the scientific literature, and the lack of
knowledge regarding the skill of state-of-the-art operational
forecasts at the seasonal time scale.
In four years, SIPN South has received 52 contributions from 20
unique groups representing five continents, totalling 906 forecasts
(most forecasts are expressed as ensembles). Forecasts conducted
for the previous summer season (2020-2021, Fig. 2) are currently
analyzed and a scientific paper is in preparation to investigate the
skill of contemporary dynamical models and statistical models in
predicting summer Antarctic sea ice at the global and regional
scales.
SIPN South will continue running for the next years, and an
additional exercise will be conducted during the Targeted
Observing Period of fall-winter 2022.
Figure 2: Forecasts of total Antarctic sea ice area for the 2020-2021
melting season (submitted before 1st December 2020) contributed
by 13 groups. Verifying observations are in black.
Education
APECS Online Workshop “Antarctic Science: Global Connections”
aligned to SCAR Open Science Conference
On 11 August 2020, YOPP-SH researchers participated in the APECS
Online Workshop “Antarctic Science: Global Connections” that took
place alongside the online events for the cancelled Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research biennial Open Science Conference
and Delegates Meeting (SCARCOMNAP2020). The recordings from
the YOPP-SH workshop session are available at the APECS vimeo
site.
Live Episode of The IcePod
In the first-ever live broadcast of The IcePod, the official podcast of
the YOPP initiative to improve weather and sea-ice forecast in the
Arctic and Antarctic, Vicki Heinrich, a psychology PhD candidate at
the University of Tasmania in Hobart, Australia, and member of the
YOPP-SH Task Team was interviewed. She described her
experiences as an Antarctic weather observer, what life is like on
the ice, and how understanding the weather helps in decision-
making (Fig. 3). The podcast episode is available here.
Figure 3: The first live session of The IcePod with weather observer
and psychology PhD student Vicki Heinrich was broadcast as part of
the YOPP Sessions at the APECS Workshop (photo: Peter
Hargreaves).
YOPP-SH Science Session
The YOPP-SH science session on 11 August 2020 was supported by
ten speakers from the YOPP-SH community who presented an
overview of some of the key activities associated with YOPP-SH.
This was a session bursting with information on a wide range of
YOPP-SH activities such as the SIPN South sea-ice prediction
initiative, the Antarctic Automatic Weather Stations network, and a
project where Antarctica atmospheric observations were carried out
by a windsled. The presentations therefore provided early career
researchers (ECRs) with a great opportunity to find out more about
some of the projects associated with YOPP, how they can use
weather and ice forecasts in their research, the different kinds of
data that are available, and ways to contribute to YOPP and PPP.
There were also examples of some innovative ways that projects
and programs work to overcome the challenges of collecting data in
and around Antarctica. Recordings of the YOPP-SH session during
the APECS can be found here.
Meetings
YOPP-SH Community
The YOPP-SH community is meeting monthly online in two calls so
that people from all time zones can attend. The sixth Year of Polar
Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere meeting will be held online,
from 24 to 25 June 2021. The meeting is organized by the Byrd
Polar and Climate Research Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA and will,
again, be aligned with the annual Workshop on Antarctic
Meteorology and Climate (21-23 June 2021). During the meeting,
national commitments will be coordinated amongst the different
action teams that look at various Antarctic regions to develop the
Targeted Observing Periods (TOPs) to explore the predictability of
impactful atmospheric phenomena such major oceanic cyclones and
atmospheric rivers. Registration for the meeting is open until 31
May 2021 at this link.
YOPP Final Summit
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) Final Summit will take place in
Montreal (QC), Canada, 1-4 May 2022. The conference will bring
together the polar prediction community, from operational centres
and academia, to environment services and polar prediction users
and northern communities, to showcase the successes of YOPP and
contribute to the legacy of the Polar Prediction Project (Fig. 4). The
YOPP in the Southern Hemisphere effort will provide an important
contribution to the summit where highlights of the YOPP-SH effort
will be showcased. See more on the Final Summit here.
Figure 4: The YOPP Final Summit is scheduled to take place 1 to 4
May 2022 in Montréal, Canada
PPP encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to share information about
the YOPP Data Portal to enable the national research communities
to make use of the portal and to contribute their own data via their
national data centres in an effort to build a comprehensive polar
meteorological database.
For further details please contact kirstin.werner@awi.de in the first
instance.
