Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station
Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station Opening ceremony
Brazil’s new Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station was officially
opened on January 15th 2020. The ceremony was attended by 70
guests, including Vice-President Hamilton Mourão and the ministers
of Science, Technology and Innovation, Mr. Marcos Pontes, and of
Defense, Mr. Fernando Azevedo e Silva.
Figure 1: Opening Ceremony
The new station was built on the site of the old one, which was
constructed in 1984. In 2012, a fire in the station killed two
Brazilian Navy personnel and left around 70% of its facilities
destroyed. Three years after that the reconstruction work began and
with an investment of approximately $100 million the Brazilian
Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) completed the new Brazilian
Comadante Ferraz Antarctic Station.
Ferraz stands out for its sleek architecture, designed by the
Brazilian firm Estúdio 41. The Station was awarded the 2020
Instituto Tomie Ohtake Akzo Nobel Architecture Prize and also the
2021 São Paulo Association of Art Critics Architecture Prize
Laureate.
The new Station is 4,500-square-meter state-of-art facility than can
accommodate up to 64 people. It consists of 17 laboratories with
modern equipment for research in the fields of meteorology,
biology, chemistry, medicine, anthropology, meteorology, physics,
oceanography and astronomical sciences.
Figure 2 - The new Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station.
The first year of operation
Safety and operational systems went through a commissioning
phase during the 2020-2021 season. After staff training and testing,
Ferraz Station is now fully operational.
Seismic Activity
To stay above the snow during the winter, the modules were
installed on precaste concrete foundations weighing up to 70 tons
and pilotis, lifting the Brazilian station three meters high above the
ground.
More than 30,000 seismic events occurred during the last summer
season in the Antarctic Peninsula, and the resulting movement
suffered by the Ferraz Station structure did not cause damage to the
facilities.
Figure 3 - Ferraz Station’s foundations.
Fire-fighting system
Installed at every station unit are fire doors as well as smoke
detectors and fire alarms. In the rooms where the machines and
generators are stored, the walls are made with an ultra-resistant
material. They can withstand fire for two hours not allowing it to
spread to other places before the arrival of a anti-fire team.
During the 2020/2021 season, many fire-fighting training and
exercises were carried out with the station staff and temporary
residents. Small adjustments were made to the fire protection and
fire-fighting systems, as well as the guidelines for fighting a fire at
Ferraz Station.
Figure 4 - Fire safety exercise.
Energy efficiency
One of the important factors taken into account for the station
reconstruction project was energy efficiency. Since its opening, the
building's efficient fuel consumption and energy production from
renewable sources are been monitored.
To guarantee a continuous power supply, Ferraz Station has a
diversified energy matrix composed of:
a main source of energy integrated by 4 diesel-generator sets
associated with combined heat and power (CHP) plants, also known
as cogeneration; and
a renewable energy generation system, consisting of 8 wind
turbines (6kWp total) and solar-photovoltaic panels (9.3 kWp total),
combined with lithium-ion batteries to smooth daily ﬂuctuations of
production and consumption, and controlled by a management
system (Figure 5).
Figure 5 - Energy Management System (EMS) screen – electrical
energy.
Thermal insulation reduces the unit's energy consumption by
preventing the loss of heat through a three-tier building envelope.
The frames are made of three layers of glass separated by inert gas
and sealed to create an insulated window that keeps the heat in and
mimimizes heat loss to the outside environment.
The contribution of renewable energy sources corresponds to
approximately 20.5% of Ferraz Station's energy supply and the heat
produced by the cogeneration plant met almost completely the
demand for thermal energy to heat the water supply system and the
building's internal space, minimizing the use of diesel heater (Figure
6). It is estimated that the generation of renewable electricity will
save up to 22,500 liters of fossil fuel for every year of operation of
the station.
Figure 6 - Building management System (BMS) – thermal energy.
Scientific research
Parte superior do formulário
Parte inferior do formulário
Brazilian researchers have continued to conduct research in
Antarctica over the last 8 years with the support of two Brazilian
Navy vessels – Ary Rongel and Almirante Maximiano – and a series
of container modules on land (MAE) that are now deactivated and
will be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area.
Several of the selected research projects involve the molecular study
of Antarctic biodiversity, environmental microbiology and human
physiology, whereas others will try to shed light on the geological
and paleontological history of the continent and its climatic,
oceanographic, biological, and geophysical connections to South
America. Brazilian scientists have been working on the Antarctic
continent for almost four decades and will continue their research
in 17 laboratories at the new Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station.
Figure 7 - Ferraz Station microbiology lab.
