The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft CEE for the
Construction and Operation of the Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
The Initial Responses to the Comments on the Draft CEE for the
Construction and Operation of the Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica
An information paper submitted by Turkey
Background
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been
prepared by the Ministry of Environment and Urbanization (MoEU),
the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
(TUBITAK) Marmara Research Centre (MAM) Polar Research
Institute (PRI), and Istanbul Technical University (ITU) for the
proposed construction and operation of Turkish Antarctic Research
Station at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica. The draft CEE has been
prepared in accordance with applicable provisions of Annex I,
Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact
Assessment in Antarctica (2016).
Turkey notified the CEP Chair of the availability of the draft CEE
for ‘Construction and Operation of Turkish Antarctic Research
Station (TARS) at Horseshoe Island, Antarctica’ on 13 February
2021. Considering the procedures for intersessional consideration of
Draft CEEs (CEP XX Final Report, Appendix 3), CEP Chair issued
CEP Circular 6 / CEP XXIII on 15 February 2021 advising CEP
contact points of the availability of the draft CEE; stated the need to
establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to
review the draft CEE report; proposed that Australia’s CEP
representative, Mr Ewan McIvor, convene the ICG. The CEE report
was available in English for download from http://
lodos.mam.gov.tr/kare/Draft_CEE_of_TARS.pdf and via the CEP
Workspace on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty website:
https://www.ats.aq/devAS/EP/CEPWorkspace.
The Republic of Turkey appreciates the valuable comments made by
the parties and would like to provide the initial responses to the
comments from ICG participants for consideration in the CEP.
Comments raised by the ICG process, and any additional comments
made during discussions at CEP XXIII, will be addressed in the final
CEE.
Initial Responses to the comments from ICG participants
Non-Technical Summary
The ICG participants noted that the Non-Technical Summary (NTS)
could be expanded to include figures and maps, and as well as the
summaries of the purpose of the proposed activity, initial
environmental state, scientific research to be conducted in the
station, key alternatives, spatial extent of the activities, nature and
significance of associated environmental impacts. NTS of the final
report will be enhanced with regional maps and visuals of the
station, and it will be updated to include further details on
mentioned topics.
Description of the Proposed Activity
Description of the proposed activity section of the final CEE report
will be expanded comprehensively considering the comments and
recommendations of ICG participants. Responses to the specific
topics in the ICG report is as follows:
Scientific Activities Supported by the Station
The participants inquired about the research activities which will be
supported by the proposed station and how these activities would
benefit from the presence of the station. Initially, establishing a
research station fully equipped with adequate infrastructural
facilities will provide opportunities to conduct long-term research
cost-effectively. For instance, a small research boat in the hangar,
an aquarium room with marine water supply, and a divers’ room in
the main building will enable measurements of physical and
chemical
parameters and ecosystem/biodiversity studies in Marguerite Bay.
The planned station will include five laboratories namely,
chemistry, biology, geotechnical, pre-process, and a cold laboratory
for ice core samples. These laboratories will not only enable
researchers to obtain preliminary results but also reduce the
logistics and costs to transfer the samples to Turkey. The station
will also include an observatory room for conducting atmospheric
and astronomical observations. Apart from these, future studies will
benefit from the proximity of Horseshoe Island to Antarctic
mainland. Further information on the scientific capacity and
research to be conducted at the proposed station will be presented
in the final report.
Scientific and Logistic Collaborations
Some participants noted that the information on the potential joint
logistic activities aiming to reduce costs and carbon footprint would
contribute to the report. Turkey gives utmost importance to
collaboration with other countries in Antarctica. In this regard, a
number of bilateral agreements have been signed with countries
including Belarus, Bulgaria, Czechia, Ukraine and the Republic of
Korea, and scientists from other countries are hosted in the national
expeditions. Therefore, it is emphasized that the proposed research
station will be of benefit to scientists from all over the world. The
details of these agreements will be presented in the relevant
sections of the final report.
Construction Camp
Several comments were raised on the location, design, construction,
operation and removal of the temporary camp to support the
construction of the station. An execution plan has been prepared
which includes plans and procedures for the construction camp and
construction site. The construction camp will be established with 40
modules of 20 feet containers in the location determined. There will
be no excavation activities for placing the modules since the
containers will be placed onto ready-made platforms after ground
levelling. As soon as the construction camp is established,
wastewater treatment and desalination units for providing domestic
water needs will be put into operation to minimise environmental
impacts. The details of the construction camp will be included in
the final report.
Planning and Schedule of Construction
Some comments stated that the addition of further details on the
schedule and duration of specific construction works would be
beneficial, and also recommended to evaluate the possibility of
extending the construction into another year. The execution plan
mentioned above includes the details of the construction phase,
specifically work packages, estimated schedule and durations. Based
on the comments noting that two years of construction period being
ambitious, an alternative plan for 3 years is also studied for any
unforeseen conditions. Both scenarios will be included in the final
report.
Construction and Operation Logistics
Participants suggested adding further information to the final report
about logistical support activities for the construction and
operation. Details of construction and logistic operations are also
included in the aforementioned execution plan, and the required
details and updates will be presented in the final report. In
summary, barges will be used for the transfer of construction
equipment from the cargo ship to the site. A wharf is not planned to
be built to limit the environmental impacts of the planned research
station. Helicopters are not planned to be used in the construction
and/or operation phases. However, a helipad is going to be built at
the beginning of the construction phase to be used in case of any
emergencies like medical evacuation. Only two terrestrial vehicles
are planned to be used during the operation phase serving for
material supply and maintenance of the research station, and also
for scientific purposes when required.
Earthworks and Geotechnical Studies
Several participants raised comments on the extent and size of the
earthworks along with the geotechnical surveys on the proposed
construction site. Some excavation work will be carried out to
install the precast foundations; however, this work will be limited
to the number of foundations. Excavated material will be used for
levelling of paths and laydown areas, which will further be used
during construction and operation phases. Geological and
geotechnical surveys were carried out in the former scientific
expeditions. Natural unit weight and point load strength analyses
were performed on the collected samples from the proposed
construction site, and bearing capacities and subgrade reaction
modulus values were calculated. Considering
these calculations, the usage and technical details of precast
foundations have been determined. Single footings with special
geometries will be used under the frost-effect depth in order to
prevent uplift problems together with the freeze-thaw effect that
may occur due to climatic conditions. Details of geotechnical
studies, dimensions and numbers of precast foundations, and the
estimated amount of excavated material are going to be included in
the final report.
Construction Materials
ICG participants noted that it would be useful if the final report
would involve the specific building materials and information on
their environmental performance. A list of building materials and
their environmental performance will be presented within the final
report to be prepared.
Energy Management
Some comments from the participants requested further information
on energy management system and renewable energy sources. In
summary, four diesel generators with 400 kVA power are planned
to be installed in the Energy Centre which is close to the fuel tanks.
Installation of wind turbines is cancelled based on the remarks
received on the draft CEE due to limited information on migration
routes of birds. Necessary observations and scientific studies will be
conducted to obtain more information on the aforementioned issue
after the proposed research station is established. Then, the use of
wind turbines will be re-considered for decreasing fossil fuel
consumption. Environmental impact assessment for installing wind
turbines will be prepared if the conditions allow based on the
observations. Details about the Energy Management System with
the construction, operation and contribution of renewable energy
sources will be included in the final report.
Specific details of the fuel tanks and containment infrastructure
were discussed by the ICG participants. According to the
calculations, 20 tanks with a capacity of 40 tonnes will adequately
support the research station’s energy requirements for two years
considering possible failures in supply. Only Antarctic Diesel will be
used in the generators and vehicles of the proposed station. Fuel
tanks will be designed to prevent possible leakages and spills.
Technical sketches and specifications of the tanks will be included
in the final report.
Waste Management
Detailed information about the wastewater treatment and the
discharge location was requested by some ICG participants. As
stated in the draft CEE report wastewater will be treated
biologically. Greywater will also be treated and reused for flushing
toilets and cleaning purposes in order to save water. Treated water
will be discharged at sea from a point where conditions for dilution
and rapid dispersal are met as stated in Article 5 of Annex III.
Technical details of the treatment units will be included in the final
report.
The participants also raised comments on technical information
about the incinerator and waste management in general. Wet
scrubbers will be used in the incinerators to reduce emissions where
food waste and sewage sludge is planned to be incinerated. The
remarks for the draft CEE states that dewatering the wastes will
increase the efficiency of the incinerators; thus, decrease fossil fuel
usage and emissions. Considering these valuable comments, a
decanter unit will be used in the treatment system in order to
reduce the water content of the sludge before incineration. A waste
management plan for the construction and operation phase
covering handling, storage and disposal steps is being prepared and
will be included in the final report.
Other Comments
The ICG suggested that further details, including additional maps,
should be provided to ensure the CEE adequately describes the full
scope of the proposed activity and associated actions. As
recommended in the comments, the final report will be enriched
with maps that will show the key features (flora & fauna, ASPA,
HSM, and Important Bird Areas) along with the proposed location.
The general layout shared in the draft CEE will be updated by
providing more details, and corresponding sketches will be annexed
to the final report. As suggested scale bars, north arrows, labels and
legends will be added where appropriate.
Initial Environmental Reference State
The ICG participants suggested that some elements of the “Initial
Environmental Reference State” should be further developed to
form a comprehensive basis for assessing and monitoring the
environmental impacts of
the proposed activity. Specifically, the section describing flora and
fauna in the report was not found sufficiently comprehensive by the
ICG participants. Marine flora and fauna part of the draft CEE will
be enriched by underwater observations realized by previous
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and diving studies. A map of
terrestrial flora and fauna present at the proposed construction site
will be included in the final report as well.
Alternatives to the Proposed Activity
International Collaboration
ICG participants suggested further information could be provided
on the option of collaborating with other national Antarctic
programs on the use of existing facilities. However, this option does
not seem functional considering a large number of scientists from
Turkey participates in the annual expeditions. As stated in the draft
CEE report, other Antarctic Programmes rightfully will prioritise
their research programmes and are able to host a limited number of
researchers from other countries. In addition, the situations such as
the Covid-19 pandemic make it nearly impossible to host scientists
from other countries.
Selection of the Location
The selection of Horseshoe Island among other alternatives and
criteria during the selection process was inquired in the ICG
comments. Possible locations for camp/station sites have been
evaluated since the first Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-I) in
2017. As stated in the draft CEE report, with the contribution of
Turkish polar scientists, 17 possible locations have been evaluated
regarding many factors such as topography, climate conditions, sea
ice, protected areas, biodiversity and accessibility. The results are
analysed with Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method and four
candidate locations became prominent. After a detailed discussion
among the four candidate sites, Horseshoe Island has been selected
as the most appropriate site for establishing a research station.
Further details on the selection will be added to the final CEE
report.
Wind Turbines
Several participants expressed their concerns about the
environmental impacts of the wind turbines on the birds, especially
considering Lagotellerie Island. Although a limited number of
Adelié penguins, shags, skuas and Antarctic terns were observed
throughout the island during former visits, no significant presence
of these birds was recorded in the proposed construction area.
Vertical axis wind turbines were chosen for the station, which poses
significantly less risk to birds compared to alternatives. However,
the comments involved negative opinions on the use of wind
turbines due to the lack of information and insufficient observation
of bird migration paths. Therefore, the construction and use of wind
turbines will not be considered until this data gap is closed after the
establishment of the station.
Water Supply
Supplying water from the lakes was not welcomed by the countries
that provided comments since deep lakes in Antarctica are deemed
as sensitive ecosystems. Considering these valuable
recommendations, seawater will be desalinated for domestic water
use instead of supplying water from the lakes. The reverse osmosis
method will be employed to provide domestic water. Technical
aspects and possible environmental impacts of reverse osmosis will
be included in the final report.
Predicted Impacts of Climate Change
Further information about potential environmental consequences of
climate change and consideration of natural hazards such as
earthquakes and tsunamis in the location of the proposed activity
was requested by the participants. The impacts of possible
earthquakes have been taken into account in the static calculations
of the main and ancillary buildings during the design phase. The
problems that may arise due to the melting of permafrost are
considered regarding the structure and installation depth of the
foundations. The future sea-level rise due to the global climate
change was regarded during the general layout placement, and the
distance of buildings to the shoreline were determined.
Environmental impacts that may occur due to climate change in the
future and related mitigation measures will be added to the final
report.
Impacts and Mitigation
The ICG Participants noted that the prediction of impacts could be
developed and better supported. Based on the comments, the
Impact Assessment section of the report will be reviewed, and the
methodologies of impact identification and assessment will be
added. Additionally, significance ratings in the impact matrices will
be re-evaluated and details on the scaling of these ratings will be
included in the relevant section.
Several participants recommended describing some elements of the
proposed activity in more detail and considering the full impacts of
those activities on the terrestrial and nearshore marine
environment. Participants also suggested that further information
and assessment would be better evaluated in the draft CEE,
including:
Biosecurity Measures
ICG participants emphasized the high risks of the introduction of
non-native species in the Antarctic Peninsula region and
recommended explaining specific arrangements to prevent non-
native species introduction effectively (including cleaning and
inspections), monitoring and response. The final report will present
more details on biosecurity measures (such as planning, cleaning
processes, personnel training and visual inspections).
Earthworks
Several participants stated the draft CEE report would benefit from
details about how excavation and presence of buildings will alter
the physical structure of the ice-free ground and drainage of melted
snow, measures against dust generation and how the dust will affect
the terrestrial and nearshore marine environment. The elevated
design of the buildings will not pose a change for the drainage of
melting snow and ice in the sloping land. Additionally, a modelling
study on the snow accumulation was conducted where the outer
shell and the layout of the buildings were designed to minimise the
snow accumulation. The usage of precast concrete foundations and
the elevated structure of the main and ancillary buildings will
change the landscape at a minimum level; thus, reducing the
environmental impacts. Besides the installation of precast
foundations, a limited amount of excavation is planned only at the
foundation pad zones during the construction. Excavated material
will be used in backfill and levelling of the routes and ground for
laydown areas. The estimated amount of the excavated material
will be presented, along with the updated mitigation measures in
the final report. The construction works do not involve many
activities that will generate dust. The crushing of the excess
excavated material for the ground levelling is a major source of
dust, which will be mitigated by watering the surrounding to
prevent the transport of the particles. Since the construction does
not involve any explosions and/or piling, exceeding the noise
threshold levels is not expected. However, noise levels will be
regularly monitored by a sound-level meter at different locations of
the construction site. If the sound level exceeds the determined
thresholds, simultaneous activities will be stopped, and the noise
level will be reduced.
Management Plans
The ICG Participants noted that measures related to oil spills and
waste management would be better if supported with management
plans, namely Oil Spill Contingency Plan and Waste Management
Plan. With the final report, details on the mitigation measures,
training and response plan will be presented within the oil spill
contingency plan that is under preparation. In addition, the Waste
Management Plan, which will include the type, amount, storage,
transportation and disposal details of the wastes that will be
generated during the construction and operation of the station, will
be shared in the final report.
Monitoring
Some comments suggested that further details of the planned
monitoring programme should be presented such as objectives,
impacts of monitoring, number and locations of sampling sites,
monitoring of biota. Participants also recommended Turkey to
consider increasing the frequency of measurements. The
measurement frequencies of the parameters in the presented
monitoring plan will be increased considering the comments.
Additionally, details concerning the purpose of the monitoring
program to be executed, parameters to be measured and sampling
points will be given in the final report.
Cumulative Impacts
The ICG commenters pointed out that further description of the
indirect and cumulative impacts of the proposed activity will be
beneficial. The Final CEE will provide additional information on
cumulative impacts arising from the combination of the individual
impacts of the proposed activity, interactions between other
Antarctic Programs in the region, interactions with touristic
activities, how the operation of the station will have impacts on the
station area, Horseshoe Island and Antarctic Peninsula.
Gaps in Knowledge and Uncertainties
The ICG Participants suggested that this section should be further
improved to provide detail while discussing knowledge gaps and
uncertainties in the draft report. Gaps in Knowledge and
Uncertainties section in the draft CEE report will be updated
regarding the recommended uncertainties and methods to clear
these gaps.
As mentioned in the draft report, a limited number of Adelié
penguins, skuas, Antarctic terns and shags were recorded during the
former visits to the region, while no groups were detected in size of
a “colony”. Since short-term Antarctic expeditions did not allow
obtaining long-term data on the region, a study on the migration
routes could not be conducted. An intensive study on this subject
will be carried out after the establishment of the station, which will
-depending on the data to be obtained- enable the installation of
wind turbines in the future. Since the use of regional lakes as the
domestic water source was cancelled due to reasonable comments
on the related environmental impacts, the uncertainties on this
issue will not be further discussed in the final report.
Conclusions of Draft CEE Report
The ICG advised that the statement of “proposed activity would
lead to minimum disturbance of the environment” is not adequately
supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. This
statement will be replaced by “more than minor or transitory” to
comply with Article 3 of Annex I and will be supported with related
data in the final CEE report.
It was mentioned in the draft CEE report that short-term
expeditions could lead to similar or higher carbon emissions
compared to the operation of a station in the long term. Some
comments on the draft CEE noted that the operation of the
proposed station would still involve shipping support. As suggested
by the ICG participants, this statement will be reviewed in the final
report.
Summary
Turkey conveys its appreciation to the ICG participants for their
valuable comments, Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, CEP Chair; and
Australia for convening the ICG process and providing an
outstanding ICG report. The draft CEE report will be revised based
on comments received from ICG participants and the discussions
that will be held during the CEP meeting. Turkey anticipates
delivering the final CEE report in due time.
For further comments or information, please contact:
Mr Ahmet Varır
CEP Representative of Turkey
Ministry of Environment and Urbanization
Mustafa Kemal Mah, Eskişehir Yolu, 9. Km, No:278, Ankara/Turkey
Tel: +90 312 586 31 56
E-mail: ahmet.varir@csb.gov.tr
