Tourism Management Policy for Esperanza Antarctic Station
English version provided by the author
Tourism Management Policy for Esperanza Antarctic Station
Information paper presented by Argentina
Background
In 2010 Argentina presented Working Paper 49 “Proposal for the
elaboration of guidelines for stations that receive visitors” in order
to promote Parties to elaborate guidelines for tourist visits to the
stations managed by them.
As a result of debates, many Parties supported the proposal that
stations should have written policies related to visitors (paragraph
245 Final Report XXXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM)). Through the IP 86 “Tourism Management Policy for
Carlini Scientific Station” of the XXXVII ATCM and IP 131 “Tourism
Management Policy for Brown Scientific Station” of the XXXVII
ATCM, Argentina presented its guidelines for the above mentioned
stations.
The different guidelines that Parties have been communicating to
regulate visits to their Antarctic stations, have been incorporated to
the IAATO “Field Operations Manual”, in order to apply them
during visits to those facilities by their associated operators and
individuals. Argentina would appreciate that these guidelines also
be included in the referred Manual.
Esperanza Antarctic Station
Esperanza Station (63˚24'S, 56˚59'W) is a permanent Argentine
facility, located in the homonymous bay, at the northeastern tip of
the Antarctic Peninsula, on the western margin of the Antarctic
Sound, precisely along the coastal strip of Punta Foca in the middle
between Aguila Cove to the west and Choza Cove to the east. It was
founded on 17 December 1952 and has been in continuous
operation ever since.
It is currently the Argentine station where important natural,
scientific, historical and educational values are concentrated in the
same area. This situation results in the development of numerous
research projects covering various subjects, including studies on
glaciology and permafrost, geology, seismology, birds (penguins
and skuas), physiology, monitoring of the ecosystem, geodesy,
historical heritage, meteorology, etc. Some of the highlights of the
area include the presence of Historic Sites and Monuments Nos. 39
and 40, the significant geological heritage that make up the 148
Monte Flora ASPA, the Gentoo and Adelie penguin colonies - the
latter considered one of the largest colonies on the Antarctic
Peninsula, with more than 100,000 breeding pairs, has been
monitored since 1995, the LRA 36 Radio Station "Radio Nacional
Arcángel San Gabriel", the Gustavo Giro Tapper Museum, the Saint
Francis of Assisi Chapel and the Provincial School No. 38, President
Raúl Ricardo Alfonsín.
The station also has a permanent seismograph, in cooperation with
the Italian Antarctic Programme, and points of geodetic importance
such as the SPRZ Permanent GNSS station.
Although the climatic conditions of each summer could complicate
landings in the area, Esperanza Station and the homonymous bay,
according to statistics, are among the sites chosen by tour operators.
In recent years, the number of visitors, according to records
published by IAATO, has averaged 2,500 visitors per season, with
summers recording even higher numbers.
While research is carried out throughout the year, it is during the
summer when both scientific and tourist activities coincide with the
period of conditioning and cleaning of the facilities and the
surrounding area and, consequently, the number of people at the
station increases.
Tourism Management Policy for Esperanza Antarctic Station
In this context of intensification of activities carried out at the
station, and taking into account the scientific activity of each
season, Argentina has decided to implement a regulated reception
of visits, in order to ensure that all the activities carried out there
do not interfere with each other.
This has also been assessed in line with Recommendation XVIII-1
(1994) “Tourism Guidelines”, Resolution 5 (2007) “Tourism in the
Area of the Antarctic Treaty”, Resolution 7 (2009) “General
principles of Antarctic Tourism”, la Resolution 4 (2007) “Maritime
tourism”, among others. Likewise, Measure 15 (2009)
“Disembarkation of people from passenger vessels in the Area of the
Antarctic Treaty”, already ratified by Argentina, although not yet in
force, was also considered.
The guidelines annexed to this document, aim at regulating visits to
Esperanza Station, preserving both the scientific and logistic
activities being undertaken, as well as the environmental and
historical values of the area, while allowing a safe visit of tourists to
the area of the station facilities. These guidelines apply to the
station facilities while Esperanza bay area and the zodiac type boat
rides that take place therein are excluded.
Informative talks on the environmental and historical values and
station activities by assigned station personnel will complement the
guidelines for visitors, allowing for a better experience during the
visit.
Compliance with the guidelines should be observed by all visitors
requesting a visit to Esperanza Station, whether it is carried out as
part of an activity organised by an IAATO member operator or an
independent operator.
The visitor guidelines are hereby notified and we request it be
incorporated into the IAATO Field Operations Manual. It is also
requested that those Parties or Competent Authorities evaluating
tourism activities that include a visit to Esperanza Station, inform
the organizers of activities of these guidelines, at the same time as
notifying the Argentine Antarctic Programme.
The guidelines will be reviewed every time it is considered relevant,
and updates and new versions will be appropriately informed.
