Diversity in Polar Science Initiative: Polar Horizons
Diversity in Polar Science Initiative: Polar Horizons
Information paper submitted by the United Kingdom
As part of a series of activities and initiatives to mark the 200th
anniversary of the discovery of Antarctica, the UK established a
Diversity in Polar Science initiative. For at least the first 150 years
of Antarctic exploration, visitors were overwhelmingly men. Given
that Antarctica drives global systems and that the impact of climate
change on the continent has global consequences, which will affect
everyone, the initiative was developed to deliver a more diverse
and inclusive future for UK Polar science, that better reflects British
society.
Over the past two years, Diversity in Polar Science has delivered a
range of activities, events and resources aimed at celebrating the
existing diversity within the UK Polar community, and promoting
and enhancing Antarctic science opportunities to under-represented
groups, including women, people from ethnic minorities, people
with a disability, and LGBT+.
“Polar Horizons” events took place in 2020 and 2021 to bring
together early career researchers (ECRs) from under-represented
groups, primarily in science, technology, engineering and maths
disciplines. Twenty-two ECRs participated in early 2020, when the
event was initially hosted in-person at the British Antarctic Survey,
but with the necessity of hosting online in 2021, over 100 ECRs
were able to participate. ECRs were immersed in an intensive and
varied overview of Polar research, and also paired with established
Polar researchers from their field of study for more detailed
discussions, mentoring and career advice. Polar Horizons alumni
were then invited to ongoing online seminars and events and
encouraged to join the established UK Polar Network (of ECRs),
which has also increased its focus and engagement on the
promotion of diversity in the UK polar community.
In response to a number of inquiries about the Polar Horizons
initiative, the British Antarctic Survey has put together a ‘How to’
guide. This is attached to this Information Paper (and also available
along with other resources developed and compiled through the
Diversity in Polar Science initiative at https://www.bas.ac.uk/
project/diversity-in-uk-polar-science-initiative/diversity-in-uk-polar-
science-resources/) for ATCM colleagues.
