Latitudinal network of multiparametric stations in Antarctica and
Climate Change Observatory
English version provided by the author
Latitudinal network of multiparametric stations in Antarctica and
Climate Change Observatory
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Background
Global warming is a phenomenon that does not affect the entire
planet homogeneously. While in equatorial regions, its effects are
much more attenuated, in polar regions, they are intensified thanks
to a fundamental principle called “polar amplification”.
Chile is one of the longest countries in the world, but with a north-
south axis, and the latitudinal influence is evident, making it a
country highly vulnerable to climate change, since it has low-lying
coastal areas; arid and semi-arid zones; forest areas; territory
susceptible to natural disasters; areas prone to drought and
desertification; urban areas with air pollution problems; and
mountainous ecosystems. In addition to this, Antarctica is important
as a global climate regulator.
While in the Chilean north, there is little precipitation and the
average annual temperature is high, in the south, precipitation is
much higher, and temperatures are low. Between the two extremes,
there is a gradient of temperature, precipitation and other
parameters of interest for the study of climate change. If we project
this latitudinal variation towards the Antarctic Peninsula, we will
have the longest latitudinal gradient to study climate change in the
world, spanning more than 8,000 kilometers.
A number of facilities and capabilities already exist in continental
South American Chile, to which will be added, thanks to a project
led by the Chilean Antarctic Institute, a network of multi-
parametric sensors that will have as its axis the Chilean stations
along the Antarctic Peninsula, up to the Union Glacier (only 1,000
km from the South Pole), in a first stage.
In a second stage, wide areas of land and sea between the Antarctic
bases will be sensed by means of automatic stations, generating a
continuous gradient of climate change measurements.
The network's backbone includes 2,118 linear km, from the INACH
station "Professor Julio Escudero" to the Union Glacier Joint Polar
Station. This represents the largest permanent sensor network ever
installed in Antarctica, but it is also a powerful tool for
understanding and modelling the global change scenarios that are
already affecting the world and will undoubtedly provide
fundamental data for future development models based on quality
scientific information.
This project will be part of other initiatives such as the Climate
Change Observatory, promoted by the Chilean Ministry of Science,
Technology, Knowledge and Innovation (CTCI).
First stage: installation of sensors in Antarctica
The project involves installing 21 automatic stations, of which 10
will be at Chilean stations and 11 in areas where there is no direct
information. The sensors include measurements of basic
climatological parameters such as temperature, humidity,
atmospheric pressure, wind speed, solar radiation, water and snow
precipitation, among others, as well as advanced equipment for
measuring albedo, multispectral and photosynthetically active
radiation, infrared temperature, soil moisture, pH, seismic and
deformation of the
Earth's crust.  
In addition, the Climate Change Observatory programme of the
Ministry of CTCI will integrate existing sensors within the national
territory, creating a decentralised sensor network (i.e., including
sensors from both public and private institutions) with an adequate
density and variety of Earth observation instruments across the
national territory. The Observatory will have governance, that will
establish interoperable standards and steer, coordinate and facilitate
collaborations between the scientific community, the public, the
public sector and the private sector. At the technical level, a data
laboratory will set up a platform to collect and open observational
data relevant to climate change, including priority data for
monitoring, ensuring continuity of data availability, aligning data
and metadata with international interoperable standards, and
providing computational resources for evidence-based analysis and
solutions.
An Information brochure on the Climate Change Observatory is
attached as an annex.
Conclusion
Chile will make a major scientific and logistical effort to install
multiparametric sensors on the Antarctic Peninsula to complete the
world's most extended latitudinal gradient to study climate change,
covering more than 8,000 kilometers. The implementation of the
first sensors and their connection to the Climate Change
Observatory will occur in December 2021.
The Climate Change Observatory and its network of Antarctic
sensors will contribute to international knowledge about climate
change and allow the international scientific community to share
data freely.
Chile would like to invite the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to be
part of this joint effort and establish cooperation mechanisms to
integrate the various existing capacities as a clear demonstration of
the fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty.
