The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data identifies
Areas of Ecological Significance in the Southern Ocean
The Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data identifies
Areas of Ecological Significance in the Southern Ocean
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This Information Paper provides further detail in support of
Working Paper 52 and the draft Resolution on Areas of Ecological
Significance identified in the Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic
Tracking Data (RAATD) project.
Background
In 2009, the marine predator research community was invited to
provide tracking data to the Scientific Committee for Antarctic
Research’s Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals. Over the
next decade, and with the support of WWF and Centre d’Etudes et
de Synthèse pour l’Analyse de la Biodiversité (CESAB, France), the
Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD) team
collated and painstakingly quality-controlled and filtered over
4,000 tracks (3 million locations) from 17 marine predator species,
studied between 1991 and 2016. This dataset, published in a recent
data paper (Ropert-Coudert et al. 2020), includes contributions
from more than 70 scientists from 12 National Antarctic Programs
and represents the field efforts of hundreds of individuals. An
important feature of the dataset is that it is freely available to
everyone. The data underpinned a second paper, published in the
journal Nature (Hindell et al. 2020), wherein the RAATD team
identified ‘Areas of Ecological Significance’ in the Southern Ocean,
and highlighted the relevance of these areas for management and
conservation of the region.
Identifying which oceanic areas warrant special protection from
existing, developing, and forthcoming threats is inherently difficult
in the vast Southern Ocean. However, electronic tracking data from
birds and marine mammals can be used to provide fundamental
insights into zones that are relevant to their biology. The approach
relies on a simple principle - these mobile animals primarily go to
places at sea where they find food. Therefore, identifying areas of
the Southern Ocean where predators most commonly go tells us
where their prey can be found. For example, baleen whales and
penguins go to places where they can feed on krill, whereas some
seals and albatrosses go where they can find fish, squid, or other
prey, in general. If different predators and their diverse prey are
found in the same place then this area has both high diversity and
abundance of species from multiple trophic levels, indicating that
the area is of high ecological significance.
Key findings
Hindell et al. (2020) used these animal tracking data to model the
circumpolar habitat preferences of 17 marine predator species (12
seabird species and 5 marine mammal species) to identify regions
that were important to all these species, termed ‘Areas of Ecological
Significance’ (AESs).
The most important of these areas are scattered around the
Antarctic continental shelf and in two wider oceanic regions, one
projecting from the Antarctic Peninsula engulfing the Scotia Arc
and another surrounding the sub-Antarctic islands in the Indian
sector of the Southern Ocean.
The locations of AESs correspond with the availability of suitable
breeding or resting habitat, and regional oceanography and sea ice
dynamics that affect biological productivity. However, climate
model projections indicate that these areas of important habitat
may change by 2100. Continued monitoring of species and an on-
going assessment of the effectiveness of conservation and
management actions will therefore be important. Further predator
tracking work will also provide an important means to guide
understanding of the efficacy of conservation actions, and to inform
dynamic management into the future.
Conclusions
The findings of Hindell et al. (2020) identify regions that are likely
to have high biodiversity and biomass of the prey of the animals
that were tracked, and the ecosystems that support these prey,
providing an ecosystem-level analysis of the areas that most
warrant protection. Pressures on AESs owing to climate change will
affect all parts of the Southern Ocean, but their effects are likely to
be strongest on the Antarctic continental margin. The responses of
species to these pressures are difficult to predict, highlighting the
need for continued monitoring as part of ongoing management
actions. Adaptive management approaches to conservation,
including protected areas, will be necessary to deal with future
changes in a timely way. This work highlights where future science-
informed policy efforts might best be directed.
References
Hindell, M. A., Reisinger, R. R., Ropert-Coudert, Y., et al. (2020)
Tracking of marine predators to protect Southern Ocean ecosystems.
Nature 580, 87-92, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2126-y.
Ropert-Coudert, Y., Van de Putte, A., Reisinger, R. R., et al. (2020)
The retrospective analysis of Antarctic tracking data project.
Scientific Data 7, doi:10.1038/s41597-020-0406-x.
