WMO Annual Report
WMO Annual Report
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
The World Meteorological Organization www.wmo.int (WMO) is a
specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 193 Member
States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on
the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction
with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting
distribution of water resources.
WMO has framed its Polar and High Mountain activities as part of
the WMO Strategic Plan 2020-2023 along the following priorities:
(i) integration of surface and space observations, (ii) polar
prediction and services, including climate services, (iii) the Global
Cryosphere Watch pre-operational phase, (iv) high mountain
activities, (v) transition from research to operation and services,
and (vi) resources and partnership.
The activities of WMO related to Antarctica has been coordinated
through the Executive Council Panel on Polar and High Mountains
Observations, Research, and Services (EC-PHORS), since 2007. In
2021, EC-PHORS held its 10th session and the report in available
online. The meeting recommended revised terms of reference of the
Panel including a focus on the evolution of the coordination of
those activities on Antarctica where WMO could make contributions
to advance specific current and emerging goals, as well as the
engagements with other actors in the region, e.g. SCAR, COMNAP,
etc.
WMO Observations and Data activities relevant to Antarctica:
WMO continues to play a key role in facilitating programmes of
surface and upper-air meteorological observations in the Antarctic
by working with relevant scientific organizations, and the
standardization of observing, coding, data exchange and data
management practices applied to the Antarctic. Following the
governance reform of WMO activities, these will receive active
support through the structures of the WMO Commission for
Observation, Infrastructure and Information Systems (Infrastructure
Commission).
The 73rd session of the WMO Executive Council (EC-73), which will
take place in June 2021, will consider for approval the pre-
operational plan of the Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW). A
summary on the GCW Sea Ice objectives was published in the WMO
Bulletin Vol 70(1) - 2021 https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?
explnum_id=10595.
The observing stations operated in Antarctica provide critical input
to global prediction models and the availability of their data in real
time is critical. To facilitate the registration of available surface
stations in the WMO’s Observing System Capability and Analysis
Tool (OSCAR/Surface) WMO has provided further clarification
regarding the allocation of WIGOS Station Identifiers (WSI) for
stations operating in Antarctica. Specifically, station operators are
invited to connect with their national OSCAR/Surface Focal Points
who are authorised to issue WSIs for Antarctica-based stations
operated by national institutions. These Focal Points will also
provide guidance on the registration process, based on the
nationally agreed policies. The list of the OSCAR/Surface national
focal points is available from https://community.wmo.int/
governance/commission-membership/national-focal-points-
oscarsurface.
Additionally, several other programmes, including the Global
Cryosphere Watch, has been authorized to issue WSIs, where these
are not issued by the National Focal Points. This clarification should
further facilitate the engagement of station operators in Antarctica,
with the goal of facilitating the real time data exchange from these
stations.
During the current intersessional period, WMO is developing two
critical policies, which will be discussed at EC-73. The first is on the
Unified Data Policy for the International Exchange of Earth System
Data and the second is on establishing the regulatory framework for
a Global Basic Observing Network, to which the observing stations
in Antarctica are expected to make a critical contribution.
A concept of a WIGOS Data Quality Monitoring System (WDQMS)
developed by WMO is relatively mature. A pilot project using the
existing monitoring capabilities of the global NWP Centres for the
surface component of the Global Observing System is being
transitioned to pre-operational status and has already demonstrated
the value of such a system. WMO is interested to support the
implementation of this concept for the stations operated in
Antarctica and collaborate with interested organizations, in this
sense.
Winter Antarctic Targeted Observing Periods and Further Plans of
the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) 2017-2019 galvanised extra
observation and modelling efforts in both the Arctic and Antarctic.
YOPP is part of the World Meteorological Organization's Polar
Prediction Project (PPP). From July 2019, the PPP moved into its
Consolidation Phase. This final phase of PPP (until end of 2022) is
crucial to synthesize the data and research from the Preparation
and Core Phases and to determine the long-term success of YOPP.
YOPP-SH is currently planning a second Special Observing Period,
mid-April to mid-July 2022, coinciding with the rapid expansion of
the sea-ice cover (see associated IP 94).
 
Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (AntRCC) Network: the
Ccope and Concept
WMO, with partners, continued with the development of an
Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (AntRCC) Network. To
facilitate the engagement of countries (including Treaty Parties,
WMO Members etc.) interested in climate services for the Antarctic
Region, including representatives from operational, research and
user communities, WMO in coordination with the Secretariat of
Antarctic Treaty and other partners, organized a “Scoping
Workshop on Climate Services for Polar Regions: Towards
Implementing an Antarctic RCC- Network”. A majority of country
representatives expressed a clear indication of interest to contribute
to Antarctic RCC-Network activities, and mutually agreed that the
RCC implementation for the Antarctic would likely be based on a
distributed-function model, similar to that of the WMO Regional
Association VI serving Europe, that is countries with strong
capabilities in mandatory functions could take the lead
responsibility for specific functions and involve other contributors
to form a consortium. Further details are provided in the associated
IP 95.
Antarctic Science activities of the World Climate Research
Programme
Through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme2,
WMO carries out a number of research activities and modelling on a
variety of scales in which the climate of the Antarctic region is a
key aspect. For example, its Climate and Cryosphere Core Project
(http://www.climate-cryosphere.org) with an international office at
the Bjerknes Centre in Norway, focusses on the cryosphere
component of the climate system. This includes coordinating a
number of research activities (often in partnership with SCAR) on
ice sheet mass balance and sea level, sea ice, permafrost and other
cryosphere components. WCRP also coordinates a number of
modelling activities of relevance to Treaty Parties, including
Antarctic CORDEX https://cordex.org/domains/region-10-
antarctica/ (the Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment,
with an office at the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological
Institute), and the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project that
produces the scenario runs used by the IPCC https://www.wcrp-
climate.org/wgcm-cmip (now also with a new project office hosted
by the European Space Agency in the UK).
As part of the implementation of its Strategic Plan 2019-2028
https://www.wcrp-climate.org/wcrp-sp WCRP has started a number
of new activities of interest to Parties. Key among these are the new
WCRP Lighthouse Activities https://www.wcrp-climate.org/wcrp-
ip-la being developed (see Figure 1, below). We welcome
engagement in the development of these activities and intend to
provide additional information on the relevance of these to the
Antarctic region at a future ATCM.
Figure 1: WCRP’s new Lighthouse Activities. See: https://
www.wcrp-climate.org/wcrp-ip-la for details.
A number of regionally-based Climate Research Forums https://
www.wcrp-climate.org/climate-research-forums to exchange ideas,
discuss new activities and opportunities are being developed by
WCRP, to explore ways that our community of scientists, partner
programs, funders and end-users of our climate science can engage.
We invite interested Parties and others to take part.
WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate
Each year WMO produces a high-level “Statement on the State of
the Global Climate” https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/
climate/wmo-statement-state-of-global-climate with key partners,
including SCAR. These statements are presented at the Conference
of Parties (COP) meetings and other fora and are available in
English, Spanish, Russian, French, Chinese and Arabic. Copies can
be downloaded from: https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?
explnum_id=10618
WMO continues to look forward to a positive, mutually beneficial
engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate
observations, services and research. For further queries please
contact Mike Sparrow (msparrow@wmo.int) in the first instance.
