Training Book for the Turkish Scientific Polar Expeditions
Training Book for the Turkish Scientific Polar Expeditions
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the book prepared to be used
during the training of the participants for the Turkish scientific
polar expeditions, namely “the National Polar Science Expeditions
Training Book”.
Background
The studies of Turkish scientists on Antarctica date back to the
1960s. These studies were generally carried out with individual
initiatives until 2017. The national polar research gained a different
dimension in 2017 with the Republic of Turkey Presidential
auspices and the first National Polar Scientific Expedition was
organized in the same year. From 2017, until the first quarter of
2021, when this book was published, six National Polar Scientific
Expeditions were organized, cooperation was made with more than
80 institutions and organizations, and more than 90 researchers
participated in the expeditions.
During the preparation processes of the expeditions, coordination
and training meetings are held with all researchers and participants
within the scope of the National Polar Scientific Expeditions. The
topics of these trainings include general information on polar
regions, environmental protocol, health precautions, first-aid, fire-
fighting, life on board, communication via VHF radio, etc. The main
goal of these trainings is to inform researchers on polar regions and
create awareness of unforeseen situations during the expeditions.
These trainings involve both theoretical explanations and practical
applications. In the theoretical part, the operation of the
expeditions and related activities are explained, and the participants
are provided with knowledge about the region to be visited. In the
practical part, the trainings are generally carried out onboard a
vessel, where infrastructures of governmental institutions such as
the Turkish Coast Guard or the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) have been used. Using the
relevant infrastructure and equipment during the training, it is
aimed for the participants to gain experience on the environment to
be faced, as well as how to take action in emergencies. In addition,
during these trainings, the health and mental conditions of
researchers are monitored by psychologists and medical doctors
experienced in extreme sports, outdoor and diving topics.
The Training Book
In line with these trainings, the National Polar Science Expeditions
Training Book was prepared in 2021 to provide supplementary
educational material for both educators and expedition participants.
The book, which aims to ensure the safety and security of the
participants in the National Polar Science Expeditions, was prepared
by TUBITAK, Marmara Research Center (MAM), Polar Research
Institute (PRI) with the support of 10 authors. The titles of the
sections in the book are as follows:
Related Legislation
Science
Environment
Emergency & First Aid
Survival in Nature
Fire-fighting
Life and Safety on Board
Mental Health
Conclusion
The National Polar Science Expeditions Training Book contains
information that can be used not only in the polar regions but also
in daily life and can be applied during emergencies. The book will
be effectively utilized during the expedition trainings, and a
summarized booklet version of the book will be prepared for the
participants as well, to benefit and practice throughout the
expedition.
