Competent Authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Competent Authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Summary
ATCM XLII in 2019 agreed to establish a permanent web-based
forum for Parties to discuss tourism regulatory activities and
exchange knowledge and experience. The forum is convened by the
working group co-chair with responsibility for the ATCM tourism
agenda item. This paper reports on the establishment of the forum,
and the development of an agreed scope and purpose, identification
of priority issues for initial focus, identification of opportunities for
enhanced cooperation between competent authorities, and an
ongoing work plan and schedule. Parties are encouraged to have
their competent authorities participate in the work of the group as
appropriate.
Background
ATCM XLII considered WP19 Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5
April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Summary and Key
Recommendations (Netherlands, United Kingdom). The meeting
agreed to establish a permanent forum to allow national Competent
Authorities to discuss tourism regulatory activities, and exchange
knowledge and experience (paragraphs 372– 374, ATCM XLII final
report). The meeting agreed that the forum would be convened by
the working group chair responsible for the tourism agenda item,
and that participants may wish to establish a work plan. In
establishing the forum, the ATCM identified the following tasks:
identifying specific challenges and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation in the implementation of the Protocol;
providing advice to the ATCM on emerging issues related to tourism
regulation; and
formulating advice to the ATCM, via delegations, on specific
relevant issues.
Establishment of the forum and working arrangements
In consultation with the convener, the Secretariat established a new
online forum for the convened Competent Authorities discussions.
This forum is intended to discuss tourism-related issues of general
relevance to the competent authorities, and enhance cooperation
across a range of issues. To ensure the continued sharing of
information directly between competent authorities and others
about specific proposed activities, two pre-existing forums have
been retained (one restricted to Parties, and one that is also open to
observers and experts).
Work proceeded in a number of stages over two intersessional
periods (taking into account the cancellation of the 2020 ATCM), in
a similar manner to ATCM intersessional contact groups.
Discussions commenced with proposals from the Convener on scope
and purpose, working arrangements, workplan and schedule,
identification of opportunities for enhanced cooperation, and
identification of priority issues for initial discussion. Argentina,
Chile, France, Germany, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain,
the United Kingdom, the United States, and Uruguay participated in
the discussions. The discussions and working documents can be
accessed by Parties in the ATCM online discussion forum.
The convener noted that previous discussions had identified a long
list of Competent Authorities issues that could benefit from
consideration in the forum, and suggested that it would be useful to
identify a smaller number of priority issues to address initially.
Views were invited from participants on the issues they considered
to be highest priority. To assist in this consideration, the convener
provided a summary list of issues previously raised (from the ATCM
discussion forums, the report of the 2019 Rotterdam Antarctic
tourism workshop (ATCM XLII IP11), the ATCM XXXVIII Special
Working Group on Competent Authorities Issues, and relevant
ATCM Measures and Resolutions). Participants were also invited to
suggest any additional issues (including new and emerging issues)
that were not so far included on the list. Finally,
views were invited from participants on opportunities and
challenges for enhanced cooperation between the competent
authorities.
Outcomes of discussions
Scope and purpose
The participants discussed details of the scope and purpose of
discussions (within the mandate established by ATCM XLII), and
agreed on a statement (below) to guide work in the forum.
Scope and purpose:
The competent authorities will consider issues related to
authorisation of tourism and non-governmental activities that have
general relevance for most competent authorities, with a view to:
identifying specific challenges and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation in the implementation of the Protocol, ATCM Measures
and Resolutions;
identifying for ATCM consideration emerging issues related to
tourism regulation; and
formulating advice to the ATCM, via delegations, on specific
relevant issues related to the evaluation and authorisation of tourist
and non-governmental activities.
The forum will be convened by the ATCM working group chair
responsible for the tourism agenda item. Discussion will be guided
by a work plan, and will address issues as agreed by participants,
including new and emerging issues as necessary. The convened
forum is open to participation by all national competent authorities
and wide participation is encouraged. The convened forum is not
intended to replace the other web-based forums for discussion and
consultation on specific tourism and non-government activity
proposals.
Identifying priority issues for initial discussion
The group considered competent authorities issues that have been
previously raised, and provided views on their priorities. A list of
five priority issues was agreed (below, not in priority order). The
group noted that other issues could be added or prioritised at any
point as necessary.
Priority issues for initial focus:
Harmonisation of standards;
Nested permits / permits where multiple activities are authorised
by different Parties on the same expedition;
Compliance and enforcement issues of common interest to the
competent authorities (excluding arrangements under national
legislation);
Issues arising from new activities or those seldom conducted, and
potentially risky activities;
Scientific activities associated with tourism activities.
A number of potential new issues were raised in the discussion. The
group considered these, and noted that some had already been
discussed in the ATCM as policy matters, and that some were
outside the scope of the forum, or would require further
development. There was no agreement to further consider these
additional issues in the discussions of the forum.
Opportunities for enhanced cooperation
Ideas and views on opportunities for enhanced cooperation between
competent authorities were collated. These included, in addition to
the forum itself: ad hoc meetings of competent authority
representatives, including in the margins of the ATCM; building
working-level contacts between competent authorities; theme-based
webinars; and videoconferences.
A number of participants observed that recent experiences with
virtual meeting platforms and other online tools demonstrate that
effective and efficient cooperation can occur using virtual and
online tools. Some
participants also regarded face to face meetings (in the margins of
the ATCM and/or separately convened) as desirable when
conditions allow.
The group will continue to progress this work virtually, in the web-
based forum. As specific issues from the priority list are discussed in
more detail, the group will consider whether aspects of the work
might benefit from focused attention, for example via a virtual
meeting or webinar. More detailed discussion of potential face to
face meetings will await improvements in the health and travel
situation.
Ongoing workplan and schedule
The group will begin discussion of the priority issues following
ATCM XLIII, with a first stage of discussion to commence in mid-
August 2021.
Participation in the convened forum
The convened forum is open to participation by all national
competent authorities and wide participation is encouraged.
