National Antarctic Programs’ operations during an unprecedented
Antarctic season
Working through a global pandemic and the strength of COMNAP
National Antarctic Programs’ operations during an unprecedented
Antarctic season
Working through a global pandemic and the strength of COMNAP
Summary
For the 2020/21 Antarctic season, a common goal focussed
COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs: keep the
coronavirus off the Antarctic continent, thereby keeping national
Antarctic program expeditioners healthy and safe. In support of this
goal:
COMNAP established the COVID-19 ad hoc Subcommittee.
COMNAP developed the “COVID-19 Outbreak Prevention and
Management Guidelines”.
COMNAP EXCOM increased their usual level of contact hours and
met (online) regularly across the year to focus on COVID-19
relevant strategies to support the Membership.
COMNAP Member and Observer national Antarctic programs
increased their usual level of contact hours, and in addition to the
AGM and Symposium, met (online) regularly in addition to any
usual bilateral and multilateral meetings.
All COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs implemented
COVID-19 protocols.
All but two COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs reduced
their overall planned activity with overall Antarctic season activity
reduced by an average of 58%.
Long-term science, critical maintenance of buildings, infrastructure
and equipment, including scientific equipment, was carried out
successfully.
Purpose of this Information Paper
In a year of extraordinary challenges, national Antarctic programs
recognised the increased risks presented to their operations during a
global pandemic and proactively responded. This paper highlights
the remarkable efforts by all COMNAP national Antarctic programs
from December 2019 through to the present that enabled a
challenging and successful Antarctic season to take place. The
programs went to extreme measures to meet their obligations to
deliver and support their countries’ Antarctic, and in some cases
polar, research strategies, while focussing on keeping expeditioners
healthy and safe. Information presented in this paper was gathered
from a range of sources including from the COMNAP “Townhall
Meetings” and from an informal survey of Members related to the
2020/21 Antarctic season.
Fundamental principles and common goals
National Antarctic programs all support one fundamental principle:
Identify then mitigate or eliminate risk in order to keep Antarctic
expeditioners safe.
Coupled with the fundamental safety principle, the purpose of each
program can be broadly and generally described as to continually
manage their Governments’ long-term investments in Antarctic
infrastructure and research. Over the years, programs have
developed various ways and means to do this and support efficient
seasonal and year-round operations and logistics systems to/from
their home countries to/from Antarctica. They have well-developed
systems to support, equip and deliver their countries’ research
strategy in the Antarctic. The global pandemic challenged these
traditional ways and means.
For the 2020/21 Antarctic season, a common goal focussed
COMNAP Member national Antarctic programs, that was, keep the
coronavirus off the Antarctic continent, thereby keeping national
Antarctic program expeditioners healthy and safe. By-and-large this
goal was achieved and Antarctica remained the only COVID-19 free
continent for a year from the time when, in December 2019, the
World Health Organisation (WHO) was informed of cases of
pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan City, China, and for nine
months
from March 2020, when the WHO announced that the COVID-19
outbreak was a global pandemic. At the time of writing, there are
no reported cases of COVID-19 in Antarctica.
Prepare for an unprecedented Antarctic season
In early 2020, against the rapidly evolving global situation, the
Antarctic season 2019/2020 was at peak activity. In March, as the
WHO declared a global pandemic, many of the national Antarctic
programs had successfully completed their summer season and were
actively moving people, cargo and scientific samples north. Some
were completing final tasks from the summer season and many had
entered or were about to enter winter-over mode.
As the global situation began to worsen, some national Antarctic
programs ended their 2019/20 Antarctic summer season earlier
than planned, withdrawing personnel from Antarctica under
urgency. As expeditioners were moving north to travel to their
home countries, it became apparent that borders were closing,
travel options were becoming limited and different countries had
very differing levels of outbreak and response protocols. It took
some expeditioners longer to travel home than the duration of their
stay in Antarctica. At the close of all summer stations, the 975
winter-overs settled in on the only COVID-19 free continent.
On 9 March 2020, the COMNAP EXCOM met under urgency to
“focus on devising a strategy that collectively strengthens national
efforts to avoid introducing the coronavirus (COVID-19) disease to
Antarctica.” EXCOM established the COMNAP COVID-19 ad hoc
Subcommittee to advise COMNAP on matters of preparedness and
response to the disease. Regular communications intensified
amongst the Joint Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine
(JEGHBM). Through COMNAP, a single focus mobilised the national
Antarctic programs: Keep the coronavirus off the Antarctic
continent, thereby keeping national Antarctic program
expeditioners healthy and safe.
On 18 March, the “COMNAP SARS‐CoV‐2 / COVID‐19
Recommendations (non‐mandatory) in the context of Antarctic
Operations Working Paper” was sent to all programs. The document
recognised that “Importantly the ability to respond to a highly
infectious novel virus with significant mortality and morbidity in
the extreme and austere environment of Antarctica with limited
sophistication of medical care and public health responses is High
Risk with potential catastrophic consequences including death.”
There being no known cases of COVID-19 in Antarctica the key
message was “Act Early and Act Strongly as containment and
prevention must be the priority to prevent introduction of SARS‐
CoV‐19 in Antarctica.”
The Working Paper recommended that “...all national Antarctic
programs who have not already closed their seasonal facilities or
who have not yet entered TOTAL winter‐over/winter isolation
mode, should urgently reconsider any scheduled access, personnel
and freight transport into Antarctica...” and also that “Tourists
should be prevented from entering national Antarctic program
facilities and from any interaction with national Antarctic program
personnel. Tourists MUST be prevented from visiting research
stations”. Regular communications between the COMNAP and
IAATO Secretariats was established, maintained and proved fruitful.
Later, it became known, that nearly 60% of 217 people on-board
the tourist vessel Greg Mortimer tested positive for coronavirus
upon arrival in Uruguay after activity in the Antarctic Peninsula
region between 18–22 March 2020. That vessel had no plans in
their schedule to visit any occupied stations while in Antarctica.
By 29 June 2020, “The COMNAP COVID-19 Outbreak Prevention &
Management Guidelines” were developed and were distributed to
Member and Observer national Antarctic programs and shared with
IAATO. The Guidelines are a demonstration of consensus
commitment to the common goal. They continue to be regularly
reviewed and updated. Renewed guidelines in anticipation of
Antarctic season 2021/22 are currently under development.
Member national Antarctic programs relied upon the relationships,
communications chain and network that COMNAP has provided for
over 30 years. Through COMNAP, advice based on WHO technical
guidance was quickly developed and shared. The advice was
strengthen by Member programs freely contributing their relevant
expertise and lessons learned. More than ever, the COMNAP
Membership supported each other with instrumental leadership
from the COMNAP Secretariat and the EXCOM.
As the year progressed there was hope that the global pandemic
would end sooner rather than later. National Antarctic programs
were planning for “normal” operations but were also making
contingency plans. Soon, it became clear that the pandemic was not
lessening and vaccination was some time off.
Recognising that if Antarctic season 2020/21 was to take place, and
if the fundamental principle of keeping expeditioners safe was to be
met, programs had to implement strict protocols and reduce all
planned activity. Again, the COMNAP network proved critical in
this regard with regular online meetings organised through the
Secretariat which were well-attended and provided platforms to
share information on protocols and the status at each gateway.
Through the COVID-19 ad hoc Subcommittee and the JEGHBM,
national Antarctic program medical directors continuously shared
their COVID-19 response plans and resources and supported each
other.
All programs implemented COVID-19 protocols for their deploying
expeditioners and all but two programs reduced their overall
planned activity.
Develop and implement strict protocols: Medical
The COMNAP Guidelines recommended that in addition to the
usual pre-deployment medical screening of expeditioners, “medical
doctors carry out a notes screening and physical screening for
Antarctic deploying personnel that gives consideration to, the risk
factors for COVID‐19”. This additional screening was a ‘first line of
defence’. Those expeditioners that failed the pre-deployment
medical screening were replaced and many national Antarctic
programs built redundancy into their hiring process for this reason
and also in the case where an expeditioner did pass the medical but
was stopped in transit to Antarctica for testing positive for
COVID-19. National Antarctic programs built support into their
programs in case of this eventuality.
In preparedness for the season, all national Antarctic programs were
urged to review and enhance their healthcare staffing levels,
training and remote medical support requirements, diagnostic
capability, infection control and isolation capability, any ICU
capability including prolonged capabilities (oxygen supplies) and
their medevac plans. Many of the national Antarctic programs
acquired and shipped Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) testing kits
and equipment to Antarctic facilities or outfitted their vessels with
testing capabilities, along with additional Personal Protection
Equipment (PPE) supplies. Information in regards to any special
medical capabilities/equipment availability was shared during the
COMNAP AGM Regional Break-out Groups sessions, in advance of
the start of the season. An update of this information share will take
place during the COMNAP AGM 2021 (July).
Develop and implement strict protocols: Pre-departure quarantine/
isolation and testing
The COMNAP Guidelines called for “Managed isolation...for all
expeditioners for at least a minimum of 14 days as part of the pre-
deployment process.” The guidelines urged for testing coupled with
the isolation protocols and recommended “No one with a positive
pre‐deployment COVID‐19 test result to be deployed...” to
Antarctica.
All programs implemented COVID-19 protocols for their deploying
expeditioners. In some cases, these were on top of any protocols
established for international travellers arriving at the Antarctic
gateway. In other cases, national Antarctic programs utilised long-
haul transport options such as vessels or charter aircraft so that
there was no transiting during deployment, meaning isolation
remained in place for the duration of the journey to/from Antarctic
to/from the home nation.
Implementation of the protocols required significant additional
funding for the majority of the programs. Informal survey results
suggest the extra costs ranged from $USD10,000 to $USD3.5M. On
average, the extra funding was $USD425,000 per program.
Reduce activity while maintaining critical long-term investments:
Infrastructure including scientific equipment
While some Antarctic infrastructure, including scientific equipment,
can spend long periods of time autonomously in the extreme
environments of Antarctica, all require regular maintenance and
assurances related to power supply. Normal Antarctic conditions
and also extreme weather events, including high winds and storms,
can lead to damage or downtime of instrumentation which, if left
undiscovered, can jeopardise science projects and interrupt long-
term datasets. Therefore, Government investment in Antarctic
infrastructure relies on national Antarctic program personnel
expertise and on regular maintenance. Antarctic
summer seasons are the optimum time to complete regular
maintenance of infrastructures and to confirm reliability of
scientific equipment, deploy new scientific instrumentation and
retrieve collected and stored winter-over data when real-time data
transfer is not available. So any decision to reduce activity and
personnel going south had to be coupled with consideration as to
how required maintenance and science support would be
completed. Antarctic buildings require regular inspection, care and
maintenance to endure Antarctic conditions. Missing regular
maintenance can be catastrophic for some infrastructure and a
single missed season risks loss of investment and entire research
programs over multiple years.
All but two of the 30 COMNAP Member national Antarctic
programs decided to reduce overall Antarctic activity for the
summer season 2020/21. Four of the programs had no activity at
all-meaning they did not send expeditioners to the Antarctic for the
season and kept their key infrastructures closed. Large construction
and infrastructure maintenance projects were postponed and
programs reviewed essential activity requirements, focusing on
those.
Informal survey results showed:
Overall activity for the 2020/21 Antarctic summer season was
down/reduced by 58% on average across all programs (range from
20% less to 85% less).
There was 60% less logistics activity (range from 15% less to 90%
less and in some cases 100% less in either air or sea logistics than
what would be normal/usual).
There was 66% less scientific activity with less scientists deployed
than would be usual/normal (range from 10% less to 100% less,
that is, no scientists deployed).
There were an average of 68% less people deployed than would be
normal for an Antarctic summer season.
Inter-continental flights were significantly reduced and many
programs relied on their vessels to directly deliver their
expeditioners and supplies to/from Antarctica. Intra-continental
movement was also significantly reduced from normal seasonal
activity and visits between stations discouraged. The IAATO
Secretariat supported the Guideline’s recommendation for no tourist
visitations to stations.
International collaboration continues
Informal survey results indicated there was less on-ice international
collaboration due to implementation of COVID-19 protocols, but
international collaboration remained high outside of Antarctica and
in particular due to COVID-19 national procedures and protocols,
and assisting each other to navigate and understand those national
protocols and transiting procedures. Within COMNAP, there is
usually opportunity for “informal” or “opportunistic” international
collaboration or support in some manner or another. The reduction
in logistics and the challenges presented by the need to isolate and
not interact freely meant that most informal or opportunistic
requests for international support could not be met this season. This
resulted in lost or delayed opportunities that would have taken
place in any other “normal" season.
Even with isolation protocols in place, there was some international
collaboration which did take place. This was in the form of
transportation of programs cargo to/from Antarctica on-board
another program’s vessel or aircraft-most of this cargo now being
stored for work next season. Other examples included international
response during medevacs, transportation of passengers on
alternative carrier when planned vessel voyage cancelled, recovery
of scientific instrumentation and data retrieval from Antarctica, one
program used (after consultation) food and supplies (already in
Antarctica) from another national program’s cache, and sharing of
weather forecasting just to name a few examples.
Search and Rescue (SAR) coordination and response relationships
continued throughout with recognition that emergency response
requirements might still be needed across the range of Antarctic
activity (national Antarctic programs, NGO activity including
tourism and fisheries, etc.) even given the reduced level. The
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) and the Antarctic Flight
Information Manual (AFIM) became heavily replied upon tools to
understand big picture activity and duration of seasonal activity.
Antarctic science continues
All national Antarctic programs recognise the importance of their
Antarctic research, especially the continuance of long-term data
collection and multi-season projects, and endeavoured to prioritise
support of that science during a reduced activity season. There was
robust discussion with the research community. There is also
awareness that the reduction in personnel going to the Antarctic
most likely had the greatest impact on our early career researchers.
All national Antarctic programs are being encouraged to work with
their research communities to ensure support for early career
persons that might need access to available Antarctic data/samples
in archives and databases.
With informal survey results indicating there was a 66% reduction
in science in the Antarctic that means that 34% of the planned
science was supported. The results also indicated that most national
Antarctic programs are confident that their winter-over season will
be “normal”, that is, with the usual number of personnel on station
carrying out “more than last season” up to the “usual level of
science” for that station/programs. So a return to “normal”
operations with 100% winter-over science support over the current
winter-over period 2021/22.
It remains to be seen how program budgets and research funding
might be impacted for upcoming seasons. Already some programs
are seeing less research proposal submissions due to a range of
COVID-19 impacts.
Closing remarks
The 2020/21 Antarctic summer season was remarkable and the
national Antarctic programs stepped up to the added challenge
presented by operations during a global pandemic. The informal
survey of COMNAP Member programs, taken after the end of the
2020/21 Antarctic summer season, reported that a majority of the
respondents considered the season difficult but successful under the
circumstances. This success is largely due to the expertise and
resilience of the people in the national Antarctic programs who
work together within COMNAP in the spirit of cooperation that is
the foundation of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Planning has already begun for the start of Antarctic season
2021/22. Presently, the global pandemic continues, there are 219
countries with 143,532,000 total cases confirmed and over 3
million deaths. There are several vaccines available, currently 2.7%
of the global population being fully vaccinated. There are at least
five variants of concern, each with known attributes including
increased transmissibility, and uncertainties related to vaccination
efficacy. The JEGHBM has prepared a vaccine advisory paper and
COMNAP Guidelines are being reviewed and revised.
It appears that the 2021/22 season will also be especially
challenging due to the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
