Preparation of the 44 th Meeting
Berlin, 2022
Preparation of the 44th Meeting Berlin, 2022
Information paper submitted by Germany
With reference to the Final Report of ATCM 42 in Prague 2019 para
119 which states
“(119)...The Meeting encouraged all upcoming ATCM Host
Countries to submit a progress report to the ATCM in the form of an
IP a year in advance, and for upcoming Host Countries to provide
regular progress reports to the Secretariat. It also agreed that this
suggestion should be included in the Organisational Manual that
the Secretariat routinely provided to upcoming Host Countries...”,
Germany wishes to inform about its preparations for the 44th
Meeting in Berlin in 2022.
Germany very much regrets that, due to the global health situation,
it was not possible to continue the annual consultations of the
Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in the customary fashion
since early 2020. We hope that the development of the health
situation will make it possible for us all to come together for an
inperson meeting in 2022. We are aware that the Meeting in Berlin
in 2022 will play a disproportionately significant role against this
background.
It is a special honour for Germany to be hosting the Meeting again
for the first time since 1991 after an interval of 31 years. Thanks to
early planning, the preparations are advancing well.
The Meeting will take place in Berlin from 23 May to 2 June 2022.
We are expecting around 500 participants. The Estrel Congress
Center (www.estrel.com) has been chosen as the venue. A block
reservation has been made at this hotel for participants who would
prefer accommodation close to the venue. Further details will be
provided in due course.
The structures of the Meeting (ATCM Chair, ATCM Deputy
Secretary/Head of Host Country Secretariat, Head of Delegation)
outlined in the ATS Organisational Manual have been largely
determined. The funding for the Meeting is secured and the
personnel required to organise it is available. Overall responsibility
for organising the Meeting will lie with the Federal Foreign Office,
which will be supported by a very experienced conference service
provider.
We are in constant contact with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and
will give regular briefings on the further preparations for the
Meeting.
Germany has produced a film which portrays Germany’s
engagement in the Antarctic and presents a preview of the Meeting
in Berlin. The film will be shown at the ATCM in Paris under item
18 of the agenda after a short oral introduction on how the
preparations are progressing. It will subsequently be accessible to
the public (information on this will follow).
Germany is looking forward to the ATCM 2022 in Berlin.
We would like to take this opportunity to cordially invite you to the
Meeting.
