Important Bird Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:
Toward the development of selection criteria
Important Bird Areas and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
Towards the development of selection criteria
Submitted by Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Spain,
United Kingdom, United States
Summary
This Information Paper supplements Working Paper 43 by setting
out draft criteria that might be applied to identified Important Bird
Areas (IBAs) as well as to other bird colonies or aggregations The
term ‘bird areas’ is used throughout this document, which is
intended to include ‘colonies’ of birds, which is appropriate for
many Antarctic breeding species which aggregate very strongly
when breeding, as well as other locations where birds such as snow
petrels and Wilsons storm petrels, only loosely aggregate when
breeding. The term ‘colony’ is used when it clearly applies to a
certain species or when referring to Article 3(2)(c) of Annex V to
the Protocol which uses this term. when considering ASPA
designation.
Draft criteria used to select IBAs or other bird areas for ASPA
designation
A review of spatial protection criteria for breeding colonies of
seabirds used in other parts of the globe, was undertaken to inform
the development of the draft criteria. A summary of these non-
Antarctic criteria are provided in Appendix 1.
Having considered a range of issues, draft criteria, in the form of a
decision-making process that could be applied to the current list of
204 Antarctic IBAs, as well as other bird breeding sites across
Antarctica, are set out below with some examples.
Some additional issues that were raised in the development of these
criteria are recorded in Appendix 2.
Criterion A. Percent of global population present
BirdLife International’s IBA criteria are triggered when a site is
known or thought to hold 1% or more of the global population on a
regular basis. In order to further prioritise those sites which could
be designated as ASPAs, a ‘percent of global population’ threshold
could be applied. Adjusting this percentage figure up or down will
clearly decrease or increase the number of sites respectively that are
‘captured’ by the criterion.
5% is used here as an example and as a starting point for
discussion. The outcome from applying a 5% of the global
population trigger are shown in Table 1. Of the 204 IBAs identified
in Antarctica, 13 IBAs would meet this criterion, 5 of which are
already designated as ASPAs (Table 1).
Criterion B. Percent of the Antarctic population present
IBA criteria are triggered when a site is known or thought to hold
1% or more of a biogeographic population on a regular basis.
In order to further prioritise sites, a ‘percent of Antarctic
population’ threshold could be applied. As per criterion A, this
figure could be adjusted up or down which would decrease or
increase respectively the number of sites captured.
10% is used here as an example and as a starting point for
discussion and the outcome from applying the 10% of the Antarctic
population trigger is provided in table 1 below.
Of the 204 IBAs identified in Antarctica, 5 sites would meet this
criterion. Two of these sites are already designated as ASPAs and 2
IBAs that are not currently designated would meet this criterion. A
fifth site, Signy Island, also meets this criterion, but was already
identified using criterion A above.
IBAs with 5% or more of global population
IBAs with 10% or more of Antarctic population
IBA location name
Emperor
Adelie
Chinstrap
Imperial shag
Sth polar skua
Macaroni
Sthn giant petrel
Antarctic petrel
Cape Wadsworth
9%
Brunt Ice Shelf
8%
Cape Washington
6%
Cape Crozier
7%
16%
Cape Adare
6%
Cape Wallace
7%
Signy Island
7%
22%
Emperor Island, Dion Is
5%
Cockburn Island
5%
Avian Island
12%
Cierva Pt and islands
6%
Possession Is
6%
Foyn Is
5%
Craggy Point
50%
Scullin / Murray Monoliths
36%
Svarthamaren
33%
Jutulsessen
17%
Table 1. IBAs meeting 5% threshold for global population and 10%
threshold for Antarctic population. Sites marked in orange are
already designated as ASPAs. The population data used here are
based on that provided in Harris et al., 2015 Harris, C.M., Lorenz,
K., Fishpool, L.D.C., Lascelles, B., Cooper, J., Croxall, J.P.,
Emmerson, L.M., Fijn, R., Fraser, W.L., Jouventin, P., LaRue, M.A.,
Le Maho, Y., Lynch, H.J., Naveen, R., Patterson-Fraser, D.L., Peter,
H.-U., Poncet, S., Phillips, R.A., Southwell, C.J., van Franeker, J.A.,
Weimerskirch, H., Wienecke, B., & Woehler, E.J. 2015. Important
Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary. BirdLife International and
Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd., Cambridge., which may
not be the most up-to-date population assessments. There remain
high levels of uncertainty in Antarctic bird population data which
significantly reduces the reliability of the figures produced in this
table.
Note 1: Further consideration may be required to assign some
underlying rigour to the selection of such percentage trigger levels
as set out in criteria 1 and 2. The 5% and 10% figures used here as
examples have no scientific basis, other than being slightly higher
and therefore more selective than the 1% figures used in other
international criteria (as set out in Appendix 1) and which have
already been applied to derive the initial Antarctic IBA list.
Criterion C. Threat Status of the species
IBA criteria A1 qualifies sites for species with a (IUCN Red List)
threat status of ‘vulnerable’, ‘endangered’ or ‘critically endangered’,
as well as sites for species at ‘near threatened’ status where they
meet regional threshold size.
It is proposed that criterion C could trigger the need to consider
ASPA designation only for relevant IBAs for ‘vulnerable’,
‘endangered’ or ‘critically endangered’ species, in the context of the
CEP’s criteria for designating specially protected species.
Examples:
The IUCN red list currently identifies the Macaroni penguin as
‘vulnerable’; no other Antarctic bird species currently has an equal
or higher threat status, although the Emperor penguin remains
under review See for example: Trathan, P.N., Wienecke, B.,
Barbraud, C., Jenouvrier, S. et al. 2020. The emperor penguin -
Vulnerable to projected rates of warming and sea ice loss. Biological
Conservation, 241 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.108216 .
Two Macaroni penguin colonies reach the IBA A1 threshold Harris,
C.M., Lorenz, K., Fishpool, L.D.C., Lascelles, B., Cooper, J., Croxall,
J.P., Emmerson, L.M., Fijn, R., Fraser, W.L., Jouventin, P., LaRue,
M.A., Le Maho, Y., Lynch, H.J., Naveen, R., Patterson-Fraser, D.L.,
Peter, H.-U., Poncet, S., Phillips, R.A., Southwell, C.J., van
Franeker, J.A., Weimerskirch, H., Wienecke, B., & Woehler, E.J.
2015. Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary. BirdLife
International and Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd.,
Cambridge. (noting that the majority of breeding locations for this
species are north of 60o south). The largest colony is Craggy Point,
Clarence Island, which has already been identified in the previous
criterion (≥ 10% of Antarctic population present (Table 1)). The
other colony, Gibbs Island, is an IBA with Macaroni penguins,
Chinstrap penguins and Antarctic fulmars as trigger species.
Note 2: Further consideration will need to be given as to whether or
not to include this criterion, as it may result in overlap with the
separate process under Annex II to designate and accord special
protection to threatened species. In accordance with the Guidelines
for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised
Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II
to the Protocol, species with conservation status of vulnerable or
higher can be recommended for designation as a Specially Protected
Species, and an Action Plan developed. The development of the
Action Plan may itself appropriately give consideration to further
protection requirements for the species, including the possible
designation as ASPAs of some or all breeding colonies. In other
words, consideration might first be given to specially protected
species designation prior to any spatial protection measures being
applied.
Criterion D. Direct, indirect or cumulative pressures
The CEP’s Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for
Protected Areas (Resolution 1 (2000)) include the need to
undertake an environmental risk assessment to identify actual or
potential threats to identified values (see Section 2.4 of the
Guidelines).
Application of this criterion will require consideration of actual or
potential direct, indirect or cumulative pressures on identified IBAs.
The Guidelines also advise assessing the ‘degree of interference’ of a
candidate ASPA and asks to what extent the area has been subject
to human interference, whether or not there are signs of human
activities; whether or not there is a loss or addition of species,
natural processes and abiotic material, and to what extent visitation
is occurring or the landscape altered.
Consideration could be given to providing some structure to this
stage of the assessment, perhaps through the development of a
checklist of ‘aspects’ to consider. A semi-quantitative approach
might be used such that where a certain number of pressures are
identified, consideration for ASPA designation is triggered.
A checklist has not been developed at this stage, but might include,
for example, known or potential climate change implications for the
bird area; any trends in visitation numbers (perhaps within a
certain distance of the bird area); an established station or base
within a certain distance of the bird area; known past impacts
(e.g. a nearby pollution event); foreseeable future impacts such as
the planned construction of a new facility (within a certain distance
of the bird area See for example: Southwell, C., Emmerson, L.,
Takahashi, A., Barbraud, C., Delord, K. and Weimerskirch, H. 2017.
Large-scale population assessment informs conservation
management for seabirds in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean: A
case study of Adelie penguins. Global Ecology and Conservation, 9,
104-115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2016.12.004), etc.
It is also noted that sites with no known past or current impacts are
also of importance as ‘pristine’ sites for protection as baselines
studies and control sites for comparative assessment with disturbed
sites.
Criterion E. Unique or rare features
The CEP’s Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for
Protected Areas refer to the need to assess the distinctiveness of an
area (see Section 2.3).
If an IBA is identified as being unique or rare, then this might
trigger the need for ASPA designation, if the IBA has not already
been selected from the criteria applied above.
Examples might be the most southerly breeding location of a
species or a breeding location in a different habitat type to other
colonies of the species, or the only known example in a
biogeographic region.
Example:
Smith Peninsula (IBA100; identified for breeding Emperor
Penguins) is the only IBA in Southern Antarctic Peninsula ACBR 15
Other considerations
A number of additional elements may need to be taken into account
in assessing the merits of ASPA designation of an IBA or other bird
breeding area, including, for example:
whether an ASPA could be designated that incorporates more than
one IBA, such as on the Peninsula where there are dense clusters of
colonies and IBAs;
whether there is significant change in the breeding success at the
bird area (either positively or negatively) cf the environmental risk
assessment component of the CEP’s Guidelines for Implementation
of the Framework for Protected Areas;
ongoing research interest in a colony or bird assemblage e.g. long-
term datasets. cf the scientific and monitoring component of the
CEP’s Guidelines;
the extent to which a bird species is already represented with the
Antarctic protected area system cf the representativeness
component of the CEP’s Guidelines;
whether the bird area includes important or unusual assemblages of
bird species cf the diversity component of the CEP’s Guidelines;
whether the bird area is thought to play an important ecological
role e.g. nutrient run-off supporting vegetation growth around the
bird area margins cf the ecological importance component of the
CEP’s Guidelines.
Discussion
The proposed criteria are potentially presented in a priority order
for application, although, as noted above criterion C may need to sit
to one side or even be considered first if the threat status of a
species requires consideration for designation as a specially
protected species prior to any spatial management measures being
applied.
How many of the criteria need to be met in order to trigger ASPA
designation has not been proposed here. However, some of the
criteria, e.g. A and B could be established as automatic “trigger”
criteria, such that if
their conditions are met, ASPA designation for the bird area should
be considered. This needs further consideration.
The designation of ASPAs to protect bird areas in Antarctica should
not detract from the need to consider such additional protection
measures, as well as the need also to protect offshore foraging
locations. See for example: Handley J., Rouyer M-M., Pearmain E.J.,
Warwick-Evans V., Teschke K., Hinke J.T., Lynch H., Emmerson L.,
Southwell C., Griffith G., Cárdenas C.A., Franco A.M.A., Trathan P.
and Dias M.P. 2021. Marine Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas
for Penguins in Antarctica, Targets for Conservation Action. Front.
Mar. Sci. 7:602972. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.602972
Appendix 1. Non-Antarctic Criteria for Protecting Bird Colonies.
Internationally, two major approaches have been used to identify
important bird sites: the criteria developed by the Conference of
Parties to the Ramsar Convention and the criteria developed by
BirdLife International to identify IBAs Information drawn from Hall,
R. 2007. Overview of criteria that may be used in the development
of new criteria for the identification of internationally important
breeding sites critical for species listed in Annex 1 of ACAP. Paper
presented as AC3 Doc 19 Rev. 1 to the Third Meeting of the ACAP
Advisory Committee, Valdivia, Chile, 19-22 June 2007.. The criteria
developed by the UK’s Joint Nature Conservation Committee to
implement the European Birds Directive were also reviewed.
The following descriptions are included only for comparative
purposes. t is noted that whilst consideration is being given here to
developing approaches for applying the area protection mechanism
of Annex V, that this is being done in the context of the general
protections afforded to all areas/species under the Protocol. The
application of spatial protection mechanisms in other parts of the
world are more likely to be considered where there is a more
limited toolbox of conservation measures available.
Ramsar Convention criteria
The Ramsar Convention, or the Convention on Wetlands, entered
into force in 1974 and is the intergovernmental treaty that provides
the framework for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and
their resources.
The Parties to the Ramsar Convention have developed nine criteria
for identifying wetland sites of international importance Ramsar
Regional Center – East Asia. (2017). The Designation and
Management of Ramsar Sites – A practitioner’s guide. Available at
www.ramsar.org and www.rrcea.org five of which appear to be
relevant to identifying important bird breeding sites:
Ramsar Criterion 2 specifies that a wetland should be considered
internationally important if it supports vulnerable, endangered, or
critically endangered species or threatened ecological communities;
Ramsar Criterion 3 specifies that a wetland should be considered
internationally important if it supports populations of plant and/or
animal species important for maintaining the biological diversity of
a particular biogeographic region;
Ramsar Criterion 4 specifies that a wetland should be considered
internationally important if it supports plant and/or animal species
at a critical stage of their life cycles The RAMSAR criteria place
emphasis on ‘critical stages of life cycles’. For Antarctic seabirds,
moulting is an important stage of the life cycle. Moulting sites tend
to be more spatially dispersed than breeding sites, so considering
them in IBA identification or ASPA designation might not be
practical, though aspects related to birds’ non-breeding needs are
also ‘important’., or provides refuge during adverse conditions;
Ramsar Criterion 5 specifies that a wetland should be considered
internationally important if it regularly supports 20,000 or more
waterbirds; and
Ramsar Criterion 6 specifies that a wetland should be considered
internationally important if it regularly supports 1% of the
individuals in a population of one species or subspecies of
waterbird.
Underlining added for emphasis. Note, the focus of the Ramsar
convention is wetland areas that support a range of species, not just
birds.
IBA criteria
The global level IBA criteria Fishpool, L.D.C. & Evans, M.I. (eds)
(2001) Important Bird Areas in Africa and associated islands.
Priority sites for conservation. Pisces Publications, Cambridge:
BirdLife International. used in 2015 to identify the Antarctic IBAs
Harris, C.M., Lorenz, K., Fishpool, L.D.C., Lascelles, B., Cooper, J.,
Croxall, J.P., Emmerson, L.M., Fijn, R., Fraser, W.L., Jouventin, P.,
LaRue, M.A., Le Maho, Y., Lynch, H.J., Naveen, R., Patterson-Fraser,
D.L., Peter, H.-U., Poncet, S., Phillips, R.A., Southwell, C.J., van
Franeker, J.A., Weimerskirch, H., Wienecke, B., & Woehler, E.J.
2015. Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary. BirdLife
International and Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd.,
Cambridge. are:
Criterion A1: sites holding significant numbers of globally
threatened species, or other species of global conservation concern;
Criterion A2: sites known or thought to hold a significant
component of a restricted-range species;
Criterion A3: sites known or thought to hold a significant
component of the group of species whose distributions are largely
or wholly confined to one biome;
Criterion A4i: sites known or thought to hold, on a regular basis,
1% or more of a biogeographic population of a congregatory
waterbird species;
Criterion A4ii: sites known or thought to hold on a regular basis,
1% or more of the global population of a congregatory seabird or
terrestrial species;
Criterion A4iii: sites known or thought to hold, on a regular basis,
at least 20,000 waterbirds, or at least 10,000 pairs of seabirds, of
one or more species;
Criterion A4iv: sites known or thought to be a bottleneck site where
migratory species pass regularly during migration in numbers
exceeding set thresholds.
National criteria
To meet the requirements of the European Union’s 1979 Birds
Directive the UK’s Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC)
developed Special Protection Area Guidelines Available from:
https://jncc.gov.uk/our-work/special-protection-areas-overview/
that applied a two-stage approach:
Stage 1 (to identify areas which are likely to qualify for SPA status)
has four site criteria:
1. An area is used regularly by 1% or more of the Great Britain (or
in Northern Ireland, the all-Ireland) population of a species listed in
Annex 1 of the Birds Directive in any season.
2. An area is used regularly by 1% or more of the biogeographical
population of a regularly occurring migratory species (other than
those listed in Annex 1) in any season.
3. An area is used regularly by over 20,000 waterfowl (as defined
by the Ramsar Convention) or 20,000 seabirds in any season.
4. An area which meets the requirements of one or more of the
Stage 2 guidelines in any season, where the application of Stage 1
guidelines 1, 2, or 3 for a species does not identify an adequate
suite of most suitable sites for the conservation of that species.
Stage 2 (to select the most suitable areas in number and size for
SPA classification) has seven site criteria:
1. Population size and density – areas holding or supporting more
birds than others and/or holding or supporting birds at higher
concentration are favoured for selection.
2. Species range – areas selected for a given species provide as wide
a geographic coverage across the species’ range as possible.
3. Breeding success – areas of higher breeding success than others
are favoured for selection.
4. History of occupancy – areas known to have a longer history of
occupancy or use by the relevant species are favoured for selection.
5. Multi-species areas – areas holding or supporting the larger
number of qualifying species under Article 4 of the Directive are
favoured for selection;
6. Naturalness – areas comprising natural or semi-natural habitats
are favoured for selection over those which do not.
7. Severe weather refuges – areas used at least once a decade by
significant proportions of the biogeographical population of a
species in periods of severe weather in any season, and which are
vital for the survival of a viable population, are favoured for
selection.
Appendix 2. Additional observations
Consideration and discussion around the development of these
criteria has raised several issues relevant to the mechanisms of
affording protection to colonies of birds in Antarctica. These are
recorded below to aid further discussion.
Marine foraging areas. Pressures being faced by some species may
be most significant at foraging (rather than ‘breeding’) locations. In
such cases, the best conservation outcomes may not always be
achieved by protecting terrestrial breeding colonies; though such
designation can help to avoid additional pressures on certain
species or populations. It is noted that BirdLife International has
identified a series of marine IBAs south of 60o South, most of which
are in the Antarctic Peninsula region (see: https://
maps.birdlife.org/marineIBAs). This information has not been
brought to the attention of or considered by the CEP, though has
been considered by SC-CAMLR’s WG-EMM (https://
www.ccamlr.org/en/wg-emm-2019/30). It is also noted that
CCAMLR has identified some foraging distributions for some species
in the process of preparing MPA proposals. It may be appropriate
for the CEP and SC-CAMLR to discuss whether further work on
marine foraging areas might be needed and if so within which
body.
Cooperation with other bodies. Cooperation with other relevant
international fora should be considered in the protection and
conservation of seabirds, including CCAMLR, the Agreement on the
Conservation of Albatross and Petrels (ACAP) and the Convention
on Migratory Species (CMS) as appropriate.
Research and Monitoring. Research and monitoring is being
undertaken to collect Antarctic bird population data including from
remote sensing platforms as well as on-the-ground censuses (e.g. the
Antarctic Site Inventory), though it is important that collected data
is made readily available to environmental managers to support
ongoing consideration of management options. Spatial and
temporal population data remains extremely patchy, and there is a
pressing need for Governments to consider ways to improve
population monitoring across Antarctica Of relevance to long-term /
adaptive monitoring see: Lindenmayer, D.B. and Likens, G.E. 2009.
Adaptive monitoring: a new paradigm for long-term research and
monitoring. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 24(9) pp482-486.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.03.005.
Ongoing application of criteria. Criteria (including the IBA criteria)
will likely need to be revisited over time as new data and
information become available. This will include population and
location-specific data, as well as genetic data which may assist in
better descriptions of cryptic species (e.g. Antarctic prions). This
could also include situations where new colonies are discovered e.g.
through remote sensing Borowicz, A., McDowall, P., Youngflesh, C.,
Sayre-McCord, T., Clucas, G., Herman, R., Forrest, S., Rider, M.,
Schwaller, M., Hart, T., Jenouvrier, S., Polito, M.J., Singh, H. and
Lynch, H.J. 2018. Multi-modal survey of Adélie penguin mega-
colonies reveals the Danger Islands as a seabird hotspot. Science
Reports 8, 3926. 10.1038/s41598-018-22313-w, Schwaller, M.R.,
Lynch, H.J., Tarroux, A. and Prehn, B. 2018. A continent-wide
search for Antarctic petrel breeding sites with satellite remote
sensing. Remote Sensing of Environment, 210, pp444-451. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2018.02.071 as well as on-the-ground
surveys.
Threats. Account needs to be taken of the threats to a species in
considering options for protection. Threats can be species specific,
for example some bird species demonstrate an ability to adapt to
climate change pressures, whereas others may struggle to do so.
Threats (impacts) can be direct, indirect and cumulative and a full
assessment is needed to ensure appropriate management measures
are utilised. Threats may directly or indirectly result from:
environmental change, including habitat loss (could be habitat gain
in same cases) and effects on food availability;
human activity e.g. logistics, science, tourism, infrastructure
development and fishing.
Consideration may also need to be given to the susceptibility of a
species to future threats e.g. increased susceptibility to disease as a
result of increased stress as a consequence of climate change and
other pressures.
Birds as indicators of broader biodiversity values. BirdLife
International has developed its assessment approach over time and
now recognises ‘Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas’ as a
component of identifying and protecting ‘Key Biodiversity Areas’
Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) – sites that contribute to the global
persistence of biodiversity, including vital habitat for threatened
plant and animal species in terrestrial, freshwater and marine
ecosystems.Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas (IBAs) – KBAs
identified for birds using internationally agreed criteria applied
locally by BirdLife Partners and experts. In time, the CEP and
Antarctic Treaty Parties, may need to give consideration to
systematically assessing and identifying broader scale ecological
management units, ecosystems, and/or habitats within the Antarctic
protected area system that integrate and account for a range of
biodiversity values.
