Breeding of seabirds insensitive to shifting ocean temperatures
Breeding of seabirds insensitive to shifting ocean temperatures
An Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Canada, New Zealand,
South Africa and the United Kingdom
Summary
Current climate change may alter the timing of breeding of species
at different rates, resulting in a temporal mismatch between the
needs of predators and the abundance of their prey. This paper
provides scientific evidence that seabirds worldwide, including data
from species from the Antarctic, have not adjusted their breeding
seasons over time or in response to rising sea surface temperature.
If climate change results in altered timing of prey availability
during a key point in the season, many seabird species may struggle
to feed their young. This information is relevant to effective
conservation and management of the Antarctic fauna and important
in monitoring Antarctic seabirds within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Introduction
Seabirds of the Southern Ocean are amongst the most threatened
birds in the world. Scientific information about their status is much
needed with climate change being one of their biggest threats.
Under such context, the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP) called for additional climate change research and monitoring
to improve the basis for decision making, prioritizing the work of
the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) in
particular the continued progress on the Climate Change Response
Works Programme (CCRWP) (Resolution 4 (2015) (ATCM XLII Final
Report, agenda item 7, Paragraph 48). Such work will be relevant
in cooperation with other bodies, such as the Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the Agreement for the Conservation
of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) and the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources (CCAMLR).
In this paper, a comprehensive meta-analysis of breeding
populations of seabirds worldwide, (including the following species
from Antarctica: Antarctic skua (Catharacta maccormicki), Cape
petrel (Daption capense), Southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides),
Wilson´s storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), Snow petrel
(Pagodroma nivea), Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), Chinstrap
penguin (Pygoscelis antarctica) and Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis
papua)), was used to assess the relationships between breeding
periods of seabirds and sea surface temperature (Figure 1) (Keogan
et al. 2018).
Figure 1: The data from the Antarctic populations in this study
comprises 41 times series from 8 seabird species across 9 locations,
collected between 1952 and 2015. The numbers beside the colony
names in this figure correspond to the species as follows: 1)
Antarctic skua (Catharacta maccormicki), 2) Cape petrel (Daption
capense), 3) Southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides), 4) Wilson´s
storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), 5) Snow petrel (Pagodroma
nivea), 6) Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), 7) Chinstrap penguin
(Pygoscelis antarctica), 8) Gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua).
Conclusions
Data from 145 breeding populations of seabirds worldwide,
collected between 1952 and 2015, show that on average, seabird
populations worldwide have not adjusted their breeding seasons
over time or in response to change in sea surface temperature
(Keogan et al., 2018). With such a lack of a trend over time, the
results suggest that if lower trophic levels are shifting in parallel
with changing temperature, seabirds, in general, may be at risk
from increasing levels of trophic mismatch (Keogan et al., 2018). In
relation to Antarctic seabirds, models predict that (1) the timing of
breeding of Antarctic seabirds will be later in higher latitudes due
to stronger photoperiodic cues in high latitudes and, (2)
temperature trends will be more negative in high latitudes because
polar systems are experiencing warming faster than other areas in
the planet. This limited plasticity of reproductive timing in seabirds
potentially makes these top predators highly vulnerable to future
mismatch with lower-trophic-level resources (Keogan et al., 2018).
Monitoring of timing and abundance of prey availability is critically
needed for Antarctic seabird populations.
Overall, these results provide evidence of the insensitivity of the
timing of breeding of seabirds, including Antarctic seabirds, and
reinforces the need to monitor Antarctic seabird populations and
their interactions with prey species relevant to inform management
actions.
Reference
Keogan K, Daunt F, Wanless S, Phillips RA, Walling CA, Agnew P,
Ainley DG, Anker-Nilssen T, Ballard G, Barrett RT, Barton KJ, Bech
C, Becker P, Berglund P-A, Bollache L, Bond AL, Bouwhuis S,
Bradley RW, Burr ZM, Camphuysen K, Catry P, Chiaradia A,
Christensen-Dalsgaard S, Cuthbert R, Dehnhard N, Descamps S,
Diamond T, Divoky G, Drummond H, Dugger KM, Dunn MJ,
Emmerson L, Erikstad KE, Fort J, Fraser W, Genovart M, Gilg O,
González-Solís J, Granadeiro JP, Grémillet D, Hansen J, Hanssen
SA,
Harris M, Hedd A, Hinke J, Igual JM, Jahncke J, Jones I, Kappes PJ,
Lang J, Langset M, Lescroël A, Lorentsen S-H, Lyver POB, Mallory
M, Moe B, Montevecchi WA, Monticelli D, Mostello C, Newell M,
Nicholson L, Nisbet I, Olsson O, Oro D, Pattison V, Poisbleau M, Pyk
T, Quintana F, Ramos JA, Ramos R, Reiertsen TK, Rodríguez C,
Ryan P, Sanz-Aguilar A, Schmidt NM, Shannon P, Sittler B,
Southwell C, Surman C, Svagelj WS, Trivelpiece W, Warzybok P,
Watanuki Y, Weimerskirch H, Wilson PR, Wood AG, Phillimore AB,
Lewis S (2018) Global phenological insensitivity to shifting ocean
temperatures among seabirds. Nature Climate Change 8(4):
313-318. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0115-z
