Report about 2020-2021 Antarctic Summer Campaign Uruguayan
National Antarctic Program
Report about 2020-2021 Antarctic Summer Campaign
Information Paper submitted by Uruguay
Summary
On the occasion of the XLIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
and XXIII Committee for the Protection of the Environment, the
Uruguayan National Antarctic Program, through its Manager, the
Instituto Antártico Uruguayo, is pleased to share the main activities
developed within the framework of the 2020-2021 Antarctic
Summer Campaign.
During 2020, the Uruguayan Antarctic National Program´s
authorities implemented restrictions and protocols to crew and
scientific who travelled to Antarctica, including mandatory PCR
testing and additionally isolation time before take-off.
The Uruguayan National Antarctic Program worked on three
protocols applicable to the Artigas Station (BCAA), Logistics and
crew to carry out a safe and preventive campaign. The main
summer campaign objective was limited to a regular supply,
maintenance mission and an essential scientific activity.
With all the measures taken, Uruguay has largely succeeded in
keeping the coronavirus out of its Antartic Scientific Station.
Despite the Campaign achieved, our program remains cautious
SARS-CoV-2 highlights the existing vulnerabilities in Antarctica and
may produce new challenges, so the main objective for Uruguay is
to be preventive and cautious in the measures taken.
Operative organization of Antarkos XXXVII Expedition
The coordination of the Campaign operations within the framework
of Covid-19 was very difficult, due to the uncertainty, the possible
infection and the budget recession that the country had to adopt. In
this sense, our program took the decision to close the Uruguayan
seasonal station "T/N Ruperto Elichiribehety" (ECARE), and to
require the Hercules C-130 aircraft of the Uruguayan Air Force to
carry out the Antarctic operations in Artigas Station (BCAA).
Uruguay had to make a historic decision throughout the Antarctic
activity, which was to coordinate direct 24-hour flights. In 24
hours, flights were made from Montevideo (Uruguay) to Antarctica
and from Antarctica to Punta Arenas (Chile) to Montevideo.
The first departure date was 16th of December, transferring from
Montevideo to BCAA summer and winter crew, technicians,
working groups, scientists and logistic cargo.
On January 4th, 2021 the second flight was performed, transferring
from Montevideo to Artigas Station, logistic cargo and re-deploying
personnel (incoming and outcoimng crew, scientists and technicians
that had been deployed in the 1st flight).
The third stage was on April 13th, 2021, transferring cargo from
Montevideo to Artigas Station and returning to the country
technicians and scientists who are not part of the winter crew.
Finally, during the third stage, the winter crew was inoculated with
the covid-19 vaccine, highlighting the support of the doctor from
the Russian Bellingshausen Station.
Scientific and technological activities during the 2020-2021
summer campaign
Scientific activity was also reduced due to logistical and operational
factors during this campaign. Even so, the projects and research
carried out were consistent with their quality and objectives. In this
sense, 9 National Projects were approved for the 2020-2021
campaign (7 Scientific Projects and 2 Environmental Monitoring
Projects) focusing on three important scientific aspects: geosciences,
life sciences and environmental monitoring.
Regarding technologies, Artigas Station has improved during this
austral summer its communication capabilities with the launching
of a new Intelsat 21 satellite channel in Ku band, with direct
connection to 6Mbps Internet.
This upgrade improves data transmission capabilities to support
real-time signal acquisition. In particular, its intended use is the
observation of seismic and earthquake data.
In addition, the remaining bandwidth will improve the convenience
and social communication of the hibernation equipment.
General overview of Antarctic cooperation 2020-2021
Although the Covid-19 pandemic has fostered a sense of local
control around the world, in Antarctic affairs there has been an
extraordinary sense of community, a sense that we are all in this
together, one case, one death, one infection in Antarctica is
everyone's case.
Antarctic cooperation has also been reduced this season, but
Uruguay understands that the prevailing factor is the recession in
logistical, operational and scientific activity of all the Parties in
order not to expose the continent.
Cooperation is a fundamental pillar of the Antarctic Treaty. In the
2020-2021 summer campaign, cooperation focused on research
projects and logistical support. In this Antarctic campaign, through
the coordination of the Instituto Antártico Uruguayo, work was
carried out in the following scientific projects (Evaluation of the
structure of the soundscape and the impact of anthropogenic noise
on Ardley Island (Maxwell Bay), AntarPLAST, Penguins as sentinels
of anthropogenic impact and climate change in the Antarctic
ecosystem, and Multicompartmental study of contaminants in the
Fildes Peninsula), in particular two of them were supported by
researchers from Argentina and Spain who were working from
Artigas Station.
Regarding logistical support, Uruguay is especially grateful to Brazil
(Brazilian Antarctic Program) and Chile (Chilean Antarctic
Program) for their support in the framework of the operational and
logistical needs during the summer campaign.
General Conclusions
There are large differences in how Parties deal with the COVID-19
pandemic, Uruguay supports the exchange of experiences among
the Parties, the measures adopted, the activities developed within
the framework of an Antarctic Campaign, the information is
important to make known the experiences
of the different countries so that others can learn from these
experiences and improve the actions in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
