COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project: Update
COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project: Update
Background
After discussions at ATCM XLII (2019) on “Safety and Operations:
Aviation” the Meeting requested COMNAP report on innovative
technologies in order to improve air operations safety, for guidance
on what minimal but non-mandatory survival equipment should be
carried (on personned aircraft) and welcomed information on the
intended workshop on the practical and technical aspects of safe air
operations in Antarctica (ATCM XLII Final Report, paragraphs 263–
265, 267–268). To address these ATCM requests and in support of
our common goal to promote operational safety in Antarctica,
through the COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group, COMNAP
began the “COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project”. The global
pandemic has seen the project timeline shifted and the workshop
postponed to early 2022. Never-the-less, progress on many of the
outputs has been possible. This paper serves as an update on the
status of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Project and its component
outputs.
Summary of the project
The project was developed with five outputs:
Output 1: Review ATCM Resolution 1 (2013) and provide COMNAP
advice to ATCM XLIII (2021).
Output 2: Perform Air-related Technology Audit.
Output 3: Develop minimum survival equipment recommendations
(non-mandatory) for carriage on aircraft.
Output 4: Convene Antarctic Aviation Workshop (AAW).
Output 5: COMNAP paper(s) to ATCM XLIII (2021) & ATCM XLIV
(2022).
Status: Output 1
Review of practical and technical aspects of ATCM Resolution 1
(2013) by COMNAP Membership is completed and preliminary
advice was presented to ATIP 2019/2020 IP033 and to ATCM XLIII
(2021) as WP008.
Status: Output 2
A paper-based air-related technology audit was performed by way
of the COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group. The initial list of
technologies is provided as Annex 1 to this document and will be
further enhanced and discussed at the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation
Workshop (see Status: Output 4 below).
Status: Output 3
A draft of the minimum survival equipment recommendations (non-
mandatory) for carriage on aircraft was prepared. The draft list in
the form of preliminary advice to the ATCM XLIII (2021) can be
found as Annex 2 to this document and will be further enhanced
and discussed at the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation Workshop (see
Status: Output 4 below).
Status: Output 4
Planning was well-advanced for the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation
workshop to be hosted by the Australian Antarctic Division, in
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, on 30 & 31 July 2020. The global
pandemic forced the postponement of the workshop and the hosts
of COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) 2021, Japan’s National
Institute of Polar Research, kindly agreed to take on organisational
responsibilities for the workshop on the margins of the AGM in
Toyama, Japan, 15 & 16 July 2021. Due to the global pandemic the
AGM has been moved to a virtual format. The Workshop Steering
Committee have determined that the workshop would be most
effective and successful if it was postponed in order to meet in-
person. There is a strong indication that the workshop will take
place in late April/early May which would be the normal time for a
COMNAP Search and Rescue (SAR) triennial workshop (SAR
Workshop V 2022). It is likely the two
meetings could be combined with the Antarctic Aviation Workshop
being the focus of discussions since it is anticipated that the SAR
community would also participate. The Workshop Steering
Committee intends to make a formal announcement of dates, host
and venue in the very near future. For the time-being, the proposed
workshop agenda and schedule is presented as Annex 3 to this
document. COMNAP welcomes full participation by the aviation/air
operations community in the development of the agenda or
schedule, and for suggestions of experts to present, facilitate or
chair sessions of the workshop.
Status: Output 5
If the workshop is held in late April/early May 2022, COMNAP
anticipates submitting the project and workshop reports, and any
additional papers that may be required based on the outcomes of
the project, to ATCM XLIV (2022). Upon completion of this output,
the project will end. The Air Operations Expert Group is a standing
Expert Group and will remain convened to continue to focus on
promoting operational safety in Antarctica.
Annex 1: Air-related Technology Audit
Items that were considered:
Situational Awareness
Tracking systems (COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) and
others)
Participation
Opportunities
Potential obsolescence
Enhancement
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS‐B) out
Fixed wing, rotary wing and RPAS
Flight Aware
Ground receiver distribution
National Antarctic Programs
Non-Governmental Operators, including non‐IAATO members
De-confliction
Traffic Information Broadcast by Aircraft (TIBA) relevance
Transponder Landing System (TLS)
ADS‐B in
Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS)
Other technologies?
Search and Rescue
Autonomous Distress Tracking (ADT)
ADS‐B/Flight Aware
SARSAT
Other technologies?
Detailed descriptions with Pros/Cons for the Antarctic situation
TRAFFIC COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEM (TCAS)
Automated visual and voice warning of potential mid-air collision
between TCAS equipped aircraft and transponder equipped aircraft.
International standards vary, but most countries require TCAS for
aircraft with 30 or more passengers.
Depiction of TCAS threat ring:
Depiction of transponder equipped aircraft identified on typical
flight management system (FMS) on TCAS equipped aircraft.
Depiction of alert warning on typical vertical velocity indicator
(VVI) on TCAS equipped aircraft. Threat aircraft is 300’ below TCAS
aircraft. TCAS aircraft is descending at 400’/minute toward the
threat aircraft.
PROS
Existing, off-the-shelf technology
Mandated in most countries
Can see transponder equipped RPAS
CONS
Only sees transponder equipped aircraft with system turned on
AUTONOMOUS DISTRESS TRACKING (ADT)
On 1 January 2021 ICAO requirement for all large (> 27,000 kg)
new production aircraft to have ADT installed. Possible
recommendation for all operators to consider install of ADT on
aircraft operating in Antarctica. Rescue Coordination Centre’s
(RCCs) prepare for ADT implementation.
Distress signal automatically activates when aircraft deviates from
specific parameters. No pilot interface required.
RCC response accelerated, data automatically captured in secure
repository for SAR.
PROS
Immediate and automatic alert prior to crash
CONS
Not widely manufactured and mature technology
ADS-B out may make this redundant
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE - BROADCAST
(ADS-B)
Various ATCM papers advocate for safety improvements largely
built on ADS-B. Some equipment, like ADS-B out, will be mandatory
ICAO requirement for international flight.
Features are depicted below.
ADS-B out – equipped aircraft broadcast GPS and transponder data
via multiple paths to air traffic control. The signal eliminates/
supplements ground based radar for broader surveillance. Trans-
oceanic monitoring can be near real-time with satellite (Iridium)
interface.
ADS-B in traffic signal received
ADS-B in traffic signal received
ADS-B in - Properly equipped aircraft can receive the signals of
ADS-B and transponder equipped aircraft for collision avoidance.
Big airplane “sees” little airplane from little airplane signal and/or
ground based broadcast of little aircraft position (black arrow).
Typical ADS-B in depiction of near real-time pilot awareness of near
traffic.
COMNAP SAR MEETING DISCUSSION – FLIGHT AWARE
INTERFACE
Flight Aware is a commercial entity that supplies ground-based
ADS-B receivers to airfields for around $100 and ask the owners to
tie-in the signals to the internet. Owners need an unobstructed
antenna mounting position, power, and internet access. The
incoming data is automatically sent to the Flight Aware server and
presented to all global users for the global picture of aircraft in
flight.
There is a huge void of information in Antarctica. Any willing
participants, NAP or NGO, would improve the real time picture of
aviation activities around the continent.
Flight Aware provided receiver
Flight Aware provided receiver
Any station in Antarctica with internet could “feed” the Flight
Aware global traffic picture
This is a typical Flight Aware image with traffic and weather. Live
images are easily accessed by internet. This image example shows
weather and traffic in the USA Gulf States region.
Annex 2: Minimum survival equipment recommendations (non-
mandatory) for carriage on aircraft
Personal Equipment
• Thermal underwear
• Mid layer
• Outer layer - parka and bibs
• Socks
• Hat
• Balaclava
• Sunglasses / goggles
• Gloves / Mittens
• Spare socks - Spare mittens/ gloves - Spare hat
• Winter boots with thermal liner
Food / Drinks
• Dehydrated rations
• Tea bags / Instant coffee / Chocolate
• Chocolate bars/ nuts / Energy bars
• Energy drink powder
Cooking Equipment
• Matches / lighter
• Stove / Burner - Repair kit for stove
• Fuel bottle(s) / Hose to drain fuel from fuel tank
• Cutlery
• Cooking pot with lid
• Thermos / Water bottle
• Funnel
Sleeping Equipment
• Sleeping bag / Bivy bag / Recue blanket
• Sleeping pad
• Tent / Tarp
• Spade
• Snow saw
Group Equipment
• First Aid kit
• Toilet paper
• Multi tool / knife
• Plastic bags / Ziploc bags
• Ice screws
• Snow anchor
• Rope / String / Para cord
• Compass / with mirror
• Mirror – Whistle
Communications Equipment
• Satellite telephone / Iridium / Inmarsat
• PLB / EPIRB – Emergency locator
• Inreach / Satellite tracking device
• HF / VHF radio
Annex 3: Proposed Antarctic Aviation Workshop Agenda and
Schedule
Agenda
The Workshop Agenda Items are as follows:
Opening, introductions, workshop background
Session 1: Regulatory Review
Session 2: Technology Innovations
Session 3: Safety
Session 4: Communications Initiatives
Reporting of key outcomes
Close
Overview of Programme Schedule
The Workshop will be held in four main sessions. Each session
includes presentations, time for questions to presenters and a panel-
led discussion with all participants. The broad Overview is as
follows:
Day 1
Day 2
 
0830
Participants arrive/Registration
Participants arrive/Summary of key points day 1/Additional
comments
0930
Welcome/background
Session 3: Safety
1000
Session 1: Regulatory Review
1100
1200
1300
Lunch
Lunch
1400
1500
Session 2: Technology Review
Session 4: Communications Initiatives
1600
1700
1800
Discuss draft reporting/Next steps
1900
 
