Celebrating the bicentennial of the discovery of Antarctica
English version provided by the author
Celebrating the bicentennial of the discovery of Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation and ASOC
In 2020 Russia and Antarctica hosted a series of events, held to
mark the bicentennial of the discovery of Antarctica by the Russian
navigators Faddey Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev during their
3-year long circumnavigation of the world in 1819–1821.
The celebrations began on 28 January 2020 with a teleconference
which linked the Russian Antarctic station Bellingshausen and the
Situation Center of the Russian Government. First Deputy Prime
Minister of Russia Andrey Belousov congratulated the staff of the
Russian Antarctic Expedition. Congratulations on behalf of the
President of the Russian Federation were read out by the Assistant
to the Head of State Igor Levitin. The participants of the
teleconference noted the importance of public-private partnership
in the implementation of infrastructure projects in Antarctica. This
was followed by an official solemn rally which took place at the
Bellingshausen station, with the participation of such distinguished
speakers as the Minister of Natural Resources Dmitry Kobylkin and
the head of the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring Igor Shumakov. The rally was attended
by employees of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, crew members of
“Admiral Vladimirsky” and “Yantar”, the oceanographic research
vessels of the Russian Navy, as well as personnel of nearby Chinese,
Chilean, Uruguayan, Argentine stations and German specialists who
conducted research at the Bellingshausen station. Estonian
President Kersti Kaljulaid and the crew of the “Admiral
Bellingshausen” yacht, on which she arrived at the station, also
took part in the gala dinner held in the conference hall of the
station.
On January 8, 2020, a bronze monument to Captain second rank,
Faddey Bellingshausen, the commander of the Russian South Polar
Expedition, of 1819–1821, was unveiled at Bellingshausen station in
a solemn ceremony. The monument unveiling ceremony was
attended by members of the 64th Russian Antarctic Expedition from
the Bellingshausen winter station.
As part of the anniversary celebration, a contest was held among
school students from St. Petersburg and the Leningrad Region
testing their knowledge of Antarctica and the history of Antarctic
research. The three winners of the competition with a teacher
accompanying them flew to the Bellingshausen station at the end of
February 2020, where they spent three days getting acquainted
with the work of polar explorers and the nature of King George
Island (Vaterloo). During the year, several teleconferences were also
held linking Russian Antarctic stations and several secondary
schools.
An exhibition dedicated to the bicentennial of the discovery of
Antarctica was organized in St. Petersburg’s Mikhailovsky Palace.
The exhibition featured more than a hundred paintings, drawings,
sculptures, as well as numismatics, decorative and folk art from the
collection of the Russian Museum. The exhibition included unique
materials related to the history of the discovery of the sixth
continent: drawings and watercolors made by P. N. Mikhailov – a
participant of the circumnavigation of the world by the sloops
“Mirny” and “Vostok” in 1819–1821.
In the 2021/2022 season, there is a plan to install a memorial
plaque at the Novolazarevskaya station bearing the inscription:
On January 28 (16), 1820, 155 km in the direction of NNW from
this point, the sailors of the Russian South Polar Expedition of
1819-1821 on the sloops “Vostok” and “Mirny” under the command
of F. F. Bellingshausen and M. P. Lazarev discovered and mapped
the icy coast of Antarctica for the first time in the history of
mankind.
In 2019–2020, the Federal Agency for Fisheries organized a round-
the-world expedition of the training and sailing vessels
“Krusenstern”, “Sedov” and “Pallada”, dedicated to the 200th
anniversary of the discovery of Antarctica.
Within the framework of the civil society education initiative, a
number of events dedicated to this anniversary were also held.
The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) together with
government organizations, scientific and civil communities,
developed and conducted a series of environmental awareness
events. Their goal is to draw attention to Antarctica, the challenges
it faces, and the need to protect its unique nature.
“In the Icy Embrace of the Southern Ocean” – this is the name of
the photo exhibition created jointly by the Antarctic and Southern
Ocean Coalition and the International Environmental Fund “Clean
Seas” with the support of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly
of the Russian Federation and the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment of the Russian Federation. The exhibition took place at
the Ministry of Natural Resources of the Russian Federation and the
State Duma, the French Embassy in Moscow, as well as at the
Primeval Russia nature festival in Gostiny Dvor, “Russia – My
History” museum in St. Petersburg and the Museum of the World
Ocean in Kaliningrad. Visitors to the exhibition made a virtual trip
to the southernmost continent with the help of photographs by
John Weller, Paul Nicklen and Stanislav Zakharov, where they saw
whales and penguins, ice floes and icebergs, mysterious creatures
and the most frost-resistant fish – everything that the researchers of
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean were able to capture with their
equally frost-resistant cameras. At the exhibition, it was also
possible to walk on the ice of the world’s coldest continent using VR
glasses.
To commemorate the anniversary of Antarctica’s discovery, a series
of street photo exhibitions “Discovering Antarctica Together” was
held in Moscow. Audience outreach exceeded hundreds of
thousands of people. What is more, the theme of last season’s VDNH
skating rink was “Antarctic Winter”. The organizers and partners of
the event were: Planet MEDIA, the Ecocenter “Zapovedniki”
[protected areas], the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, the
Clean Seas Foundation, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute.
The annual and long-loved Primeval Russia Nature Festival held a
thematic day which was entirely dedicated to Antarctica.
Vyacheslav Fetisov, Deputy of the State Duma of the Federal
Assembly of the Russian Federation, opened the Antarctic Day with
a story about his journey with the UN Ocean Ambassador Lewis
Pugh, who became the first person to swim in ice tunnel of the
Antarctic ice sheet in January 2020.
The animal photographer Stanislav Zakharov and the world-famous
documentary photographer John Weller showed the unusual side of
Antarctica to the visitors of the festival - from the point of view of
underwater photographers. John Weller even held a master class,
sharing his experience of underwater filming. He also talked about
how he joined forces with his colleagues to protect the nature of
Antarctica.
Specialists of the Institute of Biomedical Problems of the Russian
Academy of Sciences talked about a new scientific study in
Antarctica that simulates the work of cosmonauts on the surface of
the Moon.
The photographer Vladimir Alexeyev shared his experience with the
audience. While working on his “Secret of Ice Crystals” project, he
decided to check how much Antarctica has changed in the 200
years since its discovery. He sailed to the white continent on board
of an ancient 3-mast ship in the footsteps of the brave explorers,
and documented the current state of the ice and life on the
continent, which is still most uninhabited by humans. This photo
story helps us to know Antarctica better and to understand how
heavily dependent it is on what is happening on other continents.
The Antarctic Day program was organized by the Ecocenter
“Zapovedniki” and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition
(https://fotocult.ru/about/program/20200208/)
All-Russian environmental lesson “Discovering Antarctica together”.
The lesson was developed jointly by the Ecocenter “Zapovedniki”,
the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, the Clean Seas
Foundation, the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute. The lesson
has been supported by the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment of the Russian Federation and the Ministry of
Education of the Russian Federation.
This lesson is about the feat of the continent’s discoverers. It is also
about the continent itself, its structure, geography; about the animal
world and the importance of creating marine reserves, about the
influence of Antarctica on the World Ocean.
The lesson has been actively used all over Russia. It is designed for
a very wide age bracket: from kindergarten to schools and
universities. A total of 1083 lessons have been held up to now, in
1059 educational facilities in Russia. 39,500 children have taken
part in it so far. An interactive map is available at the lesson
website: https://заповедныйурок.рф/opening_antarctica_together/.
The lesson has been translated into English and Chinese.
At the end of November 2020 Moscow welcomed offline and online
guests at the international forum “Days of the Arctic and Antarctic”.
The International Environmental Foundation “Clean Seas” and the
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition organized two events of the
Forum – the scientific session “Marine Protected Areas of the Arctic
and Antarctic” and the environmental lesson “Discovering
Antarctica Together”. The main message of the meeting was
eloquently formulated by Maria Gavrilo – Candidate of Biological
Sciences, leading researcher of the Arctic and Antarctic Research
Institute and head of the Open Ocean project. She said that these
days everyone should focus on “Turning their ego into eco!”
(https://cleanseas.ru/novosti/kak-ego-prevratit-v-eko/).
On December 1, 2020, the premiere of the film “Antarctica: Russia’s
Gift to the World” was held online with the support of the Russian
Geographical Society. It was timed to coincide with the 200th
anniversary of the discovery of Antarctica by Russian navigators
and the International Day of Antarctica. The film by John Weller,
the world-famous documentary photographer and the founder of
the Sealegacy is devoted to one of the most pressing problems of
our time – the global warming. In the film, scientists talk about the
melting of ice, the need to create protected marine areas and
protect the world’s oceans. The film was made with the
participation of Artur Chilingarov, the First Vice-President of the
Russian Geographical Society, Corresponding Member of the
Russian Academy of Sciences; Alexander Makarov, Director of the
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI); Alexey Ekaykin,
glaciologist, leading researcher of the AARI Laboratory of Climate
Change and Environment; Maria Vorontsova, marine biologist,
international expert who participates in meetings of UN
conventions; Elena Zharkova, Russian representative in the
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (https://www.rgo.ru/ru/
article/sostoyalas-premera-filma-antarktika-dar-rossii-dlya-mira).
Unfortunately, the pandemic has affected plans to celebrate the
200th anniversary of the discovery of Antarctica by Russian
explorers. Thus, a number of events had to be canceled or
postponed to a later date. So, the international conferences
“Antarctica 2020” (https://polarresearch.aari.ru/main.php) and
“Antarctic marine ecosystem futures” (https://antarcticfutures.org/)
has been postponed to Spring 2022.
