Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2020-21
Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2020-21
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
Introduction
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
is pleased to report its activities to ATCM XLIII.
IAATO continues to focus activities in support of its mission
statement to advocate and promote the practice of safe and
environmentally responsible private sector travel to Antarctica.
Further information on IAATO, its mission statement, primary
activities and recent developments can be found at: www.iaato.org.
Overview
Thirty years ago, IAATO was created with a commitment to safe
and environmentally responsible private sector travel. IAATO has
maintained that focus through three major growth periods and their
ensuing downturns, drawing on the strength of its membership and
stakeholders to enhance procedures and management. The 2019-20
season saw a record number of visitors travelling with IAATO
Operators (74,401). The 2020-21 season was in sharp contrast to
that with only two individual expeditions, comprised of three
yachts and a total of 15 guests due to the SARS CoV-2 (COVID-19)
pandemic.
While it is difficult to say when operations will return to levels
approaching pre-COVID-19, IAATO’s commitment to safe and
environmentally responsible private sector travel is unchanged and
enduring. During the last twelve months, there has been a
significant focus on addressing operational changes due to
COVID-19, but the association has also been looking ahead to
address the future growth that is anticipated post-pandemic. Recent
actions include the strengthening of requirements for field staff
experience, the creation of new working groups and committees, a
refresh of the Antarctic Ambassadors program and strengthening of
operations in the vicinity of whales.
For further information on IAATO operators’ activities can be found
in ATCM XLIII IPxx IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: A
Historical Review of Growth, the 2020-21 Season and Preliminary
Estimates for 2021-22
COVID-19 Response and impact on IAATO Membership
When the 2019-20 season was curtailed due to global concerns
around COVID-19, IAATO and its members began preparing for the
2020-21 season with a focus on emerging challenges related to the
pandemic. The IAATO COVID-19 Steering Group (now the IAATO
COVID-19 Advisory Group) was formed to share information
regularly with the membership, including updates from gateway
ports and information regarding the evolving advice on how to
operate safe and environmentally responsible travel during the
pandemic. Additionally, two virtual Town Halls were hosted by
IAATO to allow the membership to share perspectives and lessons
learned on operating in this new environment which is key to the
development of industry best practice.
The COVID-19 Advisory Group also provided Operators with a
framework to assist them in preparing their own risk assessment.
Since IAATO Operators each have their own specific operating
environments, each must individually analyze every element of
their operation in order to address the challenges that COVID-19
has presented, taking into account the relevant requirement of their
respective national competent authorities, flag requirements where
applicable, as well as the perspective and input given to them from
the gateway ports.
Additionally, during this time, IAATO welcomed engaging regularly
with COMNAP and SCAR in the spirit of sharing best practice,
knowledge and to enhance understanding of the impact of the
pandemic on Antarctica.
The majority of IAATO Operators had made the decision not to
operate during the 2020-21 season by November 2020 and,
ultimately, the season was limited to only two expeditions.
Following IAATO’s 2020 Annual Meeting, IAATO membership
comprised 42 Operators, 14 Provisional Operators and 53
Associates (totalling 113 members). Subsequently, there has been
an increase in Provisional Operators but a net decrease in
membership due to several Associate Members leaving as a result of
the pandemic. Currently there are 109 members. It is anticipated
that there will be additional changes to IAATO’s membership if
IAATO Operators are unable to operate during the northern summer
season and if those challenges continue into the 2021-22 Antarctic
season.
IAATO members organise or depart from 15 Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties. During the 2019-20 season, the majority of
nationals (95.5%) carried by IAATO Operators came from 51 Treaty
Parties; the remainder came from a further 53 non-Treaty Party
countries.
The Membership Directory and additional information on IAATO
member activities can be found at www.iaato.org.
IAATO Annual Meeting
IAATO’s 2021 Annual Meeting was held virtually on 11-13 May
2021. Prior to the Annual Meeting were two COVID-19 focused
Town Halls and three other Town Hall meetings to address priority
items such as enhancing certain bylaws and reviewing terms of
reference for IAATO committees. Agenda items at these Town Halls
and the Annual Meeting included:
Creation of the Deep Field/Air Operations and Climate Change
Committees (both previously Working Groups)
Creation of the Submersible Working Group
Strengthening of requirements regarding field staff experience, as
well as the establishing the requirement that all expedition team
members take and pass the relevant IAATO Field Staff Assessment.
Revision and strengthening of the Mandatory Observer Programme
checklists.
Review and updates to the guidelines related to biosecurity and
wildlife viewing with a focus on bird and seal watching guidelines.
Agreement to make mandatory the previously voluntary speed limit
of 10 knots within IAATO’s geofenced-time areas, with certain
emergency and safety exceptions available to mitigate against
whale strikes. Agreement to develop process to regularly evaluate
the effectiveness of the geofenced time area.
Approval of collaboration between SOOS DueSouth and IAATO.
IAATO Support of Research & Conservation
IAATO encourages collaborative opportunities with scientific
organisations particularly where these enhance the Antarctic
community’s understanding of human activities in the region and
support IAATO in delivering safe, environmentally responsible
private-sector travel. Projects include(d):
IAATO/SCAR Systematic Conservation Plan – Expansion of human
activity in the Antarctic Peninsula combined with a need to better
understand and protect important areas for terrestrial biodiversity
led IAATO and SCAR to propose the development of a Systematic
Conservation Plan. The SCP is a support tool for decision-making
and management, capable of utilising a huge amount of data to
generate different scenarios depending on questions being asked or
uncertainties being addressed. IAATO is expecting delivery of a
final report from Monash University during Q3 2021. IAATO will
discuss use of the tool with its members and work with SCAR on
communicating the outcomes of the SCP with stakeholders.
SC-HASS Research Project: The impact of COVID-19 on Antarctica –
IAATO is involved in the SCAR Standing Committee on Humanities
and Social Sciences research project, Work Package 3, to better
understand the impact of COVID-19 on Antarctic tourism, including
operations, policy and permitting.
IAATO/COMNAP Fellowships – IAATO, in partnership with
COMNAP, will invest in the development of early-career researchers
by awarding its third $15,000 Fellowship in 2021. IAATO and
COMNAP jointly awarded a 2020 fellowship to early career
researcher Miguel González Pleiter from the University of Alcala,
Spain for his work on microplastics.
Support in Antarctica – IAATO Operator expeditions during the
2020-21 season were limited to two individual expeditions,
comprised of three yachts. One of these expeditions collected data
for the long-term monitoring project Penguin Lifelines, University
of Oxford. Three IAATO Operators also provided dedicated air or
vessel support to National Antarctic Programs.
Other Work and Activities
IAATO also continues to prioritise activities that strengthen its
institutional structure and help position it as a reputable, valued
partner in the wider polar community. Over the past year these
have included:
Development of an awareness campaign regarding IAATO’s 30th
Anniversary which highlights past accomplishments and discusses
ambitions for the future
Completion of Phase 1 of the IAATO database to facilitate efficient
tools and reporting capabilities
Development of the Antarctic Ambassadors landing page on
IAATO’s website and strategic plan to further strengthen the
engagement with visitors to Antarctica
Continued collaboration with the Association of Arctic Expedition
Cruise Operations (AECO) regarding Polar Field Staff Standards and
joint Town Hall session with polar field staff
In addition, IAATO Secretariat staff and Operator representatives
participated in internal and external meetings, liaising with Treaty
Party Representatives, National Antarctic Programs personnel, and
governmental, scientific, environmental, and industry organisations,
including but not limited to:
COMNAP Annual Meeting, Online, August 2020
SCAR2020 Online, August 2020
Association of Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators (AECO)
Conference & Annual Meeting, Online, October 2020
Thirty-ninth Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), Online, October
2020
Tourism Incidents 2020-21
IAATO’s policy is to disclose incidents to ensure risks are
understood and appropriate lessons are learned for all Antarctic
Operators. There were no major incidents involving IAATO
Operators during the 2020-21 season.
With Thanks
IAATO appreciates the opportunity to work cooperatively with
Antarctic Treaty Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, CCAMLR, IHO/HCA,
WMO, ASOC and others toward the long-term protection of
Antarctica.
