Delivering the Promise of Antarctic Science through Inclusiveness
and Diversity
Delivering the Promise of Antarctic Science through Inclusiveness
and Diversity
Information Paper submitted by the United States and United
Kingdom
Summary
On November 12, 1969, the first women arrived together at the
South Pole. It was a pivotal moment in the history of Antarctic
science. Now, just over 50 years from that historic moment, it is
timely to renew our collective commitment to a fair, safe and
inclusive Antarctic science enterprise. As the importance of the
Antarctic region in the global earth system is becoming ever more
apparent, the value of progressing Antarctic science for the sake of
all of humanity cannot be overstated. Treaty Parties are urged to
leverage their inherent diversity and promote full participation of
all underrepresented groups in their national Antarctic activities,
especially in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM), in order to promote the enduring quality and accelerate the
progress of Antarctic research.
Background
Caption: From left, Pam Young (New Zealand), Jean Pearson (USA),
a reporter for the Detroit Free Press, Terry Tickhill Terrell (USA),
Lois Jones (USA), Eileen McSaveney (USA) and Kay Lindsay (USA)
at the South Pole. Photo Credit: U.S. Navy
The history of women in Antarctica is a relatively short one. The
history of women scientists in Antarctica even shorter. It began with
participation by Dr Maria V. Klenova, a geologist, who was on-
board the vessel Ob as part of the Soviet Union’s Antarctic
International Geophysical Year (ICG) research team of 1957-58. A
small number of women scientists worked at sub-Antarctic stations
and on vessels in the Southern Ocean over the next decade.
On November 12, 1969, the first female scientists visited the South
Pole. The five female scientists and one reporter pictured above
locked arms to step out together off the cargo ramp of a ski-
equipped aircraft onto
the ice at South Pole Station. The first U.S. women science team to
deploy to Antarctica had asked for the opportunity to make a day
trip to the South Pole aboard a regular cargo flight while they were
waiting a few days at McMurdo Station before going to their Dry
Valleys field sites. The opportunity was extended to three other
women on the ice and two accepted. Fulfilling their quest generated
considerable publicity as a “first” that heralded new possibilities for
women scientists in Antarctica.
Although symbolic of opportunity, the 1969 South Pole visit did not
exactly fling doors wide-open to women thereafter Land, B. (1981)
“The New Explorers: Women in Antarctica”, Dodd, Mead & Co, NY,
USA, pp. 1-224., Burns, R. (2001) “Just Tell Them I Survived:
Women in Antarctica”, Allen & Unwin, Australia, pp. 1-232..
Despite significant barriers, a small group persisted to make worthy
Antarctic research contributions. Were it not for the collective
efforts of these pioneering women, there surely would not have
been the progress we know today.
Fifty years after the IGY, women scientists conceived, planned, led
and participated in major programs of the intensified globally
coordinated research in Polar regions during the 2007-08
International Polar Year (IPY). National Research Council. 2012.
Lessons and Legacies of International Polar Year 2007-2008.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://
doi.org/10.17226/13321. That effort entrained more than 50,000
researchers, local residents, educators, students and support
personnel from 60 nations. IPY’s 228 projects covered a wide
variety of scientific disciplines that resulted in major advances led
by and including women. These ranged from the first high
resolution images of the Alps-sized Gamburtsev mountain range
buried beneath the Antarctic ice sheet, to observations and
modelling of the geologic past that advanced understanding of risks
and uncertainties of regional and global climate change. The IPY
2007-2008 efforts also saw the establishment of the Association of
Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS), a network which is dedicated
to enhancing pathways for a diverse range of early career persons
into Antarctic science careers.
Importance of Diversity
A growing body of evidence demonstrates that diversity enhances
idea generation, improves decision making and produces more
effective problem solving Page, S. E. (2007) “The Difference: How
the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups, Firms, Schools, and
Societies (The William G. Bowen Series)”, Princeton University
Press, pp. 448.. At the same time, there is recognition that the
demographic make-up of the scientific community is not reflective
of national or global population demographics Huntoon, J.
E., Tanenbaum, C., & Hodges, J. (2015). Increasing diversity in the
geosciences. Eos, 96(5), 13–15.; National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics. (2017). Women, Minorities, and Persons with
Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 2017 (Special Report NSF
17-310), https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/; Bernard, R.E.,
Cooperdock, E.H.G. No progress on diversity in 40 years. Nature
Geosci 11, 292–295 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41561-018-0116-6 and diversity in the Antarctic science
community remains particularly limited. This is a problematic
situation and, as a community, we need to resolve it.
While participation of women in Antarctic science improved
markedly from very few in the IGY to nearly one quarter of
participants during the IPY, women remain underrepresented in
Antarctic endeavours by at least a factor of 2 with respect to their
fraction of the global population. Gender is not the only factor that
is not in balance with respect to populations. Although
comprehensive data are more difficult to come by, participation by
minority groups in national Antarctic science programs appears to
be considerably less representative than their fraction in national
populations. For example, the vast majority of the IPY female
scientists were white with very low participation rates of those who
identified with other ethnicities.
As in many sectors all over the world, there are grass roots efforts
underway to promote diversity and inclusiveness in Antarctic
research. On November 18, 2020, on the occasion of the
International Day of LGBTQ+ people in STEM, “Polar Pride” day
was launched.
Today, social media provides a powerful platform for the polar
research community to support and engage with one another as
well as reach wider society. Self-organised polar research
community groups, including Women in Polar Science and Pride in
Polar Research, celebrate diversity and showcase role models for
the next generation. While these self-organised groups play an
influential role in changing perceptions and attitudes to diversity in
Antarctic science more needs to be done at organizational level to
support a culture of inclusivity that is needed to achieve diversity
and it benefits. It is noted that SCAR established a Women in
Antarctic Science website (https://www.scar.org/antarctic-
women/) upon which it can build in this regard.
Media reports in recent years indicate that some women and under-
represented minorities experienced distressing and inappropriate
behaviors from colleagues. Our diverse community of researchers
should be confident of safety from discrimination or harassment in
the workplace, including in Antarctica, and harassment of any kind
should never be tolerated. Initial steps have been taken by national
programs and to work together to ensure fair and safe work
environments, such as the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs “Preventing Harassment in Antarctica” Safety
Expert Group Forum (July 2019). More work remains to be done in
a “whole of community” approach toward promoting inclusivity
and cultural change.
Importance of Antarctic Science
The Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) has underpinned the
fundamental importance of peace and science for the Antarctic
Treaty region for decades. The research sponsored under the aegis
of the ATS has led to a global awakening of the importance of
Antarctic science for all of humanity. Critical observational data
informing global models have confirmed that:
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are key driving components of
the global climate system.
Net loss of Antarctic land ice and attendant global sea level rise are
significant and accelerating.
Grounding of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet below sea level renders
vulnerable that part of the ice sheet holding 3+ meters of
equivalent global sea level rise.
Southern Ocean marine nutrients support a disproportionate
fraction of global productivity.
The Southern Ocean supports invaluable fish resources & uniquely
adapted ecosystems.
The Southern Ocean acts as a primary global carbon sink.
Atmospheric teleconnections with Antarctica impact weather
patterns in the Southern hemisphere.
Antarctica is a key location to advance our understanding of space
weather that poses risks to critical infrastructures such as satellite
navigation and electrical grids.
Antarctica remains a superb platform for fundamental astrophysics
research regarding the nature and origins of the universe.
Conclusion
It has become increasingly apparent that the Antarctic region is a
critically important component of the earth system. Science and
research results from Antarctica have never been more needed than
they are today. Supporting diversity and inclusiveness in our
science community and within our national Antarctic programs will
ensure we have the capacity and capabilities to deliver the results
from Antarctica that the global community requires from us.
With Antarctica at the heart of solutions to many of society’s
grandest challenges, the Treaty Parties, having set aside Antarctica
for peaceful, scientific purposes have a special responsibility to
ensure that the Antarctic science enterprise is as robust as possible.
It is clear that there is considerable room for enhancing diversity
and inclusion in Antarctic research. The 54 nations that have
acceded to the Antarctic Treaty, along with the Antarctic Treaty’s
Observers and Experts, comprise an inherently diverse community.
This diversity is a strength of the system that should be utilized to
deliver common goals.
We encourage all Parties to redouble efforts to intentionally and
inclusively nurture talent broadly and to draw and support
Antarctic research participants from throughout their diverse
national populations.
