Autonomous Science Operations at Halley Research Station
Autonomous Science Operations at Halley Research Station
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
Halley Research Station is located on the Brunt Ice Shelf and was
operated as a year-round facility until 2016. As a result of changes
to the behaviour of the ice shelf, the decision was made to
temporarily suspend winter operations on safety grounds. To
maintain long-term datasets, many of the instruments at Halley
were automated. This was achieved through providing reliable
power using a micro turbine, automation of instruments and
developing communication systems to enable data transfer and
systems monitoring.
Background
Halley Station was designed and built to provide excellent
laboratory and living accommodation that is capable of
withstanding extreme winter weather, of being raised sufficiently to
stay above metres of annual snowfall, and of being relocated
upstream periodically to avoid calving events as the floating ice
shelf moves towards the sea. It is made up of a series of eight pods
sitting on skis that can be uncoupled and towed across the ice using
specialist heavy vehicles: the world’s first relocatable research
facility.
In 2012, satellite monitoring of the Brunt Ice Shelf revealed the first
signs of movement in a chasm that had lain dormant for at least 35
years. This chasm could eventually cut Halley Station off from the
rest of the ice shelf, so in the 2015-16 austral summer, a new
location was identified and initial preparations for relocating the
station began. During the 2016-17 summer season, the station
modules were uncoupled and transported 23km across the ice.
During that season, another chasm (named Halloween crack)
formed and it was not considered prudent to leave staff at the
station over the winter.
The Brunt Ice Shelf (January 2021) and the location of Halley
This interrupted important scientific research programmes that
were building on the legacy of 60 years of occupation. The
expectation was that it would be several years before wintering
might resume. The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) therefore
examined options to maintain year-round scientific outputs. An
additional complicating factor was that the chasms were expected
to temporarily cut off access to any ship relief sites, so any proposal
for future operation of the station had to rely on air support only.
Methodology
The power and heat demands of the scientific instruments and the
various supporting infrastructure, such as computer servers and
satellite communications, were well understood. It was therefore
possible to estimate that much of the science (in 2017) required
around 10kW of power. Future proofing, and the option to expand
to around 20kW, was a further consideration. Reliably providing
power at this level in Antarctica, fully autonomously for around
nine months per year, is a considerable challenge. Advice was
sought from other Antarctic operators and organisations that had
similar challenges, such as those operating oil rigs or arctic
communication networks. This research showed the most promising
option was a micro-jet turbine. Not only could this be implemented
in a very short timeframe, it could also be air-transported to Halley
using BAS aircraft.
Options for autonomous winter power at Halley station
Time to implement
Infrastructure required
Short term C02
Long term C02
Power Flexibility
Air input possible?
Wind/Solar/Battery
>4 years
Very High
High
Low – medium
Low
Difficult
Extended service interval diesel generators
>3 years
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Yes
H2 fuel cells
>5years
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium
No
Micro-jet turbine
1 year
Low
Low
Medium
High
Yes
A micro-jet turbine is similar to an aircraft jet engine but configured
to maximise shaft take off power rather than thrust. A micro-jet
generator manufactured by Capstone Turbine Corporation was
selected on the basis of; reliability, one moving part only, minimal
servicing requirements and the ability to run on station stocks of
aviation diesel. The challenge for BAS was to provide a thermally
stable enclosure and supply the micro-jet turbine with nine months
of fuel in such a manner that a fuel spill was of an extremely low
probability. This latter challenge was addressed by having multiple
levels of protection around the fuel and extensive monitoring to
ensure that the protections were working. For a fuel spill to occur,
multiple failures would have to take place and these would be
detected allowing action to be taken before fuel was released.
Capstone micro-turbine cut away.
The micro-jet turbine was installed at Halley in a bunded 20ft ISO
container with a fuel tank of 48 hours duration inside the container.
Additional 25 tonne bulk bunded fuel tanks were sited 10m away
(for snow management reasons) from which the fuel is periodically
and autonomously pumped.
A cutaway render of the micro-jet turbine (green) and the fuel tank
(pink) inside a bunded 20ft ISO container.
The main engineering challenges around the micro-jet turbine are
the thermal management and accounting for all the fuel – this is
made difficult because of the large thermal expansion coefficient of
diesel based fuels.
The science experiments at Halley range from climate, atmospheric
chemistry, glaciology and space physics. Some instruments were
effectively already automatic (or controlled over the internet)
whereas some experiments were based around people undertaking
tasks. BAS undertook an internal prioritisation process that took
into account the ease of automation and the value of the continued
data set. To date around 75% of the experiments have been
automated, and BAS continues to add experiments each season.
Automation of a previously manually operated instrument has
allowed for finer-scale scientific study, undertaking a far higher
number of regular measurements than could be taken by a person.
Automated flask air sampling – previously a manual process
Stratospheric Ozone measurements undertaken by an automated
Dobson.
Much of the existing computing and communication infrastructure
from the station was capable of running in autonomous mode,
although more resilience and fail-safe options were added. For
example, an Iridium Open port satellite terminal was added to back
up the existing VSAT link. The science experiments could all be run
from small, thermally efficient buildings so the main station living
units were put in a safe dormant state.
Timeline
The project was initiated in April 2017 and in September that year
a micro-jet turbine (fitted in its container) was loaded on the RRS
Shackleton, arriving at Halley in January 2018. It was not possible
to finish all the necessary works that season and completion was
undertaken in the 2018-19 season using air support. The station
successfully ran autonomously throughout the whole of winter of
2019. Further science experiments were added during the air
supported season of 2019-20 with successful autonomous
operations throughout the winter of 2020. In the 2020-21 season,
further air-supported servicing was undertaken and additional
science experiments were brought on line. The station is now
entering its 3rd year of autonomous operation.
Data
A key part of the operation of the system, both for science and
infrastructure, is the continual transfer of data to the UK. This gives
us a high degree of assurance that the systems, and in particular the
fuel containment, are working correctly. Over 100 parameters are
sent back every 5 seconds and eight webcam images are returned at
5 minutes intervals. This also aids preparation for service visits.
Continual data and webcam images returned to UK.
Conclusion & Benefits of Science Automation at Halley
The micro-jet turbine has been the key enabling technology that has
allowed the British Antarctic Survey to maintain the scientific
output of Halley station in an autonomous manner. Equally
important is the philosophy of the system design, with a data rich
implementation and a focus on reliability, resilience and replication
all contributing to the success of the project.
Delivering year round science outputs from a summer only
operation has been a significant challenge. However, while some
science experiments are no longer possible, others have been
improved as a result of the move to automation. Automation has
resulted in a significant reduction in the logistics and resources
required to run the station, particularly in respect of staff numbers,
fuel usage, and ship time.
The Future
Additional science experiments will be added each season. When
ship access is re-established some large instruments such as a
meteor scatter radar will be added, along with a second micro-jet
turbine to provide further resilience.
These technologies represent a successful proof of concept for future
power supply to automated scientific instruments that could
transform the way scientific data is gathered across Antarctica.
