Celebrating Magellan and Elcano
Celebrating Magellan and Elcano
Information Paper submitted by Portugal and Spain
Summary
There were a number of educational initiatives to celebrate the
500th Anniversary of the First Circumnavigation of the Globe by
Ferdinand Magellan and Juan Sebastián Elcano, arguably two of the
greatest navigators of all times. In this paper, it is reported a non-
exhaustive number of initiatives carried out by Portugal and Spain,
despite the COVID 19 pandemic.
Education and Outreach initiatives of Portuguese and Spanish
organizations celebrating the 500th anniversary of the First
Circumnavigation of the Globe by Ferdinand Magellan and Juan
Sebastián Elcano
At XLII, Chile reported on the commemoration of the of the 500th
anniversary of the discovery of the Strait of Magellan, as part of the
World´s first circumnavigation by Fernão de Magalhães; known in
Spanish as Fernando/Hernando de Magallanes and as Ferdinand
Magellan in English (ATCM XLII, IP 115).
Under the command of the Portuguese Ferdinand Magellan and,
after his death in the Philippines, with the Spaniard Juan Sebastian
Elcano at the helm, the expedition, financed by the Spanish Crown,
set sail in 1519 from Seville to be completed three years later by
Elcano. This expedition, possibly the greatest maritime adventure in
human record, went on to circumnavigate the Earth for the first
time, proving that our planet was round.
Magellan developed considerable navigation skills, named the
Pacific Ocean, was the first European to navigate the Magellan
Strait (initially named “Estreito de Todos os Santos”) and added
immensely to European knowledge about the World. He is still
regularly remembered through times. Examples: NASA named
Magellan the mission to Venus (one of the most successful deep
space missions), one of the craters in the Moon is named Magellan.
The two galaxies that can be seen by naked eye in the Southern
Hemisphere are called Magellan clouds (or Nubeculae Magellani).
Punta Arenas (Chile) holds the Universidad de Magallanes and has a
penguin with his name (Magellan penguin Spheniscus
magellanicus).
After his captain’s death, Elcano took the helm of the Nao Victoria
and, in his determination to return to Spain, made the audacious
decision to sail West crossing uncharted waters of the Indian ocean,
rounding the Cape of Good Hope and arriving in Seville on
September 8th 1522, along with only 17 members of the crew,
originally made up of 240 men. On the one hand, the scientific
legacy of both Magellan and Elcano lives on thanks to Andrés de
Urdaneta, another survivor of the expedition, who later in the 16th
century discovered the so-called “tornaviaje”, the return pathway
across the Pacific from the Philippines, effectively connecting China
to Europe through Mexico. On the other hand, it also lingers thanks
to the Italian Antonio Pigaffeta, which have embarked with
Magellan and arrived with Elcano, becoming the chronicler of this
journey, whose adventures are known through his publication “The
First Journey around the World”. This is the only accountable
writing since, if ever existed, there are no trace or records of the
Magellan notebook or diary. All this set in motion what modern
historians have called «The First Globalization».
A non-exhaustive list of education and outreach activities by
Portugal and Spain include:
The Portuguese Navy tall ship NRP Sagres planned a
Circumnavigation tour in 2020 (departing on the 5 January 2020),
for 371 days covering 20 countries, following the Magellan Route.
This mission was part of the Celebration Programme for the Fifth
Centenary of Fernão de Magalhães
Circumnavigation (https://sagres.marinha.pt/ ). However, due to
the pandemic situation, this journey was cancelled and the NRP
Sagres returned to port in March 2020.
In a similar vein, the Spanish Navy training ship ‘Juan Sebastian de
Elcano’ left Cadiz on September 24, 2020 for her 93rd Training
Cruise. She is scheduled to sail around the world as one of the main
milestones organized to commemorate the fifth Centenary of the
first Circumnavigation of the Earth. The ship will have the
opportunity to visit other relevant places of the original expedition
such as Guam, the Philippines or Indonesia.
Digital display on “Biodiversity in the expedition of
circumnavigation of Magalhães-Elcano (1519-1522)", with the
collaboration of the Sociedade de Geografia de Lisboa and the
Embassy of Spain in Portugal, with the support of the Directorate
General for Culture of the Ministry of Culture of Spain.
Group of 8 Conferences on the intervention of Portuguese and
Spanish scientists in commemoration of the 500 years of the
expedition of circumnavigation of Magalhães-Elcano (1519-1522). 9
Sept. - 4 Oct. 2019, Room Algarve, Sociedade de Geografia de
Lisboa (http://www.socgeografialisboa.pt/2019/)
ElViajeMásLargo #VCentenario | "The Longest Voyage: The First
Journey around the World" is an exhibition and documentary
programme that reflects on the attitude of man before a long trip
into the unknown. It connects the first circumnavigation of the
Earth with the individual challenges of the present and the
collective challenges of the future. The project began in 2018 with
the exhibition following the steps of Magellan and the preparations
of the first circumnavigation with the traveling exhibition "The
Dream, 1518-2018", and continued with the celebration, in 2019, of
a great exhibition in the Archivo General de Indias in Seville around
the first circumnavigation and the importance of "travel" for the
evolution of mankind.
El viaje a la Especiería (The trip to the Spice Trading House) This
exhibition, made up of 32 images, some of them from the Naval
Museum, was displayed in Espinosa de los Monteros (Burgos). This
town also pays tribute to the sailor Gonzalo Gómez de Espinosa,
born there in 1479 and embarked on the ship Trinidad, captained
by Ferdinand Magellan, who, after the latter's death in 1521, took
command of the damaged ship that could not accompany the
Victoria and Juan Sebastián Elcano on their return.
Educational event "More Magalhães more World" by Ciência Viva/
Pavilion of Knowledge. To celebrate the 500th anniversary of the
departure for the first World circumnavigation, on the 20th of Sept.
2019 the Pavilion of Knowledge dedicated a day to exploration and
to new challenges to Humankind and for the Oceans. On that day,
Institutions that produce knowledge about the Sea (e.g.,
Universities, Research Institutes) presented the visitors with a vision
of what has changed in the last centuries. It was an event full of
challenges and practical activities about the Oceans, bringing
together families, scientists and specialists around the table to
discuss their next expeditions and innovations, in diverse fields
ranging from climate change to biodiversity. 20 Sept. 2019 Pavilhão
do Conhecimento, Lisboa. (ttps://www.pavconhecimento.pt/)
POLAR WEEKS by the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
(APECS) Portugal and Polar Educators International (PEI) Portugal,
with their national and international partners. This activity brought
together polar scientists into schools across Portugal, to give
lectures (or skype calls with international colleagues; read Xavier et
al. (2018)) in March and October 2019, in which Magellan was
regularly mentioned and remembered.
European investigators night 2019. Educational activities in 27th
September at the University of Coimbra (Portugal) related to polar
science. -
XVI SIMPÓSIO DE HISTÓRIA MARÍTIMA, titled "Fernão de
Magalhães and the knowledge of the Oceans" 19, 20 and 21
November 2019. Sociedade de Geografia, Lisboa. (https://
escolanaval.marinha.pt/pt/)
Conference "Fernão de Magalhães - his family context" by António
de Mattos e Silva at 5pm 17 Dez. 2019 at Room Algarve, Sociedade
de Geografia de Lisboa.
List of activities by the Portuguese Navy (https://www.marinha.pt/
pt/).
List of activities by Tourism of Portugal (http://
www.magalhaes500.pt/).
List of the 343 activities by the Centennial Commission in Spain:
http://vcentenario.es/actividades/
Report of the cooperation of Portugal and Spain in celebrating the
500 years of the first World circumnavegation (https://
www.publico.pt/2019/04/01/).
Reference
Xavier JC, Azinhaga PF, Seco J, Fugmann G (2018) International
Polar Week as an educational
activity to boost science–educational links: Portugal as a case study.
Polar Record 54(5-6): 360
365. Doi: 10.1017/S0032247418000621
