Project Calls and Evaluation Processes in Turkish Antarctic
Expeditions
Project Calls and Evaluation Processes in Turkish Antarctic
Expeditions
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the polar research project call
management system in Turkey which defines the expedition
participation as well.
Introduction
Together with the Scientific and Technological Research Council of
Turkey (TUBITAK) Academic Research Funding Program
Directorate (ARDEB) and TUBITAK Marmara Research Center
(MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI) opens annual project calls for
the participation of researchers in Turkish Antarctic Expeditions
(TAE). Project calls are open to all institutions and organizations in
Turkey and project submissions are accepted within the framework
of the priority research themes specified in the National Polar
Science Program (2018-2022). In this scope, the project calls and
the evaluation processes can be classified under the titles of
“expedition participation”, “independent of the expedition” and
“participation in research stations of other countries”.
Project Calls for 2017 – 2019
Between 2017 and 2019, the project calls and the evaluation of the
submissions were coordinated by the Polar Research Center of
Istanbul Technical University (ITU PolReC). The project call
structure was based on the TUBITAK ARDEB’s system, which has
been conducting and funding scientific projects as well as managing
submission and evaluation processes for various scientific themes
for many years. Project calls were opened between April and May
and evaluated from August to September.
During the calls, researchers were asked to fill the project
application form consisting of the following sub-titles, with a
maximum of 20 pages:
Project tag
Abstract
Purpose and Rationale of the Project
Subject and Scope of the Project
Literature Review
Materials & Methods
Budget
Sampling Area
Expedition Participants
Institutional Research Capacity
Success Criteria and Expected Outcomes
Other Institutions Supporting the Project
Other Activities of the Project Team on Antarctica
Submitted proposals were examined by a commission formed by the
rectorates of five universities and then evaluated by external
referees consisting of experts in the field of application. For 2017,
2018 and 2019 calls, 7, 15 and 19 projects were supported and
funded, respectively.
Project Calls for 2018 – 2020
In 2018, polar science project calls were integrated into the
institutional structure of TUBITAK ARDEB, which forms the basis of
the project evaluation system, and the call process was transferred
to the online platform. The application period is similar to the
former structure which the calls are opened in April - May,
evaluations are conducted in June - July, and the qualified projects
are announced in August - September. The evaluations are carried
out in a structure where five or more external referees share their
reviews within a panel system. The number of projects supported
during this period was 7, 7 and 6 for 2018, 2019 and 2020,
respectively.
It should be noted that ITU PolReC and TUBITAK ARDEB opened
project calls simultaneously in 2018 since it was the first trial of the
new project system for polar sciences. The main difference between
the 2017-2019 and the 2018-2020 period is the allocated budget for
individual projects. The budget of the projects evaluated by ITU
PolReC was quite limited and this budget was increased
approximately four times during the TUBITAK ARDEB period.
Although the number of projects has decreased in the new project
application system, the marginal benefits of the scientific projects
(namely original value, widespread impacts, outcomes) have
increased, as aimed.
