The Letter of Endorsement between the Association of Polar Early
Career Scientists (APECS) and APECS National Committee of Turkey
The Letter of Endorsement between the Association of Polar Early
Career Scientists (APECS) and the APECS National Committee of
Turkey
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the signing of the letter of
endorsement (LoE) between the Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists (APECS) and the Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists National Committee of Turkey (APECS Turkey).
Background
The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists Turkey (APECS
Turkey) was founded by Dr. Burcu Özsoy in 2013 and taken under
the umbrella of İstanbul Technical University Polar Research Center
(ITU PolReC) in 2015. Since then, Turkey has carried out education
& outreach activities in cooperation with the Turkish Students’
Polar Research Team (PolSTeam) which also has an organic
connection with APECS Turkey. The activities of APECS Turkey and
PolSTeam included the foundation of more than 100 Polar Clubs in
primary and high schools, while seminars, workshops, exhibitions,
street interviews, contests have been carried out reaching 1 million
people. In 2018, the Education and Outreach Workshop has been
organized in İstanbul with APECS and APECS Turkey to increase
partnership and share experiences. The workshop focused on
“Educators Supporting Collaboration on Polar Regions Project
(ESCoP)” and future collaborations.
Letter of Endorsement (LoE) between APECS and APECS Turkey
Based on the above information and mentioned activities, APECS
and APECS Turkey have signed an LoE in March 2021 to increase
potential cooperation and strengthen the relationship. The LoE
covers representation, communication, membership, partnership,
and finance headlines. Within the scope of this agreement, APECS
endorses the initiative of several APECS members in Turkey to
establish an APECS National Committee in Turkey with the name
APECS Turkey. APECS Turkey ensures to regularly update APECS
about its establishment process, activities, and the conducted
activities will comply with the goals of APECS, terms of reference,
and rules of procedure.
Conclusion
The duration of the LoE was designated as 6 months. After the
completion of this period, parties will revisit the letter either to
discuss a more detailed partnership or to extend the duration of the
current letter.
