Antarctic Communication and Education in a Pandemic Year
English version provided by the author
Antarctic Communication and Education in a Pandemic Year
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Abstract
The work of the Chilean Antarctic Institute in education and
dissemination of polar knowledge during the year 2020, marked by
the Covid-19 pandemic, is presented here. Outreach activities since
the declaration of pandemic alert in Chile (March 16, 2020), have
ceased to be face-to-face and have turned to virtual formats. In this
period, INACH has published 3 magazines, several educational
sheets, a book, has organized trainings for kindergarten educators
and a virtual meeting on polar science for young people, has
produced the digital exhibition "Antarctica, witness of time" and a
podcast program with Antarctic content, and has promoted the use
of its social networks to disseminate polar activities.
Background
During 2020 and in the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, an
increase in the use of social networks was observed, which in the
case of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) implied an increase
in its followers. For example, in 2016, we had 5,609 followers on
Facebook and in 2021 we reached 20,865. On Instagram in 2016
we had 116 followers and in 2021 we have reached 8,061.
INACH published in 2020 two issues of the "Chilean Antarctic
Bulletin": one with a special dedicated to Marine Protected Areas
and the other with a special dedicated to the 40 years of life of this
Antarctic outreach magazine, one of the oldest of the Chilean
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. An issue of the English-language
magazine "ILAIA, Advances in Chilean Antarctic Science" was also
published, with a special issue devoted to Antarctic social sciences
and culture.
In the context of the Conference of the Parties (COP 25) chaired by
Chile and held in December 2019 in Madrid, and more specifically
in the Cryosphere Pavilion built to address the frozen areas of the
Earth, INACH presented the bilingual illustrated book "Cambio
Climático en Cifras" ("Climate Change in figures"). It brings together
in an entertaining and graphic way the most significant figures on
the causes, effects and mitigation actions of this global problem.
There are 80 questions that are answered in this 172-page
publication. Its illustrations are totally unpublished, made by
INACH's Art Director, Pablo Ruiz. The book can be downloaded at:
http://www.inach.cl/cambioclimaticoencifras/.
Delivering updated information on the environment, regional
biodiversity and the White Continent, were just some of the
objectives of INACH's partnership project with the Magellanic
newspaper "La Prensa Austral" to provide the community with
weekly educational sheets for three months. These address various
areas of knowledge, such as: climate change, the latest
paleontological discoveries, Antarctic historical milestones, marine
protected areas, among other relevant aspects. The images and
graphics of these educational sheets were created by Pablo Ruiz and
are available at: https://www.inach.cl/inach/?page_id=8680.
On the International Day of Women and Girls in Science (February
11), the Explora Magallanes Program, part of the Chilean Ministry
of Science and Innovation, unveiled its new science outreach
product. It is the illustrated book "Charly and the Rov". This story is
aimed at children from 4 to 7 years of age and seeks to approach
the technology of underwater robotics through the story of a girl
named Charly, who dreams of becoming a scientist and being able
to travel to Antarctica. The creation of the story was supported by
INACH in the first volume through the illustrations of the Institute's
graphic designer, René Quinán, and by Océana Chile throughout the
process. The three volumes of the collection are available at:
https://www.inach.cl/inach/?page_id=8680.
One of INACH's most emblematic educational initiatives has been
the Antarctic School Fair (FAE), where high school students from all
over the country have had a space to think about Antarctica from
the point of view of scientific method. The FAE 2020 ended with
great success on November 5 and was held for the first time in
virtual format due to the pandemic; even so it had a large number
of participants from 12 regions of Chile, receiving 85 proposals.
Given this new format and the suspension of classes in most schools
in the country, INACH created the Virtual Antarctic Station to
accompany and advise students scientifically. In each session of the
Virtual Antarctic Station, attendees were able to listen and interact
with professionals from the White Continent, who answered
questions during live broadcasts and later through a Virtual
Classroom, where they were also able to access bibliography to
support the preparation of a research article, a requirement of the
contest. The presentations and dialogues with 15 INACH
researchers and professionals were transmitted through INACH's
social networks: Facebook Live, Instagram Live and YouTube,
reaching a little more than 55,000 people on Facebook; 1,500
reproductions on YouTube; 7,000 reproductions on Instagram and
with an average of 200 people live per session.
The training program for kindergarten educators that INACH has
maintained since 2010 also continued. The call, which was
traditionally face-to-face and restricted to the region of Magallanes,
was extended to all regions of Chile and in digital format due to the
pandemic. This cycle of workshops had the collaboration of the
Explora Program of the Ministry of Science, Technology, Knowledge
and Innovation, and a total of 794 kindergarten educators and
elementary school teachers who live and work in different cities of
Chile participated. In these sessions, the participants were able to
learn about general aspects of Antarctica and the teleconnections
that this continent has with the different areas of Chile.
The celebration of the Winter Solstice 2020 was carried out through
a radio program (podcast) that was made available on Saturday,
June 20, with a historical special that had as its main focus the
commemoration of the 500th anniversary of the passage of
Hernando de Magallanes through the strait that bears his name and
the first circumnavigation of the world.
To commemorate the 61st anniversary of the signing of the
Antarctic Treaty (December 1, 2020), two online events were held:
the presentation of the results of a citizen survey applied to the
inhabitants of the gateway cities to Antarctica, and the official
launch of the science outreach podcast "Audible Antarctica". The
first event "What do citizens think about Antarctica? Perceptions of
the inhabitants of the five gateway cities to Antarctica" presented
the results of a citizen survey applied to the inhabitants of the
gateway cities to Antarctica: Punta Arenas (Chile), Ushuaia
(Argentina), Cape Town (South Africa), Hobart (Australia) and
Christchurch (New Zealand), within the framework of the project
"Antarctic Cities and Common Heritage: rethinking the role of
gateway cities". The second event was the official launching of the
scientific outreach podcast "Audible Antarctica", a product that
makes available to a wide audience contents in Spanish on different
areas of national scientific research in Antarctica.
The only activity that INACH was able to carry out in person was
the presentation in Puerto Williams of the exhibition "Antarctica,
witness of time", which deals with the evolution of the natural
history of Antarctica. This exhibit was successfully reconverted and
now visitors can virtually access the contents of the exhibition on
the different environments of Antarctica through millions of years
(https://www.inach.cl/testigodeltiempo/). It should be noted that
virtual visitors will be able to access the content of the exhibition,
as well as its assembly in a 3D environment, an audiovisual in
virtual reality (VR) about the different environments of Antarctica
through millions of years, 360° photography, coloring books and
sheets, as well as a coloring application to exercise the skills of
preschool children. The main themes are paleontology and
glaciology.
Conclusion
Chile through the Chilean Antarctic Institute has continued its work
of education and dissemination of polar knowledge, despite the
limitations imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic. The use of social
networks and virtual media for education and dissemination of
knowledge have been crucial to achieve this goal and open new
doors for further dissemination of knowledge of Antarctica to the
general public.
