Report on the tasks completed by the Naval Hydrographic Service
in Antarctica 2020/21
English version provided by the author
Report on the tasks completed by the Naval Hydrographic Service
in Antarctica 2020/21
Document Presented by Argentina
Summary
This document describes the activities carried out by the Argentine
Republic in the Antarctic Peninsula, through its Naval Hydrographic
Service, to improve navigation safety and the protection of the
maritime and Antarctic coastal environments. The latest news about
beaconing and particularly aids to navigation (AIS AtoN) are also
presented here. Finally, updates related to Argentine nautical charts
and to the works on bathymetry and topography in the adjacent
coastal area of interest are also presented.
Introduction
The Automatic Identification System (AIS) facilitates the automatic
identification and tracking of vessels from other ships, aircraft and
coastal stations. Although its primary objective was to contribute to
avoid collisions at sea, its applications have exceeded the initial
expectations, transforming AIS into a multiple capacity aid to
navigation.
The Argentine Republic, in response to increase of navigation in
Antarctica, continues its work, through joint efforts between the
Naval Hydrographic Service, the Argentine Navy, Hidrovía S.A.
(company responsible for providing dredging and signalling
services) and the Joint Antarctic Command, to maintain and
increase the capacities of the AIS AtoN installed in Antarctica, with
the purpose of complementing the beaconing process.
As part of the national efforts within the scope of the Antarctic
Summer Campaign 2020/2021, 11 beacons were given maintenance
and repairs, and one AIS AtoN device was renewed, increasing the
total number of signals capacity of this AtoN.
Regarding nautical cartography, during 2020/21 three new
international nautical charts were presented, as well as a new
electronic chart. Likewise, new bathymetric and topographic
surveys have been carried out in the adjacent coastal area of
interest in Isla Media Luna / Half Moon Island and Bahía Esperanza
/ Hope Bay.
Development
AIS AtoN
During the Antarctic Summer Campaign 2020/2021, aware of the
need to increment aids to navigation and after ten years of
successful service, the Argentine Republic has conducted
maintenance on AIS AtoN devices installed at Orcadas Station (LAT.
60º 44’S, LON 044º 44’ W), Carlini Station (LAT. 62° 14’ S, LON.
58° 40’W), San Martín Station (LAT.68° 08’S, LON. 67°08’W) and
Esperanza Station (LAT. 63° 24’S, LON. 56° 59’W).
The Capacity of the Esperanza AIS AtoN was increased, adding a
meteorological station that allows the equipment to transmit
meteorological and hydrological data (message 8), as well as signal
identification and basic data on functioning status (message 21).
This unit has an ultrasonic sensor with AIRMAR heater, which
provides data on wind speed and direction to the transmitter.
Beaconing
During the Antarctic Summer Campaign 2020/2021, preventive and
corrective maintenance duties were conducted on the beacons, as
follows:
National Numbers
Name
Location
Tasks Performed
1848
Entrada Beacon
Caleta Potter / Potter Cove
General inspection and change of winds.
1849
Cámara Beacon
Caleta Potter / Potter Cove
Installation
1851
Potter Beacon
Caleta Potter / Potter Cove
Structure base construction.
1872
Vale Beacon
Puerto Yankee / Yankee Harbor
Inspection. Regular state.
1873
Ramos Beacon
Puerto Yankee / Yankee Harbor
Not found.
1877
Rosales Beacon
Isla Media Luna / Half Moon Island
Installation
1967
Faro Esperanza Beacon
Bahía Esperanza / Hope Bay
Maintenance. Put into service.
1968
Denticulada Anterior Beacon
Bahía Esperanza / Hope Bay
Maintenance. Put into service.
1969
Denticulada Posterior Beacon
Bahía Esperanza / Hope Bay
Light bulb replacement. Put into service.
1970
Rojo Beacon
Bahía Esperanza / Hope Bay
Painting
DENTICULADA POSTERIOR Beacon ENTRADA Beacon
Potter Beacon
Nautical cartography:
During 2020/21, the following nautical charts were edited:
INT 9140 / H-611 Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico
Sur Province. Islas Orcadas del Sur / South Orkney Islands.
INT 9101 / H-757 Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico
Sur Province. Peninsula Trinidad – Base Esperanza– Caleta Choza /
Trinity Peninsula - Esperanza Station - Hut Cove.
ENC AR507570 Península Trinidad. Bahía Esperanza. / Trinity
Peninsula. Hope Bay.
INT 9120 / H-762 Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico
Sur Province. Islas Shetland del Sur / South Shetland Islands. Isla
Decepción / Deception Island. 2nd Edition.
Quadroon: Fuelles de Neptuno / Neptunes Bellows. 2nd Edition.
Bathymetrical and Topographical Tasks:
A complete topographical and bathymetrical survey of the area
corresponding to the quadroon of Isla Media Luna / Half Moon
Island, chart N° 138, was carried out. Bathymetrical tasks were also
performed in the east, north and west of Punta Foca / Seal Point in
the proximity of Esperanza Station.
Bathymetry in the N, E and W of Punta Foca / Seal Point
Establishing tide gauge station
Conclusion
In accordance with national dispositions to prevent the spreading of
the COVID-19 outbreak to Antarctica, activities in the continent
were considerably reduced, preventing the normal opening of
temporary stations and
limiting the operation of vessels. However, given the priority
assigned by Argentina to the safety of human life at sea and the
assigned SAR responsibility, the Naval Hydrography Service has
continued working in its permanent effort towards cartographical
production, the maintenance of beaconing and the use of
technology compatible with new navigation systems, in order to
increase nautical safety, safeguard human life at sea and prevent
marine and coastal pollution in Antarctica.
