Proposal of Finland to host the 45th ATCM in Helsinki in 2023
Proposal of Finland to host ATCM XLV in Helsinki from 29th May to
8th June 2023
As the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty are aware, due to
circumstances beyond our control, Finland was obliged to cancel
the ATCM XLIII in Helsinki in 2020. Following the cancellation, the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) contacted Finland to enquire
whether it was willing to be re-incorporated in the Host Country -
list. As stated in the ATS Half Year Report 2020/2021 (issued 9th
October 2020):
“In compliance with the Parties’ instructions at the ATCM Forum,
the Secretariat has contacted the two Consultative Parties whose
turn to organise an ATCM did not materialise (Ecuador in 2018 and
Finland in 2020) to ask for their views on this matter and see
whether those Parties were willing to be re-incorporated in the list.
Finland announced that, in order not to miss the chance to organise
an ATCM, it had reached an understanding with India to organise
the ATCM in 2023 (postponing India to 2024).”
This announcement was subsequently included at the ATCM
Discussion Forum (Intersessional consultation among Consultative
Parties on the next steps following the cancellation of ATCM XLIII –
CEP XXIII in Finland, Second Round of Discussion) on 16th June
2020. At the summary of the discussions it states (under “other
issues”, 2nd July 2020):
“Mechanisms to recover missed opportunities to hold ATCMs:
One Party pointed out the need to discuss how Parties that recently
missed the opportunity to host ATCMs could recover that chance,
and that the forum was the proper place for this discussion. It also
suggested that such Parties should be asked for their views, either
in the framework of this forum or officially through the Secretariat.
In this respect, Finland announced that it had reached an
understanding with India to organise the ATCM in 2023
(postponing India to 2024). Tentative dates proposed were 29 May -
8 June 2023. Finland stated that it was ready to move in that
direction if other Parties agreed.”
Finland is very grateful to the Delegation of India for their
understanding and cooperation in this regard.
Finland is determined to bear its responsibilities as a consultative
member of the Antarctic Treaty and wishes also to be able to take
advantage of all the planning and arrangements we had in place for
2020. We would therefore wish to confirm the consent of the
Consultative Parties on this arrangement. This would allow us to
fully continue our preparations for the meeting in 2023.
