Managing the Effects of Anthropogenic Noise in the Antarctic –
Steps towards the development of an underwater noise protection
concept for ‘Antarctica’
Managing the Effects of Noise in the Antarctic – Steps towards the
development of a noise protection concept for ‘Antarctica’
Submitted by Germany
Introduction
One of the key pollutants created by human activities in the
Antarctic is underwater noise, which is primarily caused by ship
traffic, but also by research activities (e.g. seismic surveys) or
logistic activities. Concern about potential impacts of anthropogenic
sound in the Southern Ocean was first raised at the ATCM in 2000.
However, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has
not discussed impacts of underwater sound in Antarctic waters since
2007 (see ATCM XXIX WP41, SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and
the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP80, Taking Action on Marine
Noise in the Southern Ocean), though SCAR provided Updates on
Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean in 2012 (ATCM XXXV
IP21) and 2019 (ATCM XLII WP 68 & BP 03). The latter has also
recently been published as SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021):
Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update.
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(the Protocol) provides comprehensive protection for native birds
and mammals (Article 3 Annex II to the Protocol) and specifies that
the impacts of activities must undergo prior assessment according
to Annex I of the Protocol (Article 8 para. 1 of the Protocol). New
tools such as the Animal Audiogram Database The Animal
Audiogram Database (https://
animalaudiograms.museumfuernaturkunde.berlin/audiogrambase)
is a repository for consolidated storage of published underwater and
in air audiogram data commissioned by Germany. can aid this
assessment process (see also BP 6). Nevertheless, gaps in knowledge
on the effects of underwater anthropogenic sound on Antarctic
marine mammals make the assessment of such activities difficult
and it is still unresolved which exposure limits and protection
concepts need to be used for Antarctic marine mammals and birds
in order to ensure the full level of protection pursuant to the
Protocol. Furthermore, requirements and noise thresholds vary
between Treaty Parties that conduct these assessments, leading to
different standards.
The SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan
undertaken in 2014 identified "How will organism and ecosystems
respond to a changing soundscape in the Southern Ocean?" as one
of the 80 most pressing questions regarding the future of Antarctica.
In its most recent update on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern
Ocean (ATCM XLII BP03 and SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021), SCAR
polled a committee of experts on the current status of underwater
noise as a first-step, qualitative assessment of the state of
knowledge. Based on the SCAR, experts the state of knowledge of
potential impacts for cetaceans (and marine mammals in general)
and the understanding of the sources and types of anthropogenic
noise present in Antarctic marine waters is fair to good.
Germany hosted a workshop to determine the current state of
knowledge on effects of noise on marine mammals in Antarctica in
2018 (results presented in ATCM XLII IP 31 and Erbe et al. 2019).
The participating international experts on marine mammals
highlighted a variety of research and management needs. The
management need with the highest score was a refinement of noise
exposure criteria for the Antarctic: the participating experts
recommended that a series of focused international expert
workshops should be held in order to develop a criteria matrix
specifically for Antarctic marine mammal species and the main
anthropogenic sound sources as the basis for an underwater noise
protection concept for Antarctica.
To this end, Germany tendered a research project that will run from
January 2020 to March 2023.
Short Project Overview
The objective of the current project is to develop a criteria matrix
that specifically addresses the 24 native Antarctic marine mammal
species and the three main sources of anthropogenic underwater
noise: seismic airguns, hydroacoustic research equipment and
vessels.
To achieve this, a series of workshops will be conducted to identify
maximum sound exposure values that will prevent auditory injury
and harassment by anthropogenic sound. However, the amount of
species and sound sources constitute a considerable challenge, as
there are still several uncertainties involved that might not be
solved in the short-term. The project will therefore approach this
task using the process of Expert Knowledge Elicitation (EKE) or
Expert Elicitation (EE).
EE is a heuristic process typically used in situations with scarcity of
empirical data but the need for conservation or management
decisions (Martin et al. 2012). It should build on and use the best
available research and analysis. It should be undertaken only when
the state of knowledge will remain insufficient to support timely
informed assessment and decision making (Morgan 2014). The
outcome of EE will be a probabilistic distribution that reasonably
represents the opinion of an external observer, based on the
estimate and the confidence of the estimate from all experts
participating in the EE. It quantifies scientific uncertainty and
minimizes inadvertent bias in the elicited information.
The results of the workshops will be presented at ATCM XLIV in
Berlin and in a closing conference in September 2022 also in Berlin.
The German Environment Agency (UBA) commissioned this project
with funding from the Federal Ministry for Environment, Nature
Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU). The results of the project
are intended to inform the evaluation of activities within the
framework of the German permitting procedures and for
presentation at future ATCMs.
References
ATCM XXIX WP41, SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the
Southern Ocean
ATCM XXX IP80, Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern
Ocean)
ATCM XXXV IP21, Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII WP 68, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII BP 03, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII IP 31, Results from the international workshop “The
Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in
November 2018 in Germany
Booth, C.G., Sinclair, R.R. and Harwood, J. (2020). "Methods for
Monitoring for the Population Consequences of Disturbance in
Marine Mammals: A Review." Frontiers in Marine Science 7.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00115
Erbe C, Dähne M, Gordon J, Herata H, Houser DS, Koschinski S,
Leaper R, McCauley R, Miller B, Müller M, Murray A, Oswald JN,
Scholik-Schlomer AR, Schuster M, Van Opzeeland IC and Janik VM
(2019). Managing the Effects of Noise From Ship Traffic, Seismic
Surveying and Construction on Marine Mammals in Antarctica.
Front. Mar. Sci. 6:647. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00647
Kennicutt, MC, Chown, SL, Cassano, JJ, Liggett, D, Peck, LS,
Massom, R, . . . Sutherland, WJ (2015). "A roadmap for Antarctic
and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and beyond."
Antarctic Science 27(1): 3-18.
Martin, T. G., Burgman, M. A., Fidler, F., Kuhnert, P. M., Low‐Choy,
S., McBride, M., & Mengersen, K. (2012). Eliciting expert
knowledge in conservation science. Conservation Biology, 26, 29–
38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01806.x
Morgan, MG (2014). "Use (and abuse) of expert elicitation in
support of decision making for public policy." Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 111(20): 7176-7184. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1319946111
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (2021). "Anthropogenic
Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update". SCAR Bulletin 204, 43 pp.
https://scar.org/scar-library/reports-and-bulletins/scar-
bulletins/5589-scar-bulletin-204/file/
