PROANTAR Education & Outreach Activities
PROANTAR Education & Outreach Activities
During the 2020/2021 season, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused
many PROANTAR events to be cancelled or postponed due to the
restrictions on large events and gatherings.
In addition to the specific actions listed below, PROANTAR
developed virtual meetings and conference presentations, webinars
and other events to promote the dialogue among the scientific
community, Antarctic colleagues, teachers and students, general
public and decision makers.
The public outreach program of PROANTAR is supported by the
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI), the
Brazilian Navy, the National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development (CNPq), the Ministry of Environment,
APECS-Brasil (Association of Polar Researchers) and several
universities that are committed to educational and public outreach
efforts related to PROANTAR objectives and Antarctic issues.
The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI) and the
Brazilian Navy co-hosted the “Antarctic Science Symposium
2020”on October 16, 2020. That event was a great opportunity to
present the Antarctic Science Program and to discuss the results of
the scientific activities that were conducted during the XXXVIII
Antarctic Operation (2019/2020). The symposium presentations are
available at http://bit.ly/cienciaantartica
The MCTI Antarctic Science Program aims at developing excellent
research on the Antarctic region and its connections with the
Atlantic Ocean and South America; produce and manage
knowledge; help scientific knowledge support public-policy
decisions; promote the spread of scientific knowledge; and establish
national and international partnerships for the development of
science. (www.cienciaantartica.gov.br)
The Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) held its “Antarctic
Week – UFMG Symposium” from April 26 to 29, 2020.The main
objectives of the event were to contribute to the discussion and
spread of scientific advances in the areas of Antarctic medicine/
physiology, microbiology and archaeology and their importance to
Brazil.
All symposium materials are available at: https://
www.youtube.com/channel/UC8L_cCtQzHgbhgYFicpjk0w
“Antártica ou Antártida?” is a free online course designed for
elementary school teachers who speak Portuguese. Produced by the
Federal University of ABC (UFABC), the 60-hour course was
designed to help teachers who wish to include Antarctica in their
teaching programs. The course is divided into 4 modules - Ice,
Convergence, Environment and Life – and each module includes
lectures, discussion forums, video lessons and didactic material
production. The event provides opportunities for teachers to
improve their teaching, outreach, and collaboration.
For more information on the program, registration, prerequisites
and certification, please visit ufabc.net.br/antarticaouantartida2021
The Brazilian National Committee of the Association of Polar Early
Career Scientists (APECS-Brazil) celebrated in February 2021 the
“VI APECS-Brazil Symposium”. The event discussed the importance
of the polar regions for the global climate and the relevance of
research in Antarctica for everyday life. The virtual symposium had
simultaneous interpretation – English, Spanish, Portuguese, and
sign language.
From the May 10th to 14th 2021, during the “XXVI International
Polar Week”, a series of activities to raise awareness of the polar
areas and educating the public about Antarctic activities were
carried out: mini-courses, webinars, lectures, cinema and
presentations.
Students from all over the country, at all levels, were able to learn
facts and curiosities about polar regions, how they affect our daily
lives, the research that Brazil conducts in Antarctica and the
importance of the conservation of these environments.
All the APECS-Brazil material is available on YouTube: https://
m.youtube.com/c/APECSBRASIL/featured
The Brazilian Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz) held its virtual “II
Seminar Fiocruz in Antarctica” on December 3rd and 4th 2020. The
event discussed the background and challenges of doing science in
the region from the experience of the first year of the FioAntar
project. The project investigates risks and opportunities that
microorganisms present in the region can offer to human health, in
an epidemiological surveillance perspective that seeks to benefit the
Unified Health System (SUS, the acronym in Portuguese for the
Brazilian public health system).
The seminar presentation is available at https://youtu.be/
jvrQm4M4RD8
