Response to Australia's 2019/2020 Inspection Observations
English version provided by the author
Response to Australia's 2019/2020 Inspection Observations
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
In the 2019/2020 season Australia inspected several Antarctic
stations in accordance with Article 7 of the Antarctic Treaty and
Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, including the area of the closed Soviet station
Molodezhnaya. A report on the results of the inspection was
submitted by Australia.
The Russian side thanks Australia for the comments and
recommendations with regard to compliance with the Protocol's
requirements and reaffirms the important role of inspections under
Antarctic Treaty activities.
Molodezhnaya station was the largest Soviet station, with
accommodations of up to 700 people, located on a vast territory
and included several dozen of buildings and structures.
The wintering station was closed in 1990. Since 2006, some of the
buildings were used periodically as a seasonal base with limited
personnel, whose task included maintaining infrastructure facilities
in an accident-free state, preparing of a runway for ski-aircraft and
scheduled removal of waste from past activities with a total weight
of up to 50 tons each season by ship.
2019/2020 season turned out to be unusually warm for East
Antarctica, where Molodezhnaya and Mirny stations are located.
Due to this, various “historical” objects and areas buried under
long-term snow cover, thawed out in a short but warm summer. At
present, to eliminate the remarks of the inspection a plan of priority
measures for the coming seasons has been prepared.
Unfortunately, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
Russian Antarctic Expedition is very limited in carrying out of
seasonal logistics operations, including environmental activities at
Molodezhnaya station, but some tasks will be completed as soon as
possible.
In general, the outdated infrastructure of Molodezhnaya station will
require a complex of large-scale measures, including the removal of
fuel in tanks on the old fuel storage, dismantling of unusable
buildings and structures, reclamation of the territory in accordance
with the CEP Antarctic Clean-up Manual, waste removal by ship,
etc., as well as an assessment of the impact of activities on the
environment.
Measures to clean up the area of the former Soviet Molodezhnaya
station (from 2023 to 2030) are provided for by the Strategy for the
Development of the Russian Federation's Activities in Antarctica
until 2030, which was approved by the Government of the Russian
Federation in August 2020.
