Report on the 23rd edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol
between Argentina and Chile - 2020/2021
English version provided by the author
Report on the 23rd edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol
between Argentina and Chile (PANC) – 2020/2021
Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile
Summary
This Information Paper, drafted jointly by Chile and Argentina,
provides information on the activities carried out during the 23rd
edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol.
Background
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) began in 1998, when
Argentina and Chile established the need to coordinate their efforts
in the Antarctic SAR areas of responsibility of both Parties,
established in the “International Convention on Maritime Search
and Rescue” of 1979 (SAR Convention), which also requires
cooperation and coordination among neighboring States.
Since its creation, the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol has performed its
activities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System
(ATS). For this reason, Argentina and Chile have included the
participating vessels in their respective pre-season information,
notifying other Parties of its configuration.
Likewise, both Parties have permanently informed the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings about the PANC’s activities through
Information Papers (IP), providing details on support and rescues
carried out each season. These reports can be found in IP 26 ATCM
XXVI; IP 121 ATCM XXXIV; IP 109 ATCM XXXVI; IP 99 ATCM
XXXVII, IP 109 ATCM XXXIX, IP 125 ATCM XL, IP 14 ATCM XLII
and IP 26 ATIP 2019/21, among others.
Mission, organization and assignments
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol is performed between November
15th and March 31st of each year, to conduct activities and
exercises of search, rescues, salvaging, pollution monitoring and
remediation, with the objective to safeguard navigation, human life
at sea and to contribute in keeping waters free from pollution, in
the Antarctic Treaty area, south of 60°S, between the meridians of
010°O and 131°O”.
For the performance of the SAR missions in the area of the PANC
deployment, the SAR Coordination Centers (MRCC) in Ushuaia and
Punta Arenas have service and Antarctic support vessels and other
means at their disposal, for the purpose of handling the emergencies
that might arise. Likewise, the secondary SAR Coordination Center
(MRSC) in Puerto Williams also provides support for ongoing
operations.
Aside from the fundamental purpose of the PANC, the Antarctic
Service Vessel fulfills the following complementary activities, which
are carried out insofar as they do not interfere with the purpose of
the patrol.
Aid to the navigation: a) Meteorological support to the vessels and
ships navigating in the patrol area, b) as a mobile weather station,
incrementing and contributing to the available information for the
elaboration of the area´s forecast through the meteorological
services of both countries and c) maintenance of maritime
signalling for both countries within the PANC area.
Sanitary assistance: the units that integrate PANC have the capacity
to provide sanitary support of low level complexity, and have a
physician on board to take care of medical emergencies.
Support to the Antarctic scientific community: through the
transport of personnel and/or scientific equipment between
facilities or stations.
Logistics: through the resupplying of facilities and stations, from
both countries or from third states.
The “Austral Naval Area Command” (Comando del Área Naval
Austral), based in the city of Ushuaia, and the “Third Naval Zone
Chief Command" (Comandancia en Jefe de la Tercera Zona Naval),
located in the city of Punta Arenas, have the responsibility of
managing the Antarctic Patrol in alternative stages of
approximately 34 and 35 days.
The efforts of the PANC during the 2020-2021 period were oriented
towards the following aspects:
Maritime safety:
Safety of navigation.
Observations on Antarctic cartography.
Maintenance, installation and updates for navigation aids.
Updates on radio communications and capabilities of the GMDSS.
Signals and false alarms COSPAS – SARSAT.
SAR cases and maritime assistance.
Presentation of maritime safety information (MSI), including
weather forecasts and meteorological and glaciological conditions
in real time.
Pollution
Observations on special prescriptions for the use or transportation
of fuels in the Antarctic area (MARPOL rule 43).
Pollution resulting from normal operations or from a collision,
stranding or sinking of vessels and platforms:
Pollution from hazardous bulk liquid substances.
Pollution from waste waters.
Pollution from solid wastes from vessels.
Atmospheric pollution generated by vessels.
Monitoring of pollution in shipwreck areas.
Exercises in pollution countermeasures.
Use of dispersants, absorbant materials, skimmers and containment
barriers.
Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol 2020/2021
Argentina and Chile, through their MRCCs: the “Austral Naval Area
Command” (Comando Area Naval Austral), in Ushuaia, and the
“Third Naval Zone Chief Command" (Comandancia en Jefe de la
Tercera Zona Naval) in Punta Arenas, deployed the 23rd edition of
PANC, between November 15th 2020 and March 31st 2021.
During the aforementioned period, the MRCC of both navies
permanently maintained an “Antarctic Service Vessel” with Search
and Rescue capabilities and the necessary elements to control and
combat pollution, in addition to another vessel with similar
characteristics as back-up. These ships where the “Aviso ARA
‘Puerto Argentino’” and the “Aviso ARA ‘Bahía Agradable’” of the
Argentine Navy and the vessels “ATF ‘Lautaro’” and “OPV
‘Fuentealba’” of the Chilean Navy.
The stages of the 23rd PANC where as follows:
A. ALPHA (between November 15th and December 18th 2020)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Lautaro” – Nov. 15th to Dec. 9th,
2020.
OPV “Fuentealba” – Dec. 9th to 18th, 2020
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – Nov.
15th to Dec. 18th, 2020.
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Support to Antarctic stations and operators, including transport of
personnel and general logistics.
Maintenance work conducted on the existing maritime signalling in
the area of responsibility.
Opening of Chilean Antarctic stations.
B. BRAVO (between December 19th 2020 and January 22nd 2021)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – Dec.
19th, 2020 to Jan. 22nd, 2021.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro” – Dec. 19th, 2020 to Jan.
22nd, 2021.
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility.
Inspection of B/P KAI XIN and B/P EXPLORER.
C. CHARLIE (between January 23rd and February 26th 2021)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – Jan.
23rd to 24th, 2021.
ATF “Lautaro” – Jan. 25th to Feb. 26th, 2021.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro” – Jan. 23rd to 24th, 2021.
AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – Jan. 25th to Feb. 26th, 2021.
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
Maintenance work conducted on the existing maritime signalling in
the area of responsibility.
D. DELTA (between February 27th and March 31st 2021)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Lautaro” – Feb. 27th to Mar. 2nd,
2021.
AVISO A.R.A. “Bahía Agradable” – Mar. 2nd to 28th, 2021.
ATF “Lautaro” – Mar. 28th to 31st, 2021.
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – Feb.
27th to Mar. 2nd, 2021.
ATF “Lautaro” – Mar. 2nd to 28th, 2021.
AVISO A.R.A. “Bahía Agradable” – Mar. 28th to 31st, 2021.
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility.
Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
The results of the joint efforts of the 23rd edition of PANC were:
Total nautical miles navigated: 12.585,94 NM
Time at sea: 144 days.
Total assistances: 16 stations.
Maritime traffic: Radio contact was established with 11 vessels in
SAR area, providing support to navigation and meteorological
information.
Final comments
The tasks carried out during the 23rd PANC have once again
evidenced the importance of the joint efforts, both from Argentina
and Chile, in support of the international Antarctic community that
operates in the aforementioned area of responsibility.
This joint effort by Argentina and Chile allows for the execution of
PANC and at the same time, contributes to a rational use of both
countries’ resources.
The intention of Argentina and Chile is to continue conducting
PANC annually, contributing to the safeguarding of life at sea, the
safety of navigation and the preservation of the Antarctic
environment.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, efforts were optimized to
fulfill the commitments of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol.
