Horizon scanning exercise to identify likely invasive non-native
species in the Antarctic Peninsula region
Horizon scanning exercise to identify likely invasive non-native
species in the Antarctic Peninsula region
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom presents the results of a horizon scanning
exercise to identify invasive non-native species likely to threaten
biodiversity and ecosystems in the Antarctic Peninsula region.
Marine invertebrates dominated the list of highest risk species, with
flowering plants and terrestrial invertebrates also represented.
Background
Antarctic environments are increasingly at risk from non-native
species, with the Antarctic Peninsula region (here taken to
encompass the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands and
South Orkney Islands) consider to be at greatest risk (see ATCM
XXXV WP5). High levels of human activity by national operators
and the tourism industry may increase the likelihood of non-native
species being introduced, while climate change may increase the
likelihood of the introduced species establishing and becoming
invasive (ATCM XXXV WP5; ATCM XLII IP27 and ATCM XLII IP32).
Demonstrating the vulnerability of the Antarctic Peninsula region to
introductions, all known non-native species in Antarctica are found
within the region (see ATCM XXXIII IP46).
The CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2019) Annex
‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or
development’ highlights the need to identify potential non-native
species that present a high risk to Antarctic environments.
Specifically, Parties are encouraged to ‘Generate a list, with suitable
descriptions, of potential non-native species based on the
experience of the sub-Antarctic Islands (or other relevant
environments) and the biological characteristics and adaptability of
the “effective” colonisers.’
The aim of this Information Paper is to provide the Committee with
an update of recent research to identify invasive non-native species
likely to threaten biodiversity and ecosystems in the Antarctic
Peninsula region (see Hughes et al., 2020; Figure 1).
Species likely to invade the Antarctic Peninsula region
An international team of taxonomic and Antarctic experts
undertook a horizon scanning exercise to identify the species that
are likely to present the highest risk to biodiversity and ecosystems
within the Antarctic Peninsula region over the next 10 years.
Literature review, expert opinion and consensus approaches were
used during the workshop in Cambridge in October 2018, which
was supported by the UK Government through the GB Non-Native
Species Secretariat and Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC-UKRI). One hundred and three species, currently absent in
the region, were identified as relevant for review, with 13 species
identified as presenting a high risk of invading the Antarctic
Peninsula region (see Table 1).
Marine species dominated the list of highest risk species. Marine
invertebrates and algae can present a particular problem as they
can be transported to Antarctica attached to ship hulls and can be
exceptionally difficult or impossible to remove once established.
Mussel species were top of the list as they can survive in some polar
waters and can spread easily. When they establish, they can
dominate life by smothering the native marine animals that live on
the seabed.
Flowering plants and terrestrial invertebrates, including species
found on sub-Antarctic islands, were also considered likely to
invade. Although some of the sub-Antarctic islands have been
invaded by rats, mice or other vertebrates, invasion of the Antarctic
Peninsula region was not expected within the 10-year timeframe of
the study. However, rats and mice could survive within research
station buildings, making vigilance for signs of these species (e.g.
droppings and gnaw marks) essential.
Conclusion
Without the application of appropriate biosecurity measures, rates
of introductions and invasions within the Antarctic Peninsula region
are likely to increase, resulting in negative consequences for the
biodiversity of the whole continent, as introduced species establish
and spread further due to climate change and increasing human
activity. Therefore, further development and application of
biosecurity measures by all stakeholders active in the Antarctic
Peninsula region is recommended, including surveillance for species
such as those identified during this horizon scanning exercise.
Application of the methodology used in this research may also help
identify species likely to invade other regions of Antarctica.
Supporting reference
Hughes, K.A., Pescott, O.L. , Peyton, J., Adriaens, T., Cottier-Cook,
E.J., Key, G., Rabitsch, W., Tricarico, E., Barnes, D.K.A., Baxter, N.,
Belchier, M., Blake, D., Convey, P., Dawson, W., Frohlich, D.,
Gardiner, L.M., González-Moreno, P., James, R., Malumphy, C.,
Martin, S., Martinou, A. F., Minchin, D., Monaco, A., Moore, N.,
Morley, S.A., Ross, K., Shanklin, J., Turvey, K., Vaughan, D., Vaux,
A.G.C., Werenkraut, V., Winfield, I.J., and Roy, H.E. (2020).
Invasive non‐native species likely to threaten biodiversity and
ecosystems in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Global Change
Biology. 10.1111/gcb.14938. Available at: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/gcb.14938.
Figure 1. Non-native species can be transported to the Antarctic
Peninsula Region by different pathways. Marine invertebrates,
terrestrial invertebrates and flowering plants are all considered
likely to invade. However, Antarctic conditions are currently
probably too extreme for vertebrates, such as rats and mice, to
survive.
Table 1. List of the invaders most likely to impact the Antarctic
Peninsula region in the next 10 years.
No.
Species
Common name
Broad Group
1
Mytilus chilensis
Chilean mussel
Marine invertebrate
2
Mytilus edulis
Common blue mussel
Marine invertebrate
3
Protaphorura fimata
Springtail
Terrestrial invertebrate
4
Nanorchestes antarcticus
Mite
Terrestrial invertebrate
5
Halicarcinus planatus
Flattened crab
Marine invertebrate
6
Ciona intestinalis
Sea vase
Marine invertebrate
7
Leptinella scariosa
A buttonweed
Terrestrial plant
8
Botryllus schlosseri
Colonial Ascidian
Marine invertebrate
9
Carcinus maenas
European shore crab
Marine invertebrate
10
Undaria pinnatifida
Asian kelp
Marine algae
11
Leptinella plumosa
A buttonweed
Terrestrial plant
12
Chaetopterus variopedatus
Parchment worm
Marine invertebrate
13
Mytilus galloprovincialis
Mediterranean mussel
Marine invertebrate
