Australian Antarctic Science Program 2019-20 and 2020-21
Australian Antarctic Science Program
Overview
The Australian Antarctic Science Program is made up of Australian
government agencies and Australian and international universities
and research institutions. In 2019/20 and 2020/21 the program
undertook 69 science projects across multiple disciplines. More than
50 per cent of these projects included international collaborations
involving 65 international institutions across 21 countries. The
science program continues to benefit enormously from national and
international research and operational collaborations.
The Australian Antarctic Science Program has a strong focus on
research designed to inform the protection and management of
Antarctica. This includes research that contributes to understanding
and addressing regional and global issues through international
organisations such as the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP) and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (CCAMLR), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), International Whaling Commission (IWC), and
Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of the Department of
Agriculture, Water and Environment, leads, manages and
coordinates the Australian Antarctic Science Program. Public
summaries of all science projects, past and present, are available on
the AAD website.
Research Highlights 2019 - 2021
In the 2019-20 season, there were two major field programs
undertaken. The International Collaborative Exploration of the
Cryosphere though Airborne Profiling (ICECAP) East Antarctic
Grounding Line Experiment (EAGLE) project continued the previous
ICECAP research program utilizing geophysical airborne surveys in
East Antarctica to measure ice thickness, surface elevation and
bedrock properties over the East Antarctic ice sheet. The Australian
Antarctic Science Program also continued ecological research and
monitoring on breeding seabirds including snow petrels, Adélie
penguins and emperor penguins to improve management strategies
and conservation outcomes.
COVID-19 has affected the delivery of a number of science projects
since 2020, as the AAD has had a focus on sustaining Australia’s
research stations in the 2020-21 season. The Australian Antarctic
Science Program operates a number of projects supported by
station-based personnel for observations and data collection and a
further suite of projects utilising automated instrumentation at or
proximate to Australian research stations. This includes upper
atmosphere, cryosphere and geophysical monitoring across each of
Australia’s Antarctic research stations. Ensuring the ongoing
operation and continuity of long-term data sets has been a key
priority for the science program during this period.
The AAD led a highly successful marine science expedition in 2021
on RV Investigator, an Australian Marine National Facility with
Southern Ocean research capabilities. The eight week ‘Trends in
Euphausiids off Mawson, Predators and Oceanography’ (TEMPO)
voyage deployed new camera technologies to gather information on
krill locations, density and population dynamics. For the first time
large krill super swarm, with active predators including whales and
seabirds, was observed and recorded using multiple sensors (echo
sounders, underwater cameras) CTD, trawling and systematic
predator observations, which may provide unprecedented insight
into krill/predator interactions and swarming behaviour. This
information will contribute to the development of reliable krill
biomass estimates to support the work of CCAMLR.
In 2020-21 the AAD commenced a research program with the
University of Tasmania School of Social Sciences. The research is
examining individual attitudes and expectations of organisational
culture, encompassing Australia-based staff and expeditioners in
Antarctica. This study addresses a gap in organisational research (in
particular National Antarctic Programs) and is contributing to
efforts to support a diverse and inclusive Australian Antarctic
Program.
This period, from 2019, has also seen the completion of a number
of highly successful Australian Antarctic Program research projects
including for example:
Large-scale Change and Variability in Antarctic Sea Ice and links
with the Ice Sheet. This project made groundbreaking and highly
original findings on sea ice changes and drivers of change,
combining observations and modelling.
Integrated Marine Observing System Southern Ocean Time Series
automated moorings for climate and carbon cycle studies southwest
of Tasmania. This project used deep ocean moorings to deliver
automated observations of the exchanges of heat, carbon dioxide,
and oxygen between the ocean and atmosphere and the physical
and biological processes that control them.
Evidence-based spatial protection of Antarctica’s biodiversity. This
project contributed to ensuring a solid scientific foundation for the
further systematic development of the Antarctic protected area
system, including by establishing a biodiversity database for
terrestrial ecosystems.
Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan
In April 2020 the Australian Antarctic Science Council released the
Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan. The plan provides high-
level guidance on priority research areas and the key principles for
achieving scientific objectives. Priorities for the Australian Antarctic
Science Program include:
Environmental Protection and Management: this includes ecosystem
conservation and management, fisheries management,
environmental monitoring and assessment and environmental
remediation.
Ice, Ocean, Atmosphere and Earth Systems: including high latitude
climate science, million year ice core projects, and atmosphere and
weather research.
Human Presence and Activities in Antarctica: including biosecurity,
astronomy, medicine and human biology, and social sciences.
Digital Integration: to promote innovation in data collection and
analysis.
The plan sets out a clear commitment to work with Australian and
international research, and industry and policy partners
encouraging collaboration with recent and new Antarctic science
participants. The Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan is at
Attachment A.
New Science Research Partnerships
In addition to the Antarctic research led by the Australian Antarctic
Division, Australia has also established three new Antarctic research
partnerships to deliver integrated and collaborative science under
the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan:
Australian Antarctic Program Partnership – Led by the University of
Tasmania with partners from the Australian Antarctic Division and
agencies with Antarctic research interests. This program focusses on
improving understanding of the role of Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean within the global climate system and its implication for
marine ecosystems. It has a particular focus on teaching and early
career researcher development.
Excellence in Antarctic Science Special Research Initiative
(Australian Research Council):
Securing Antarctica’s Environmental Future (led by Monash
University) – this is an international research program with
interdisciplinary science focussed on climate processes and change,
biodiversity status and trends, and supporting environmental
stewardship.
Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic Science (led by
University of Tasmania): conducting research into changes that are
happening in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean and the impact
those changes are having on the global climate system.
Australian Antarctic Science Program Research Priorities
Million Year Ice Core
Australia continues its progress towards drilling a deep ice core at
Little Dome C (some 30 km south of Dome C and Concordia Station
(Italy/France)). Progress has been made on construction of a deep
ice drill and the acquisition of traverse vehicles, vans and sleds.
Deployment will occur over the coming two seasons. A scientific
steering committee is developing collaborative frameworks and
guiding preparatory work in lab development and final site
selection.
Krill Research
In addition to the krill biomass research such as that undertaken on
the TEMPO expedition in early 2021, research on krill reproduction,
development and physiology, and the response of krill to the effects
of climate change remain a high priority for the Australian
Antarctic Science Program and the Australian Antarctic Division.
This research contributes to Australia’s engagement in CCAMLR and
in particular the work of the Scientific Committee.
Science to support the Davis Aerodrome Project
Australia has been undertaking a range of scientific and engineering
investigations to inform the environmental impact assessment for
the proposed Davis Aerodrome. In the 2019-20 season, a team of
researchers undertook further fieldwork in the Davis region and
Vestfold Hills. Research included assessments of biodiversity and
wildlife population dynamics to assess potential impacts of the
Davis Aerodrome construction and operation on flora, fauna, and
geography.
