A step towards a structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination in the Antarctic
A step towards a structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination in the Antarctic
Submitted by Germany and Italy
Summary
This paper builds on earlier reports on the occurrence of persistent
organic pollutants (POPs) and trace elements in Antarctica.
Germany is starting to share and coordinate monitoring data, from
across the Antarctic Treaty area, to help inform future monitoring,
research and policy development. A number of Antarctic Treaty
Parties operate national Environmental Specimen Banks (ESBs) and
a closer cooperation with and between these institutions is
considered a very valuable way towards a more structured sample
and data collection of environmental contamination in the
Antarctic.
Introduction
Antarctica is considered as one of the last pristine regions of the
planet with limited anthropogenic activity and emissions.
Concerning chemical contamination, the discovery of DDT-related
compounds in Antarctic penguins was a clear indication of the
global impact of human activities (Sladen et al. 1966). Since then,
contaminant levels in Antarctica are gaining progressively more
attention from the scientific community. This holds especially true
for pollutants that persist in the environment and can reach polar
regions via long-range transport. These POPs are listed under the
Stockholm Convention, to which most Antarctic Treaty Parties are
signatory Parties. However, data on contaminants in Antarctica and
the Southern Hemisphere are still scarce in comparison to data from
the Northern Hemisphere.
Results of earlier reports on the occurrence of POPs and trace
elements in Antarctica (ATCM XXXI/IP097, ATCM XXXII/IP069,
ATCM XXXVII/IP008, ATCMXL/IP022) indicated that chemical
contamination originated from both long-range transport and
specific anthropogenic sources, such as tourism and research
activities at Antarctic stations may have an effect on the Antarctic
ecosystem’s health. In addition, a coordinated and structured data
collection strategy is missing that addresses e.g. temporal trends of
contaminants in abiotic and biotic matrices. More recently, the
Second Global Monitoring Report for persistent organic pollutants
under the Stockholm Convention reported that research studies
have demonstrated the long-range atmospheric and oceanic
transport of persistent perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and its
precursors to the Antarctic (UNEP, 2017). In addition, the melting
of snow and ice in polar regions due to climate change has been
discussed to induce the release of long-trapped chemicals such as
regulated POPs (IPCC 2019). In recent years, halogenated flame
retardants have also been detected in Antarctic biota such as fish
(Dreyer et al. 2019). But contaminant data in biota and the
Antarctic food web are still sparse.
Monitoring in the Antarctic Environment
The protection of the Antarctic environment is the primary
responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty Parties, and the release of
contaminants such as POPs into the environment of Antarctica is
inconsistent with the comprehensive approach of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol).
The monitoring of soil, water and atmosphere is generally
considered to fall within the scope of activities in the Treaty area
under Article III of the Antarctic Treaty and early detection of
impacts from outside are included in Article 3 paragraph 2 lit. e of
the Protocol. Nevertheless, such early detection is not feasible
without cooperation with other Parties, organizations and
agreements that have developed goals, rules, strategies and
practices to cope with similar environmental challenges. In this
context, it is important to recall the concept of “information
exchange” enshrined in the Stockholm Declaration and the even
more encompassing nature of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.
The Environmental Specimen Banks
Environmental specimen banks (ESBs) are facilities that archive
samples from the environment for future research and monitoring
purposes. In addition, the long-term preservation of representative
specimens is an important complement to environmental research
and monitoring. The first banking activities were set up in the
1960s, e.g. in Sweden and Japan and then in 1979 in the USA and
in Germany. Today, around 30 national ESBs are established around
the globe, including the Arctic. Each of these ESBs has its own
sophisticated and well-defined protocol to ensure specimen
integrity. Today, environmental specimen banking is experiencing a
renaissance due to an increase in regulatory interest in ESB biota
standards and trend data due to climate change. The International
Environmental Specimen Bank Group (IESB, see http://www.inter-
esb.org/) promotes the worldwide development of techniques and
strategies of environmental specimen banking and the international
cooperation and collaboration among national ESBs (Küster et al.
2014). In its most recent update on POPs in the Antarctic (ATCM
XXXII/IP069), SCAR asked for a cooperation with all Antarctic
ESBs. In this context, Germany with its ESB has started to
investigate environmental contamination in the Antarctic and to
coordinate with diverse stakeholders such as the IESB.
Conclusions
The cooperation with and between the ESBs of Antarctic Treaty
Parties is considered a very valuable way towards a more structured
sample and data collection of environmental contamination in the
Antarctic. Corresponding with the requirements of the Protocol, and
mindful of recent work on the revision of the Guidelines for
Environment Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 1
(2016)), we would be grateful to exchange data with all Treaty
Parties that are already monitoring contaminants in Antarctica or
are interested in doing so in the future. Germany also offers its
cooperation to enable a more structured sample and data collection
of environmental contamination in the Antarctic and to coordinate
activities.
References
ATCM XXXI IP097, Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants Notes on
a Request from the Stockholm Convention.
ATCM XXXII IP069, SCAR report on Persistent Organic Pollutants in
the Antarctic: An Update
ATCM XXXVII IP008, Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in
Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1):
Bioaccumulation and temporal trend.
ATCM XL IP022, Trace element contamination and availability
within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Dreyer A., Neugebauer F., Lohmann N., Rüdel H., Teubner D.,
Grotti M., Rauert C., Koschorreck J., 2019. Recent findings of
halogenated flame retardants (HFR) in the German and Polar
environment. Environmental Pollution 253: 850-863.
IPCC (2019). Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate (SROCC). 1189 pp.
Küster A., Becker P.R., Kucklick J.R., Pugh R.S., Koschorreck J.
(2014). The international environmental specimen banks - let’s get
visible. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22: 1559–
1561.
Sladen W.J.L., Menzie C.M., Reichel W.L. (1966). DDT residues in
Adelie penguins and a crabeater seal from Antarctica. Nature 210:
670-673.
UNEP (2017). Second Global Monitoring Report for persistent
organic pollutants under the Stockholm Convention Article 16 on
effectiveness evaluation.
