Education and outreach by the Antarctic Treaty Parties under
ATCM framework: a review
Education and outreach by the Antarctic Treaty Parties under the
ATCM framework: a review
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Belgium, Bulgaria and
United Kingdom
Summary
This paper describes the actions and responses of Treaty Parties to
the growing public interest in Antarctica. Analysis of the level of
reporting of education and outreach activities by Parties since 1961,
when the Antarctic Treaty entered into force, reveals a significant
increase in activity following the signing in 1991 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection. Through the work of the ATCM
Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach,
established in 2014, we can demonstrate that most delegations are
actively involved in education and outreach, and consider these
activities to be a priority. We invite Parties, Observers and Experts
to continue to be actively engaged in and to report achievements in
this field through the ATCM Intersessional Contact Group on
Education and Outreach and in the ATCM Forum.
Background
The original articles of the Antarctic Treaty make no mention of any
responsibility to inform the public about the activities on the
continent. Indeed, the papers presented at the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings (ATCM) were confidential during the first 20
years. This changed in the 1980s, when papers became publicly
available after each meeting and Observers and Experts were
admitted to the ATCMs. Analysis of papers shows that prior to the
1990s, there was little discussion on education and outreach.
However, there was a step-change following signing of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991.
Education and outreach initiatives were introduced to Treaty
Parties through a number of reports from international workshops,
including the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in
1993. From the 1990´s various expert groups were created,
including within the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programs (COMNAP), SCAR Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists (APECS) and Polar Educators International (Xavier et al.
2019). Such momentum resulted in the raising of education and
outreach in ATCM´s.
The imperative for greater visibility of Parties’ public education and
outreach activities was recognized at ATCM XXXVII WP009 in
2014, when a workshop proposal from Brazil, Bulgaria, Belgium,
Brazil, Chile, Portugal, and the United Kingdom was endorsed.
Thirty-seven Parties, Observers and Experts (ATCM XXXVIII BP26,
report ATCM XXXVIII Paragraph 323,) attended the workshop in
Bulgaria. A key outcome was the establishment of an Intersessional
Contact Group on Education and Outreach and the coordination of
an online ATCM discussion forum to capture the amount of
information on education and outreach activities by Parties. There
is evidence in papers submitted to ATCM (i.e. ATCM XXXIX WP24,
ATCM XL WP24, ATCM XLII WP33) to demonstrate the increased
interest in education and outreach activities within ATCM Parties,
Observers and Experts.
Evidence of growth of the number of papers on Education and
Outreach
A search for the words “education” and/or “outreach” at the
documents’ page of the Antarctic Treaty System (http://
www.ats.aq) between 1961 and 2017, yielded a total of 37 papers
that were submitted to ATCMs between 1961 and 2014 (Figure 1).
This number can be attributed to the fact that most delegations
considered education and outreach a low priority in this period. In
contrast, during the following 3 years (between 2015-2017), a
further 37 papers were submitted to the ATCM on education and
outreach, which clearly shows a considerable interest in this issue.
The
dramatic increase in paper numbers can be attributed to the
education and outreach workshop at ATCM XXXVIII in Bulgaria and
the establishment of the Intersessional Contact Group on Education
and Outreach.
Figure 1. Number of papers submitted to the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings between 1961 and 2017 (grouped by 5-year
clusters; e.g. 1960 = 1960–1964). Data obtained from a search on
“education” and/or “outreach” at the documents page of the
Antarctic Treaty System website (http://www.ats.aq/) (following
Xavier et al. 2019).
Conclusions
The importance of sharing information related to education and
outreach is now recognized by most ATCM Parties. The number of
papers submitted to the ATCM on education and outreach has
greatly increased since the 1990s, and particularly in recent years,
due to the increased priority given to these issues by Parties,
following (i) Article 6.1a of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection which to promoted the educational value of Antarctica
and Antarctic research, (ii) by the workshop on education and
outreach at ATCM XXXVIII and (iii) by the creation of the ATCM
Intersessional Contact Group on education and Outreach (and
ATCM forum). We continue to encourage Parties, Observers and
Experts to organize, disseminate and collaborate nationally and
internationally in education and outreach initiatives, following the
Antarctic spirit of cooperation. Examples are the celebrations of the
200th anniversary of sighting of Antarctica and the 500th first
circumnavigation of Ferdinand Magellan.
An acknowledgement is owed to Professor David Walton
(1945-2019) for contributing to this legacy.
Reference
Xavier, J.C., Mateev, D., Capper, L., Wilmotte, A., and Walton,
D.W.H. (2019). Education and Outreach by the Antarctic Treaty
Parties, Observers and Experts under the framework of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative meetings. Polar Record 55: 241-244.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1017/S003224741800044X
