A case of fruitful cooperation between Chile and Ukraine National
Competent Authorities regarding yacht’s activity in Antarctica
A case of fruitful cooperation between Chile and Ukraine National
Competent Authorities regarding yacht’s activity in Antarctica
Information paper submitted by Chile and Ukraine
Summary
Chile and Ukraine would like to share their experience on good
cooperation and exchange of information on a case of multiple
permit submission for a non-governmental activity in the Antarctic
Peninsula.
The activity owner is a captain of a yacht with a double nationality
of two States Parties and Chilean residence. The activity was
planned to be carried out during season 2020/2021, departing from
Puerto Williams, Chile. This activity raised specific difficulties
because the applicant attempted to obtain authorization from
Chilean authorities and requested authorization from Ukraine
National Competent Authority in parallel. This situation involved
significant efforts in communication and coordination between both
NCA to ensure that the activity complied with the Antarctic Treaty
System regulations.
The case
In September 2020, the applicant, a French and Uruguayan national
with Chilean residence, contacted the Antarctic Division of the
Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs to request permission to carry
out a private expedition onboard a sailing boat with a non-State
Party flag.
The project initially aimed at sailing from Puerto Williams, Chile,
and planned to carry out year-round activities in Antarctica from
January 2021 to December 2021.
On January 9, 2021, when the Chilean environmental agency was
in the process of reviewing the project, the applicant announced he
was withdrawing its application.
Subsequently, on January 13, the applicant requested authorization
to set sail from Puerto Williams. Chilean Port authorities reviewed
the applicant's documentation and verified that Ukraine had
authorized its expedition to carry out activities in the Antarctic
Treaty Area from January 2021 to January 2022.
During the same period, in Ukraine, the proponent requested
authorization from the National Competent Authority of Ukraine,
the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine. During the
reviewing process it was found that the sailing boat was not
mentioned as an unreliable vessel by any National Competent
Authorities on the ATS forum, the proponent has an extensive
Antarctic experience, had visited Ukrainian Vernadsky station many
times almost every year, and is very familiar with the area around
the Vernadsky station, where he plans to spend a lot of time during
his planned activity.
As result, the permission was issued by the Ukrainian Competent
Authority in compliance with the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the relevant guidelines on
contingency planning, insurance and other matters for tourist and
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area adopted by
the ATCM.
The Chilean Competent Authority reported the situation to Ukraine
Competent Authority, initiating early and direct communications.
During this process, both competent authorities engaged in
enhanced coordination and a constant exchange of information that
allowed a complete evaluation of the activity and its impacts.
During this exchange of information, both NCAs found that the
proponent of the activity had submitted a double application for the
same activity without informing each NCA. Afterward, we receive
more information that indicated that the same proponent tried to
obtain authorization for this activity from other States Parties.
Chile and Ukraine decided to contact the proponent of the activity
to inform and recall him that the multiple permission process is not
allowed by the ATS regulation.
Conclusion
Communication and information exchange among Treaty Parties are
essential to avoid “forum/permit shopping” and prevent the
departure of non-authorized expeditions from their ports.
This case shows that the Electronic Information Exchange System
(EIES) does not always provide information on the authorization, so
it is only at the time of departure that the Port Authority can verify
if a Treaty Party has authorized the expedition.
Furthermore, it is not always clear which competent authority is
responsible for authorizing the proposed non-governmental activity
when expeditions involve people from different countries,
applicants with dual nationality, and vessels sailing under third-
country flags.
We would urge the ATCM to encourage Parties to share information
about yachts they have authorized through the EIES, sub-forum on
National Competent Authorities, bilateral communications, and
diplomatic channels in line with Resolution 3 (2004) ) "Tourism and
Non-Governmental Activities: Greater Cooperation between the
Parties," which recommends consulting with the relevant Parties
during the process of authorization of tourism and non-
governmental activities to allow effective monitoring of yachting
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
Furthermore, we would urge the ATCM to further consider the issue
of permit shopping and the need to harmonize authorization
regulations and procedures between Treaty Parties to ensure that all
competent authorities apply the same standards and improve the
control of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic
Treaty area.
We appreciate and support the work done in the convened
Competent Authorities forum and we encourage states to
continue to engage in the discussions to address the challenges
posed by the authorization process of non-governmental activities. 
