The Madrid Protocol at Thirty: Where Do We Go From Here?
The Madrid Protocol at Thirty: Where Do We Go From Here?
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
The Protocol has long been recognised as one of the most
significant international environmental treaties ever signed.
However, much has changed since the Protocol was signed,
including the emergence of the twin crises of biodiversity loss and
climate change. What is needed now and in the next thirty years is
a renewed commitment from ATCPs to taking precautionary action
to protect the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
ecosystems, using all the tools available to them. This includes
taking action on protected areas, tourism, vessel pollution, and
climate change, among others. There has been only slow progress
on these areas at the ATCM in recent years, despite many ATCPs
recognising that further actions are needed. The ATCM, in
cooperation with other Antarctic Treaty System bodies, has a clear
opportunity to continue its legacy in preserving and conserving
Antarctica’s ecologically important and pristine areas, and realise
the Protocol’s vision of a protected, thriving Antarctic. ASOC
recommends that ATCPs renew their commitment to implementing
the principles of the Protocol and thus ensure that the next thirty
years of the Protocol are even more successful than the first thirty.
Introduction
In 2021, the Antarctic Treaty System celebrates the thirtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, otherwise referred to as Madrid
Protocol. The Protocol has long been recognised as one of the most
significant international environmental treaties ever signed.
However, much has changed since the Protocol was signed. The
crises of climate change and biodiversity loss now threaten the
whole planet, including Antarctica. The current system of
international governance, which divides authority over regions,
activities, and environmental issues among a multitude of
organisations and treaties, seems increasingly inadequate to address
challenges that require global cooperation and comprehensive
solutions.
Nevertheless, the ATCM can still do its part to increase the
resilience of Antarctic ecosystems, and the Protocol contains many
of the tools necessary to do so. The Protocol recognises the link
between environmental/ecosystem protection, scientific research,
and global climate change. Given the state of the global
environment and the global environmental agenda, future action by
ATCPs needs to be directed at acting on and reinforcing these links.
What is needed now and in the next thirty years is a renewed
commitment from ATCPs to taking precautionary action to protect
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
ecosystems, using all the tools available to them. Deciding to
abandon CRAMRA in favour of the Protocol was not an easy choice;
however, it was the best choice. Likewise, dramatically increasing
the implementation of the Protocol today will not be easy. But it is
the best option ATCPs have if they want to fulfil their obligations
and ensure the continued effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty
System. In this paper, ASOC will review the implementation of the
Protocol and suggest some of the new measures the ATCM could
take to ensure that the ATS will still have reason to celebrate the
Protocol in thirty years’ time.
Protected areas
Annex V on Area Protection and Area Management is one of the
most important annexes of the Protocol. Its provision that “Parties
shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-
geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas” areas that meet a variety of scientific,
environmental, and historical criteria was ahead of its time. This
explains in part why its adoption and entry into force was delayed
with respect to the Protocol and Annexes I-IV. However, once
adopted, Annex V complemented them with essential protection
tools applicable to a broad range of purposes both on land and
marine areas. Currently, of course, numerous targets and
commitments related to area protection with a similar purpose have
emerged from civil society, national governments, and international
organisations such as the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Unfortunately, despite the clear mandate of Annex V, ATCPs have
not achieved anything close to a “systematic environmental-
geographic framework” according to scientific
analyses (Shaw et al. 2014; Wauchope et al. 2019). Meanwhile, the
human footprint on Antarctica has been shown to be quite
significant (Brooks et al. 2019).
Much of the background scientific work needed to rectify this
situation has already been done. Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) have already been identified, as
have Environmental Domains, both of which qualify as systematic
environmental-geographical frameworks. In 2019, the Joint SCAR /
CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area
System was held prior to the ATCM. The workshop recommended
that “the CEP initiates a program of work…to develop a framework
for systematically developing the protected area system” (ATCM
XLII/IP 165). The ATCM should act on this recommendation
immediately.
Key actions for the ATCM:
Commit to designating 30% of Antarctica’s ACBRs in protected
areas by 2030, in line with a growing body of evidence that a
minimum 30% target is the most effective (Woodley et al. 2019).
Support the CEP and SCAR in undertaking a systematic
conservation planning process (SCP) to identify new areas for
protection; and support the work of CCAMLR on the adoption of
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and their connectivity with Protocol
specially protected and managed areas.
Review the management plan process to identify potential
opportunities to make the development and review of management
plans more efficient while still meeting Annex V requirements.
Climate change
Anthropogenic climate change not only threatens Antarctica, but
also the values that ATCPs pledged to uphold in the Madrid
Protocol. Antarctic scientists have made great strides in growing our
understanding of key climate questions, such as the fate of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet, the warming of the Antarctic Peninsula, and
changes in Southern Ocean circulation and ecosystems (Turner et
al., 2014). Because of their work, we understand how Antarctica is
threatened by climate change, and how Antarctica’s climatic
changes will impact global environments, economies, and societies.
The policy response of ATCPs has been inadequate. The Climate
Change Response Work Programme is in a checklist of tasks, often
organized around research, rather than a coordinated response
program. There is a profound lack of attention to climate action and
resilience of human infrastructure and Antarctic ecosystems. The
ATCM should work to complete the CCRWP while also
implementing appropriate policy responses, including calling on
Parties to fund needed initiatives, and significantly increase the
scope of ambition to the scale needed to respond to the climate
crisis.
What does increasing Antarctic climate ambition look like? First,
the Parties can use the tools that already exist to create a robust
response to implementing climate resilience zones through area
protection, both marine and terrestrial, with additional benefits for
scientific research.
Second, the Paris Agreement makes clear that all parts of the world,
even those with low carbon emissions, should take immediate
action to mitigate climate change. The Antarctic region is unique in
that it stands outside national jurisdiction, meaning that carbon
emissions are not accounted for in standard practice. To rectify this
Antarctic emissions gap, the CCRWP should add holistic carbon
accounting in the Antarctic with the goal of cutting Antarctic
emissions in half by 2030 and reaching net zero carbon emissions
by 2050.
Key actions for the ATCM:
Use the environmental management tools at hand, particularly area
protection, to support climate resilience for Antarctic species and
ecosystems and to facilitate research, in particular research essential
to understanding the global environment.
Account for carbon emissions in the Antarctic, including aviation
and shipping to and from the continent. This accounting, then,
should lead to a concerted effort among ATCPs to reduce carbon
emissions to the goal of net zero Antarctic emissions by 2050.
Complete all standing items of the CCRWP by 2025 and increase
ambition for the plan in the coming decades.
Tourism 
Antarctic tourism began to expand significantly in the late 1980s
and early 1990s, coincident with Protocol negotiations. It was soon
apparent that tourism developments required the expansion of the
regulatory regime, eventually carried out ad hoc. Antarctic
shipborne tourism began a renewed expansion in recent years led
by the commissioning of many new cruise ships. Other modalities of
tourism have been expanding too, involving fewer tourists but a
broader range of means of transport, activities and locations. These
developments led to concerns about the impact of tourism growth
on the existing regulatory regime (ASOC 2019) and the possibility
that Antarctica might had been on the verge of experiencing its own
version of “overtourism” in some locations and at some times
(Roura 2019). In response to these trends a workshop convened by
the Netherlands and the UK in 2019 proposed several actions to
address growth, diversification and compliance of Antarctic tourism
(Netherlands and United Kingdom 2019). In parallel the tourism
industry conducted internal discussions to identify ways to manage
growth (IAATO 2019).
The apparently unavoidable trend of Antarctic tourism growth came
to an abrupt end in the 2019-2020 season (itself a particularly
active season) when the global COVID-19 pandemic was declared.
There was an increase of cruise tourism of ca. 32% visitors between
2018-2019 and 2019-2020 as well as seasonal increases of deep
field and air operations of ca. 15%. (IAATO 2021). There were no
commercial SOLAS tour ships in Antarctica in the 2020-2021
season. Although it is expected that Antarctic tourism will
eventually rebound, the “Pandemic Pause” gives Antarctic Treaty
Parties the opportunity to establish robust precautionary measures
that will shape future tourism developments.
Tourism has been one of the most discussed topics at the ATCM
over the past three decades, but many discussions have been
inconclusive (ASOC 2018). In ASOC’s view it would be more
productive if the ATCM focused on identifying tangible actions to
reduce tourism pressure. Borrowing from the expanding
terminology of the pandemic, a “flattening of the curve” of tourism
pressures could be a helpful analogy to develop ways of “building
back better”. The notion of “building back better” was a common
thread through informal discussions on Antarctic tourism convened
by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, 4 March 2021.
Several ongoing initiatives are concrete positive steps. These
include inter alia, the SCAR and IAATO Strategic Conservation
Planning process for the Antarctic Peninsula, and a range of formal
and informal intersessional discussions emerging from
recommendations of the 2019 Rotterdam workshop. The latter
include addressing guidance for Antarctic visitors, voluntary on-
board observer operational framework for tourist vessels, Post-Visit
Reports, the compilation of Manual of Regulations and Guidelines
Relevant to Tourism and NG Activities, assessments of site
sensitivity, and assessment of concerning activities and
diversification.
Key actions for the ATCM:
As well as expanding the protection of unique and sensitive areas
for a range of purposes, Parties should proactively identify areas of
representative habitat/biodiversity in the Antarctic Peninsula (and
elsewhere as required) that are kept free of tourism. Some of these
areas could be used as reference areas for the study of tourism
impacts or for other purposes, including resilience building. Setting
aside biodiversity areas is also a potential outcome of the strategic
conservation process for the Antarctic Peninsula.
Parties should establish an environmental monitoring program
targeted to the management of tourism. This program should be
conceptually robust to provide the answers that are needed, and
practically achievable given logistic and resource constraints.
Parties, in consultation with the industry and other stakeholders,
should incorporate forms of “slow tourism” in the planning and
conducting of Antarctic tourism activities. “Slow tourism” and its
related term “slow travel” are not fully conceptualized, particularly
for Antarctica, but suggest integrating a slowing down of tourism
trends in the regulatory and operational frameworks for tourism, as
well as in the expectations of tourists (Roura in prep.). These might
include, for instance, fewer but “better” tourist landings that
encourage a less hectic tourism experience.
These precautionary actions do not exhaust the range of measures
needed to improve Antarctic tourism management in the future (for
instance, Parties should ensure that adopted tourism Measures not
yet in force, such as M4 (2004) and M15 (2009), become effective
as soon as possible) but are among the actions that would be best
initiated before tourism activities resume.
Vessel pollution and the Polar Code
Since the Madrid Protocol was adopted 30 years ago, the numbers
of vessels and people operating in the Southern Ocean has grown as
travel to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean has become
increasingly possible, as more countries have declared and followed
through on their intent to undertake Antarctic research
programmes, and as fisheries have expanded. In recent years, more
ships and larger ships are visiting the region and are able to
lengthen their programmes as sea ice recedes earlier and reforms
later. Areas never navigated are now becoming accessible.
Annex IV of the Protocol set a high standard for the prevention of
marine pollution from international shipping, and a decade ago, a
ban on the use and carriage of heavy grade oil in the Antarctic area
was adopted by the International Maritime Organization (IMO),
giving the waters south of 60ºS a greater level of protection from
shipping marine pollution than any other region of the world. In
2017, the Polar Code came into effect strengthening both safety and
pollution prevention measures for the polar regions.
Thirty years on however, there is still more to address. In many
ways, the ATS has set a high standard for others to follow, but now
it is falling behind and in need of review and revamp. There are
new issues to be addressed – both globally and in the context of the
waters south of 60ºS. Globally one focus is on the decarbonisation
of shipping and reducing emissions of short-lived climate forcers
such as black carbon, produced when ships burn oil-based fuels.
Black carbon is a major threat when emitted near to snow and ice
as it deposits quickly out of the atmosphere onto snow and ice and
speeds up melting. Over short time periods the impact of black
carbon is especially severe. New issues are emerging too.
Increasingly the impact of underwater noise on marine wildlife and
the complete lack of regulation of the discharge of grey water
(galleys, washrooms) is recognised. And there are existing issues
which still require time and attention and effort to get them right –
the implementation of the Polar Code and a means of
comprehensively addressing marine plastic litter.
Key actions for the ATCM:
Review implementation of the Polar Code in the Antarctic region
and contribute to global efforts to review the implementation of the
Polar Code, including expanding the scope of Part II A on
environmental protection.
Identify options and adopt measures to rapidly reduce black carbon
emissions from shipping in the Southern Ocean and set out a
strategy to decarbonise shipping visiting the region.
Review and revamp Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol, addressing
global and emerging issues of significance to the Southern Ocean
and establishing fit-for-purpose measures.
The future and the principles of the Protocol
While the concept of global environmental conservation is not new,
its current prominent place on the world stage is novel. For
decades, ecologists, climatologists, and conservationists have
understood that ecosystems are at risk when business continues as
usual. Still, there remains an urgent need to protect those places
that do not yet have a large human footprint. When the now-
famous ‘hockey stick’ graph showing the rapid increase in the
planet’s average temperature was introduced in the late 1990s, it
conclusively demonstrated how rapidly humans were changing our
world and not the other way around, as had been the case for
millions of years (Mann et al. 1999). Thanks to Antarctica, and the
extremely deep ice cores retrieved from its vast ice sheets, we can
now appreciate how quickly we are altering the world in which we
live (Legrand and Mayewski 1997).
Recent studies have concluded that only 5% of the planet remains
in its pristine state, that is, not changed by humans to accommodate
our growing food, energy or housing needs (Kennedy et al. 2019).
But we do not often realize how much the negative impacts
outweigh the benefits of changing land uses, overfishing marine
ecosystems, clearing ancient forest or creating grazing lands when it
comes to ecosystem services or mitigating the effects of climate
change. That is why a variety of global efforts aimed at
environmental conservation, such as the 30x30 campaign to create
marine protected areas (MPAs) https://mission-blue.org/2021/03/
why-ocean-health-is-central-to-building-back-better-post-covid-19/,
the development of SDGs, and the investment of private capital into
Environmental, Social, and Corporate Governance (ESG) markets
have garnered considerable support and attention in recent years. A
parallel discussion on expanding marine protection has been taking
place in the context of implementing the objective of the
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources and its Commission, with some progress, many delays,
and a growing momentum. It is clear that the world is increasingly
accepting of the need to broadly apply strong conservation
principles that are fundamentally equivalent to those embodied in
the Protocol (and other Antarctic Treaty System instruments) to the
entire planet.
Thirty years ago, when the Madrid Protocol designated Antarctic
environment as a natural reserve, required an environmental
assessment for most activities together with a range of
environmental management practices, and created a Committee for
Environmental Protection, it was a tacit recognition that early
action was required to prevent the degradation that often happens
when humans encounter a relatively untouched area. That
recognition of the need to take a proactive approach to preserving
Antarctica’s environment demonstrated foresight and leadership.
Today, more than ever, we are acknowledging our past
environmental mistakes while attempting to conserve – or rescue –
the environment for future generations, and for its own intrinsic
value. The ATCM, in cooperation with other Antarctic Treaty
System bodies, has a clear opportunity to continue its legacy in
preserving and conserving Antarctica’s ecologically important and
pristine areas, and realise the Protocol’s vision of a protected,
thriving Antarctic. The way from here should only be towards more
and better conservation, and this applies to Antarctica and to the
rest of the planet.
Key actions for the ATCM:
Reaffirm Antarctica’s natural reserve designation and the ATCM’s
commitment to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
Increase area protection in Antarctica to truly create a region
permanently protected from environmental degradation.
Reaffirm the permanent ban on mineral resource activities
including any form of mining and minerals extraction.
References
ASOC 2018. Anticipated growth of Antarctic tourism. ATCM XLI -
CEP XXI (2018). IP061.
ASOC 2019. Antarctic tourism: Using lessons learned to inform
effective, proactive management. ATCM XLII – CEP XXII . IP128.
Australia, Czechia, SCAR, and the United States (2019) Co-
conveners’ report of the Joint SCAR / CEP Workshop on Further
Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System. ATCM XLII/IP
165.
IAATO 2019. IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: 2018-19
Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2019-20 Season. ATCM XLII –
CEP XXII . IP140 rev.1.
IAATO 2021. Oral presentation during informal discussions on the
future of post-pandemic Antarctic Tourism, convened by the UK and
Netherlands and held online on Thursday 4th March 2021.
Kennedy, CM, Oakleaf, JR, Theobald, DM, Baruch‐Mordo, S,
Kiesecker, J. (2019) Managing the middle: A shift in conservation
priorities based on the global human modification gradient. Global
Change Biology; 25: 811– 826. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14549
Legrand, M., and Mayewski, P. (1997) Glaciochemistry of polar ice
cores: A review, Reviews of Geophysics., 35(3), 219– 243,
doi:10.1029/96RG03527.
Mann, M., Bradley, R. and Hughes, M. (1999) Northern hemisphere
temperatures during the past millennium: Inferences, uncertainties,
and limitations. Geophysical Research Letters. 26. 759-762.
10.1029/1999GL900070.
Netherlands and United Kingdom. 2019, Antarctic Tourism
Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s
Summary and Key Recommendations. ATCM XLII – CEP XXII
WP019
Roura RM 2019. Antarctic tourism and overtourism. Antarctic
Affairs Volume VI, 2019 / Year V pp. 7-18
Shaw JD, Terauds A, Riddle MJ, Possingham HP, Chown SL (2014)
Antarctica’s Protected Areas Are Inadequate, Unrepresentative, and
at Risk. PLoS Biol 12(6): e1001888. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001888
Turner, J., Barrand, N.E., Bracegirdle, T.J., Convey, P., Hodgson,
D.A., Jarvis, M., Jenkins, A., Marshall, G., Meredith, M.P., Roscoe,
H. and Shanklin, J., 2014. Antarctic climate change and the
environment: an update. Polar Record, 50(3), pp.237-259.
Wauchope, H, Shaw, JD & Terauds, A. (2019) A snapshot of
biodiversity protection in Antarctica. Nat Commun 10, 946. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08915-6
Woodley S, Locke H, Laffoley D, MacKinnon K, Sandwith, T and
Smart, J. (2019). A Review Of Evidence For Area‐Based
Conservation Targets For The Post‐2020 Global Biodiversity
Framework. Parks 25 (2): 31-46. DOI: 10.2305/
IUCN.CH.2019.PARKS-25-2SW2.en
