Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and
diplomacy
Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and
diplomacy
Introduction
Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 43rd Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Paris, France. This meeting
marks the tenth (10th) time whereby Malaysia makes its presence
at this prestigious meeting since being a member of the Antarctic
Treaty System (ATS) in 2011. Malaysia is also pleased to share the
progress of its activities and achievements in its Antarctic research
and diplomacy.
Progress
To date, the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation (SMARF),
which was established in July 2012 has disbursed and awarded:
30 Research Grants to Malaysian scientists;
12 Fellowships to young Malaysian scientists; and
11 Antarctic Berth Support to Malaysian scientists.
These awards are in line with the Foundation’s objective to promote
scientific research programmes in the Polar regions and to provide
as well as manage funding for research grants, post-graduate studies
and fellowship in scientific research in the Polar regions among
Malaysian scientists. Other than providing research grants,
fellowship and berth support, the Foundation continues to
undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the
Antarctic among school children and Malaysian public. The
programmes include Antarctica exhibitions, sharing sessions with
polar scientists, and various contests.
Malaysia also participated in the 2019 Annual General Meeting
(AGM) and Special Meeting of the Asian Forum on Polar Sciences
(AFOPS) which was held in Tachikawa, Japan from 30th October-
1st November 2019. The meeting deliberated on several items
including expedition and operational plan, research highlights,
cooperation between other international organizations and AFOPS,
cooperative projects and research collaboration. Through AFOPS, a
Malaysian scientist benefited from Korea Polar Research Institute
(KOPRI) Antarctic Science Fellowship Program in 2020 and he is
expected to undertake his field work at KOPRI research station in
2020/2021 summer season. However, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the expedition was postponed to the next season. In
2020-2021, all AFOPS physical meetings have been cancelled and
have taken place virtually, including Business Meeting 2020 and
Science Symposium which was held on 3rd -4th March 2021.
The Chairmanship of AFOPS has officially been handed over to
Malaysia on 1 November 2020. The term of Chairmanship is for two
years (2021-2022). The next AGM to be chaired by Malaysia is
expected to be held virtually in October 2021.
During the 2019/2020 summer season, five (5) Malaysian scientists
carried out field works in the Antarctic as part of their research
activities at the following facilities:
Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica;
Field research at the United Kingdom facilities in Antarctica; and
Field research at the Korean facilities in Antarctica.
Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica
Two (2) postgraduate students from Malaysia visited and carried
out field work at the Bernardo O’Higgins Station in Antarctica.
Their visit this time was a continuation of their supervisor’s field
work from the previous
summer season and was made possible under the collaboration
between Universidad de Magallanes, Chile and Centro de
Investigación y Monitoreo Medio Ambiental Antártico (CIMAA).
Malaysia would like to thank Chile for the opportunity given to
these students to work at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica. The
collaborative project that our students worked on was:
Scientist/Student
Research Title
Date
Station
Nur Nadhirah Zakaria
Second Stage of Bioreactor Design for Cold-adapted Bioremediation
of Antarctic Soils Contaminated with Diesel Hydrocarbons
24 Jan 2020 – 10 Mar 2020
Bernardo O’Higgins
Ahmad Fareez Ahmad Roslee
Field research at the British Antarctic Survey facilities in Antarctica
One (1) Malaysian researcher visited and carried out field work at
the Signy station in Antarctica. Her visit was made possible through
the collaboration between the Foundation and British Antarctic
Survey (BAS) through the renewed Memorandum of Understanding
between both parties for another five (5) years (2019-2024). During
this field work, she collected some plant samples for identification
at the station while soil samples collected will be couriered to
Malaysia for further analysis. Malaysia would like to thank United
Kingdom for the opportunity given to these scientists to work at the
British Antarctic Survey facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative
project that our researcher worked on was:
Scientist/Researcher
Research Title
Date
Station
Dr. Nur Alia Johari
Molecular Evaluation of Biogeography and Functional Redundancy
Theory in Antarctic Rhizosphere Prokaryotic Communities
13 Nov 2019 – 7 Mar 2020
Signy
Field research at the Korean Polar Institute facilities in Antarctica
Two (2) scientists from Malaysia visited and carried out field work
at the King Sejong Station in Antarctica. Interestingly, one of them
also received the KOPRI Antarctic Science Fellowship 2019 while
the other scientist was offered the slot for the expedition by KOPRI
with their team of scientists who were undertaking a similar
research on penguins. The following year, he applied for KOPRI
Antarctic Science Fellowship 2020 and was awarded the fellowship
to conduct another expedition in 2021. Malaysia would like to
thank Korea for the opportunity given to these scientists to work at
the KOPRI facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative projects that
our scientists worked on were:
Scientist
Research Title
Date
Station
Dr. Heo Chong Chin
Necrobiome Community Structure and Soil Chemistry Profile
Associated with Penguin Carcasses and its Correlation with Bone
Density under Antarctica Climate
16 Dec 2019 – 16 Jan 2020
King Sejong
Dr. Ahmad Riduan Ahmad
Characteristic of Lightning Flashes over Antarctica Peninsular and
its Respond to the Upper Atmosphere
1 Jan 2020 – 4 Feb 2020
Diplomacy & Collaboration
Malaysia is also honoured to inform at this meeting that it will be
organising its Ninth (9th) Malaysian International Seminar on
Antarctica (MISA9) from 25th –27th October 2021, carrying the
theme of “Polar Regions in Our Climate Crisis.” This theme,
particularly for Malaysia, is in-line with the rational that the poles
are an integral part of the global earth system and the processes and
changes in the polar regions will influence the tropics and vice-
versa. MISA is a biennial event that gathers scientists from different
countries to share findings and experiences in polar research and
provide platform to strengthen existing and forge new
collaborations. MISA also provides opportunities for local scientists
and students who are interested in pursuing their career in polar
sciences, especially global sciences. In conjunction with MISA9,
there will be one (1) Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) supported workshop on “Tropic Antarctic Teleconnections
(TATE).”
Malaysia, through SMARF, was accepted as an Observer of Council
of Managers of National Antarctic Program (COMNAP) in 2017 and
was invited to attend the XXXI COMNAP AGM on 28th – 31st July
2019 in Plovdiv, Bulgaria. However, in 2020, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the XXXII COMNAP AGM was held virtually on 3rd
August 2020 hosted by the University of Canterbury, Christchurch,
New Zealand. The current XXXIII COMNAP AGM will be held
virtually on 14th July 2021.
As a member of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR), Malaysia attended the Open Science Conference which was
conducted virtually from 3rd – 7th August 2020 and the XXXVI
SCAR Delegates’ Meeting which was held virtually in a series of
sessions over two weeks from 16th – 25th March 2021.
In view of expanding its international collaboration on Antarctic
science, Malaysia, through SMARF, and Ukraine’s State Institution
National Antarctic Scientific Centre have agreed to sign a
Memorandum of Understanding in 2021 on the “Scientific and
Technical Cooperation in Antarctic Research” for the purposes of
establishing a framework for cooperation between both nations on
the basis of equality and mutual benefit in the field of scientific,
technical, and logistic cooperation in Antarctica.
National Governance
On the domestic front in relation to governance and legislation, in
order to implement its international obligations under the Antarctic
Treaty and Madrid Protocol, Malaysia is in the final stages of
drafting its national legislation on Antarctica. The Antarctic Bill will
be tabled in Parliament once the necessary legal scrubbing process
concludes.
Conclusion
Malaysia looks forward to a continuous active engagement in the
Antarctic Treaty development process.
