Notification of the Intention of Canada to request recognition of
Consultative Party status
Notification of the Intention of Canada to request recognition of
Consultative Party status
Information paper submitted by Canada
Canada would like to inform the Consultative Parties of its intention
to request recognition of Consultative Party status pursuant to the
“Guidelines on the procedure to be followed with respect to
Consultative Party status” adopted by Decision 2 (2017). Our plans
are to submit our request and the supporting dossier to the
depositary Government in October 2021 in order to respect the
deadline of 210 days prior to ATCM XLIV.
Canada recognizes the Antarctic Treaty System as the key
multilateral mechanism for decisions on the regulation and
management of Antarctica. Canada acceded to the Treaty in 1988 as
a non-Consultative Party, and ratified the Protocol on
Environmental Protection in 2003. We are committed to the key
principles of the Antarctic Treaty, in particular maintaining peace
and cooperation, the freedom of scientific investigation, and the
protection of the continent’s fragile environment. As an
international leader on polar issues, with extensive connections to
the region’s research, tourism, governance, and history, it is time
for Canada to join our international partners and take a more active
role as a steward of the Antarctic.
Active in the Antarctic for over 100 years, Canada is a leading
contributor amongst non-Consultative Party states in publishing
Antarctic scientific research. Canadians have sustained involvement
in Antarctic research over decades, with researchers from Canadian
institutions contributing to over 1300 Antarctica-related
publications between 1997 and 2018. Between the years of 2011 to
2018, Canadian researchers have contributed more than 80 distinct
publications per year. From 2008 to 2017, our Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council supported 55 grants and awards for
Antarctic research, for a total of CAD $6.69 million across 28
researchers and 16 trainees. The Antarctic mapping missions of
Canada’s RADARSAT satellites provided repeated coverage of
Antarctica and contributed to a revolution in the understanding of
Antarctic ice-sheet dynamics. Also through the Canadian Space
Agency, Canada monitors more atmospheric gases than any other
nation – vital for international Antarctic research.
Canada is committed to advancing the collective understanding of
polar science and stands ready to promote science collaboration
with international partners in the Arctic and Antarctic. Researchers
from Canadian institutions have repeatedly collaborated with other
researchers from around the world, and there are 29 countries that
have been affiliated with Canadian Antarctic research between
2016 and 2018. Through the Arctic-Antarctic Exchange mechanism
of Canada’s Polar Continental Shelf Program, we provide logistical
support to international researchers in Canada’s Arctic regions, in
exchange for Canadian researchers receiving logistical support in
Antarctica by other nations’ Antarctic programs. We recognize the
world-class resources that already exist in Antarctica, and the
environmental impact of creating new research stations. We
propose therefore to continue to collaborate with international
partners to foster Antarctic research, including exchanges with
research facilities in the Canadian Arctic, upholding the spirit of
scientific cooperation enshrined in the Treaty.
Canada is committed to the conservation and protection of
Antarctica in recognition of its significance in sustaining unique and
irreplaceable biodiversity and supporting essential scientific
research. We ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection in
2003 and have been implementing the Protocol and Annexes I-V
through our Antarctic Environmental Protection Act since that date.
We require environmental evaluations for all Canadian activities in
the Antarctic and issue permits each year for scientific and tourism
operations. We have implemented the provisions of Measure 4
(2004) and Measure 15 (2009) requiring contingency plans,
insurance, and caps on visitor landings.
Climate change is a lived reality, including for Canada’s coastal and
northern communities, with developments in the Antarctic having
important implications globally. Canada is keenly aware of the role
that Antarctica plays in the regulation of global climate systems.
For example, McGill University hosts a
Canada Research Chair in the Geodynamics of Ice Sheet - Sea Level
Interactions focussing on the Antarctic contribution to global sea-
level rise. Canada is committed to taking action on the risks posed
by climate change and is interested in helping with actions to
protect Antarctica from the effects of climate change.
Canada is a key player in Antarctic tourism with Canadian
operators carrying a significant share of total Antarctic passengers
per year. Canada is committed to promoting responsible tourism
that protects the intrinsic value and natural heritage of the
Antarctic. Canada is a leader in Antarctic education through the
work of Students on Ice, a Canadian not-for-profit foundation with a
mandate to educate the world’s youth about the importance of
Antarctica and the Arctic region. Students on Ice has taken over
3,500 students and staff from 52 countries on educational
expeditions to the polar regions, enhancing their understanding of
the regions and inspiring many to become ambassadors for the two
poles and the pressing challenges which are experienced in the two
regions.
Canada’s polar expertise is extensively employed in Antarctica. For
example, Canadian companies provide crucial Antarctic operational
support for many national programs and tour operators, including
research, logistics, and medical evacuations.
Finally, Canada is engaged in many of the other organizations and
treaties that make up the Antarctic Treaty System. We have been an
active member of SCAR since 1998. Canada is currently an observer
in COMNAP and intends to apply this year for full member status.
Canada is a party to the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and to the Convention on the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and reports
annually under the requirements of these agreements.
In conclusion, we believe that Canada meets the requirements for
Consultative Party status and we plan to submit a formal request
and information dossier to the depositary Government in full
compliance with the Guidelines adopted by Decision 2 (2017).
Canada has been active in Antarctic science for over a century and
we hope to be able to contribute further to the goals of the
Antarctic Treaty as a Consultative Party. We look forward to your
support at ATCM XLIV.
