Antarctic Regional Climate Centre Network: the scope and concept
Antarctic Regional Climate Centre Network: the scope and concept
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
To facilitate the engagement of countries (including Treaty Parties,
WMO Members etc.) interested in climate services for the Antarctic
Region, including representatives from operational, research and
user communities, WMO in coordination with the Secretariat of
Antarctic Treaty and other partners, organized a “Scoping
Workshop on Climate Services for Polar Regions: Towards
Implementing an Antarctic RCC- Network” in Bologna, Italy, from 7
to 9 October 2019, hosted by the Institute of Polar Science (ISP) of
the Italian National Research Council (CNR) (Ref.
ATCM42_ip164_e-2). As a part of the preparation for the Scoping
Workshop, a survey of WMO Members on the needs and capacities
for Polar Regional Climate Centre (RCC) Services was initiated by
the WMO Secretariat. In the meantime, the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat also sent a similar letter addressed to the Antarctic
Treaty Parties in order to ensure that all relevant and interested
institutions in the countries were duly informed and actively
engaged in the RCC implementation for the Antarctic Region.
The survey results demonstrated that 65% of respondents require
the activities listed under mandatory functions to be performed or
coordinated by an RCC in the Antarctic region. Furthermore, 30%
already offer relevant activities, and 40% expressed interest in
contributing to an Antarctic RCC effort. The high-level overview of
interest and capabilities for RCC mandatory functions are presented
in Table 1. Furthermore, a majority of countries also expressed high
interest in providing several highly recommended functions, in
particular, research, development and coordination activities.
Table 1
Mandatory Function
Countries offering relevant Antarctic services already
Countries interested in contributing to Antarctic RCC functions
Long Range Forecast
Argentina, Australia, (Italy), (Russia), UK, USA
Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, Finland, India, Italy, (Japan),
Korea, Norway, Peru, Russia, Sweden, USA
Climate Monitoring
Argentina, Australia, Denmark, Chile, France, India, (Italy),
Norway, Russia, UK, USA
Argentina, Australia, (Denmark), Chile, China, France, India, Italy,
Japan, Peru, Korea, Russia, UK
Climate Data
Argentina, Australia, France, Chile, India, Japan, Norway, Russia,
UK, USA
Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, (Denmark), France, India, Italy,
Japan, Korea, Norway, Russia, UK
Training
Argentina, (Russia), USA
Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, France, Korea, Peru, Russia
The Scoping Workshop attended by around twenty national
representatives of thirteen countries (Argentina, Australia, Chile,
China, Denmark, Finland, Germany, India, Italy, Norway,
Peru, UK and USA), explored opportunities and challenges relating
to Antarctic climate monitoring and prediction services and the
underpinning data inputs. Building on the survey results the
participants further discussed the Antarctic RCC-Network concept,
including the provisional structure, priority functions of the
Antarctic RCC-Network and the implementation strategy.
All the countries representatives expressed a clear indication of
interest to contribute to Antarctic RCC-Network activities, and
mutually agreed that the RCC implementation for the Antarctic
would likely be based on a distributed-function model, similar to
that of the WMO Regional Association VI serving Europe, that is
countries with strong capabilities in mandatory functions could take
the lead responsibility for specific functions and involve other
contributors to form a consortium.
The following is an initial mapping of the structure of Antarctic
RCC-Network considered by the participants, based on a functional
delineation of the RCC-Network nodes and tentative interests
volunteered for lead responsibilities, subject to internal
consultations and formal endorsements. The proposed
responsibilities are suggestive and need to be further discussed and
formalized at the national as well as regional levels. This initial
mapping can serve as the basis for exploring more substantive and
formal commitments in due course:
(i) Climate Prediction Node:
Operational activities for long range forecasts (LRF);
Lead coordinator: Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), Australia
(ii) Climate Monitoring Node:
Operational activities for climate monitoring;
Lead coordinator: National Research Council - Istituto di Scienze
Polari (CNR-ISP), Italy
(iii) Climate Data Node:
Operational data services to support LRF and climate monitoring;
Lead coordinator: British Antarctic Survey (BAS), United Kingdom
Training, one of the mandatory functions of WMO RCCs, is
proposed to be tackled as an integral part of each of the above
functions. Each of the above nodes is expected to be supported by a
consortium of interested and committed Members/partners, to pool
together their capacities, products and services to collectively meet
specified criteria for RCC mandatory functions as well as to fulfill
the vision laid out for the Antarctic RCC-Network.
Moreover, participants identified priority activities beyond RCC
mandatory functions to be provided by AntRCC-Network, in
particular sea ice monitoring and prediction, atmospheric modes of
variability and indices, Climate Change Projections and
accumulation and surface melt to be explored by national focal
points based on national consultations.
Participants discussed the possibility of having an Antarctic Climate
(Outlook) Forum focused on the Antarctic region (as is done for
other regions of the globe) to discuss requirements and updates to
the Antarctic RCC. This would preferably be co-located with other
relevant regional events (for example those associated with the
Antarctic Treaty System, SCAR or COMNAP). Forums would be
centered around thematic topics and requirements.
The Workshop highlighted the importance of close collaboration
with several partners, including COMNAP, SCAR, GCW, IICWG,
WCRP, and agreed to facilitate their engagement from the
beginning and throughout implementation and operation of the
Antarctic RCC Network.
The aforementioned findings of the Scoping Workshop and the
Survey results are reflected in the Concept Paper on the
Implementation of Polar Regional Climate Centres: Towards an
Antarctic RCC, provided in the Annex I.
Procedurally, the next step is to convene an implementation
planning meeting with involvement of countries potentially
contributing to the Antarctic RCC Network in order to
develop an implementation plan and secure institutional
commitments from interested Members to undertake specific
functions.
Furthermore, the Executive Council Panel of Experts on Polar and
High Mountain
Observations, Research, and Services (EC-PHORS) at its tenth
session (March 2021) endorsed the concept for the Antarctic RCC-
network, and recommended to invite the team of Arctic RCC-
network (in demostration phase) to identify the measures of their
success and the lessons learned in the process, before moving
forward on implementation of Antarctic RCC-network, given their
uniqueness in the broader RCC context.
For further details please contact Anahit Hovsepyan
(AHovsepyan@wmo.int) in the first instance.
