Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAS) within the Antarctic
Treaty area: An international collaboration to inform habitat-related
conservation decision-making and conservation planning for marine
mammal species
Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAS) within the Antarctic
Treaty area: An international collaboration to inform habitat-related
conservation decision-making and conservation planning for marine
mammal species
Information Paper submitted by IUCN and SCAR
Summary
An international group of scientists from 11 countries and the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the
French Biodiversity Agency (OFB), including those holding or
having access to long-term marine mammal data and having
experience of working with marine mammals in the Extended
Southern Ocean region, came together for five days to nominate
candidate Important Marine Mammal Areas (cIMMAs), as
determined by a set of criteria supported by specific evidence. At
the conclusion of the five days, 15 cIMMAs were submitted to an
independent review panel and 13 were later approved as IMMAs:
Four IMMAs are located wholly or partially within the Antarctic
Treaty area. These are now listed and shown on the IMMA e-Atlas
with access to shapefile and background information (https://
www.marinemammalhabitat.org/imma-eatlas/). The outcomes of
this work may be useful in the development of spatial conservation
measures.
Introduction to the IMMA Initiative of the IUCN SSC/WCPA Marine
Mammal Protected Areas Task Force
The Important Marine Mammal Area (IMMA) initiative was
developed by IUCN’s joint Species Survival Commission (SSC) and
World Commission of Protected Areas (WCPA) Marine Mammal
Protected Areas Task Force (the “Task Force” The IUCN Marine
Mammal Protected Areas Task Force is part of two IUCN
commissions, the Species Survival Commission (SSC) and the World
Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA). The Task Force works
closely with the Cetacean, Pinniped, Otter and Sirenian SSC
specialist groups and the High Seas and Key Biodiversity Area task
forces. The Convention on Migratory Species (CMS) adopted in
2017 a resolution supporting the IMMA work, and the Task Force
working arrangements with the International Whaling Commission
(IWC), the Convention on Biological Diversity’s EBSA programme
and the International Maritime Organisation (IMO). The IMMA tool
(shapefiles and background information) are made available on the
Task Force website, as well as via the World Conservation
Monitoring Centre (WCMC) to commercial companies within the
Proteus Partnership.). The model is based on the successful example
of the BirdLife International process for determining Important Bird
and Biodiversity Areas (IBAs) (Notarbartolo di Sciara and Hoyt
2020). The criteria are consistent with IBAs, Key Biodiversity Areas
(KBAs) and Ecologically or Biological Significant Areas (EBSAs) of
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), but tailored to
marine mammals (Hoyt and Notarbartolo di Sciara 2014). IMMAs
are defined as discrete portions of habitat, important to marine
mammal species, that have the potential to be delineated and
managed for conservation (IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas
Task Force 2018). The IMMAs are identified according to specific
criteria that capture critical aspects of marine mammal (seals and
cetaceans) biology, ecology and population structure including
vulnerability, distribution, abundance, special attributes and key
life cycle activities. The intention is that the identification of IMMAs
through a consistent expert biocentric process are measured against
standardized criteria that will provide valuable input about marine
mammals and their habitats. IMMAs are an advisory classification
based on available science and knowledge. In some cases, IMMAs
may contribute to existing national and international conservation
initiatives.
For the period 2016-2023, the Task Force has started undertaking
the planning and execution of regional expert workshops covering
the following;
Mediterranean (October 2016),
Pacific Islands (March 2017),
North East Indian Ocean and South East Asian Seas (March 2018),
Western Indian Ocean and Arabian Seas (March 2019),
Australia-New Zealand Waters and South East Indian Ocean
(February 2020),
Black Sea, Turkish Straits System and Caspian Sea (February 2021),
South East Tropical and Temperate Pacific Ocean (scheduled for
late 2021),
South West Atlantic Ocean (2022).
IMMA Workshop
The Extended Southern Ocean Region, covering the Antarctic and
surrounding ice and waters including the subantarctic islands, host
the richest marine mammal feeding grounds in the world. It was
recognized that there are still substantial data gaps for marine
mammals across this vast region — partly due to the challenges of
logistics and funding and the comparatively limited seasonal
window for study of some species.
From 15-19 October 2018, the Task Force conducted the fourth
IMMA workshop in Brest, France, focusing on the Southern Ocean
from Antarctica extending to the various subantarctic islands. The
Task Force engaged twenty marine mammal scientists and two
observers from 11 countries. Together they identified and mapped a
total of 15 candidate Important Marine Mammal Areas (cIMMAs),
accompanied by concise summaries, proposing boundaries and
detailing how each proposal met one or more of the eight IMMA
criteria and sub-criteria. In addition, seven areas of interest (AoI)
were tentatively retained as potential future cIMMAs pending
further research and consideration. A further four AoI were deferred
to a future workshop as they extended outside the region’s
boundaries (IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task
Force 2020, 2021). After independent review, 13 IMMAs were
approved, 4 of which are located wholly or partially within the
Antarctic Treaty area. One area was kept as a cIMMA, at the request
of the peer review panel, as it was felt more information was
required for it to fully address the IMMA criteria.
Sites include habitats and foraging areas for crabeater seal
(Lobodon carcinophaga), leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx), Weddell
seal (Leptonychotes weddellii ), Ross seal (Ommatophoca rossi),
Antarctic fur seal (Arctocephalus gazella) and southern elephant
seals (Mirounga leonina) that haul-out on the ice or come ashore to
molt or reproduce.
The approved IMMAs within the Antarctic Treaty area
After the review, 13 IMMAs were approved, one cIMMA was kept
and seven areas gained AoI status in the whole Extended Southern
Ocean region considered by the workshop. Four of the 13 approved
IMMAs are located wholly or partially within the area covered by
the Antarctic Treaty. Complete information on identified sites with
site maps can be found at https://www.marinemammalhabitat.org/
immas/immas-searchable-database/.
Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs)
N.B: Underlined names are IMMAs that are located wholly or
partially within the area covered by the Antarctic Treaty. The
IMMA criteria used to identify the four areas covered by the
Antarctic Treaty are shown in Table 1.
South Georgia,
Scotia Arc,
Western Antarctic Peninsula and Islands,
Gough Island and Surrounding Waters,
Bouvetøya and Surrounding Waters,
Ross Sea Ecosystem,
Scott Islands and Iselin Bank Complex,
Prince Edward Islands and Western Oceanic Waters,
Crozet Islands,
Heard Islands Kerguelen and Surrounding Waters,
Amsterdam Island, Saint Paul Complex and Associated Waters,
Macquarie Island Ridge, and
New Zealand Subantarctic Islands.
IMMAs located in the Antarctic Treaty area
IMMA criteria used to identify the area
Scotia Arc
A
C2
D2
Western Antarctic Peninsula and Islands
A
B1
B2
C1
C2
D1
D2
Ross Sea Ecosystem
B1
B2
C1
C2
C3
D1
Scott Islands and Iselin Bank Complex
A
C2
D2
Table 1: The IMMA criteria used to identify the four areas covered
by the Antarctic Treaty are shown in the table. The criteria require
evidence supported by data that the proposed habitat is important
for A: Species or Population Vulnerability; B1: Small and Resident
Populations; B2: Aggregations; C1: Reproductive Areas; C2: Feeding
Areas; C3: Migration Routes; D1: Distinctiveness; and/or D2:
Diversity.
Candidate IMMA (cIMMA)
Circumpolar Southern Ocean Seasonal Ice Edge Extent cIMMA
Areas of Interest (AoI)
South of South Georgia AoI
East of South Sandwich Islands AoI
Drake Passage AoI
Filchner Trough AoI
Antipodes Islands AoI
Balleny Islands AoI
Ice Edge Extent South of the South Pacific AoI
Fig. 1. The Extended Southern Ocean IMMA network consists of [1]
South Georgia, [2] Scotia Arc, [3] Western Antarctic Peninsula and
Islands, [4] Gough Island and Surrounding Waters, [5] Bouvetøya
and Surrounding Waters, [6] Ross Sea Ecosystem, [7] Scott Islands
and Iselin Bank Complex, [8] Prince Edward Islands and Western
Oceanic Waters, [9] Crozet Islands, [10] Heard Islands Kerguelen
and Surrounding Waters, [11] Amsterdam Island, Saint Paul
Complex and Associated Waters, [12] Macquarie Island Ridge, and
[13] New Zealand Subantarctic Islands.
IMMAs within the area covered by the Antarctic Treaty: [3]
Western Antarctic Peninsula and Islands, [6] Ross Sea Ecosystem,
[7] Scott Islands and Iselin Bank Complex, [2] section of the Scotia
Arc IMMA south of 60°S
Fig. 2. Latest version of the IMMA e-Atlas, including the Extended
Southern Ocean (April 2021, see https://
www.marinemammalhabitat.org/immas/imma-eatlas/).
Conclusion
Globally, IMMAs are already being used as a spatial data layer in
the implementation of area-based management tools (ABMTs) and
spatial conservation measures; For instance for the evaluation of
marine protected areas (MPAs) in Vietnam, Bangladesh and
potentially Mozambique; marine spatial planning (MSP); and in
consideration for future EBSAs and KBAs (Notarbartolo di Sciara et
al. 2016). The International Whaling Commission (IWC) is using
IMMAs plus shipping data to identify and address shipstrike issues.
The Convention on Migratory Species has adopted a resolution
calling on its country members to promote and use IMMAs. It is
important to stress that IMMAs are designed to be a data layer that
can be helpful to support decision-making processes.
Acknowledgments
The Extended Southern Ocean IMMA workshop, including the
extensive preparation and review phases, was supported mainly by
the French Biodiversity Agency (OFB) through the IUCN Global
Marine and Polar Programme. Additional funding support for the
final stages of reporting of the workshop and e-Atlas came from
Fondation Prince Albert II de Monaco, OceanCare, Animal Welfare
Institute (AWI) and the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC).
Administration for the project was through the Tethys Research
Institute in Italy, and Whale and Dolphin Conservation in the UK.
The other workshops to date were funded by the German
International Climate Initiative (IKI) through the Global Ocean
Biodiversity Initiative (GOBI) and the MAVA Foundation.
References
Hoyt E, Notarbartolo di Sciara G (eds) (2014) Report of the
workshop for the development of Important Marine Mammal Area
(IMMA) criteria. IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force
and International Committee on Marine Mammal Protected Areas,
Marseille, France, 22 Oct. 2013. https://bit.ly/2TWIIHc
IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (2018) Guidance
on the use of selection criteria for the identification of Important
Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs). Version: March 2018. https://
bit.ly/2Umm4Ho
IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (2020) Final
Report of the Fourth IMMA Workshop: Important Marine Mammal
Area Regional Workshop for Extended Southern Ocean, Brest,
France, 15-19
October 2018. https://www.marinemammalhabitat.org/download/
final-report-of-the-regional-workshop-for-the-extended-southern-
ocean-important-marine-mammal-areas/
IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (2021) IMMA e-
Atlas. https://www.marinemammalhabitat.org/immas/imma-
eatlas/
Notarbartolo di Sciara G, Hoyt E (2020) Healing the wounds of
marine mammals by protecting their habitat. Ethics Sci Environ
Polit 20:15–23. https://doi.org/10.3354/esep00190
Notarbartolo di Sciara G, Hoyt E, Reeves RR, Ardron J, Marsh H,
Vongraven D, Barr B (2016) Place-based approaches to marine
mammal conservation. Aquat Conserv 26(Suppl 2):85−100.
