Antarctic wilderness and inviolate areas
Antarctic wilderness and inviolate areas
Information Paper submitted by Australia, Netherlands and New
Zealand
Summary
This paper summarises the outcomes of a quantitative analysis of
the extent of Antarctic wilderness, recently published in Nature
(Leihy et al., 2020). The researchers assembled an extensive
database of ground-based human activity across the Antarctic
continent and offshore islands, comprising approximately 2.7
million records spanning 200 years. Using several global and
Antarctic regional definitions they found that >99% of Antarctica
can still be considered wilderness, with large-scale ‘Inviolate
Wilderness Areas’ (>10,000 km2 with no record of historical
human activity) representing approximately 32% of the continent.
These findings are relevant to the work of the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP), such as ongoing efforts to develop
an agreed approach to understanding and protecting Antarctic
wilderness, and to systematically develop the Antarctic protected
area system including consideration of areas of outstanding
wilderness value and areas kept inviolate from human interference.
Background
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(Environmental Protocol) requires that protection of the Antarctic
environment, including Antarctica’s wilderness values, shall be a
fundamental consideration in the planning and conduct of all
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. Since its first meeting in
1998, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has
regularly discussed how to understand and apply the concept of
wilderness in the context of its role to provide advice and
recommendations to the Antarctic Treaty Parties on implementation
of the Environmental Protocol.
Areas of focus have included supporting consideration of
Antarctica’s wilderness values in the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) process, and identifying ‘areas of outstanding…
wilderness value’ that may warrant inclusion in the series of
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) in accordance with
Article 3.2(g) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol.
Discussions have also considered potential connections between
wilderness areas and inviolate areas For example, CEP XV Final
Report paras. 152 and 154 and CEP XVII Final Report para. 178.,
noting also that Article 3.2(a) of Annex V calls for the series of
ASPAs to include ‘areas kept inviolate from human interference so
that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have
been affected by human activities’.
The most recent (2016) update to the Guidelines for Environmental
Impact Assessment in Antarctica (the EIA Guidelines) provided
additional guidance for considering potential impacts on wilderness
values, highlighting the importance of making an assessment, to the
extent possible, of the pre-activity wilderness state of the location of
the proposed activity. As identified in the draft report on the State
of the Antarctic Protected Area System forwarded by the CEP to
ATCM XLII See CEP XII Final Report para. 184 and Attachment A to
ATCM XLII/WP70., to date few ASPAs have been designated
primarily to protect wilderness values (only ASPA 123 Barwick and
Balham Valleys) or inviolate areas (only ASPA 129 Rothera Point
and ASPA 165 Edmonson Point).
The CEP meeting agenda previously included a long-standing item
related to consideration of wilderness values, and the CEP Five-Year
Work Plan for many years included a priority issue dedicated to
developing an agreed understanding of the term wilderness and
methods for improved protection of wilderness. There remains no
agreed definition of wilderness or wilderness values in the Antarctic
context, with the EIA Guidelines noting that wilderness is ‘generally
understood to represent a measure of the relative absence of
evidence of, or impacts from, human activity’.
The subject of Antarctic wilderness continues to be raised at CEP
meetings, including most recently at CEP XXII (2019). At that
meeting, when considering the outcomes of discussions at a
workshop on
Antarctic tourism held in Rotterdam, the Committee ‘invited SCAR,
in consultation with interested Parties, to further elaborate an
understanding of the wilderness values with a view to their
practical application’ (CEP XXII Final Report, para. 14).
To inform the Committee’s ongoing efforts to identify and protect
Antarctic wilderness and inviolate areas, this paper summarises the
findings of relevant research (Leihy et al., 2020), recently published
in Nature.
Research to quantify the extent of Antarctic wilderness
The researchers compiled an extensive database of the available,
high-resolution (25 km2) records of ground-based human activity in
Antarctica spanning 200 years (~2.7 million activity records, from
363 sources). To accommodate different perspectives, the
researchers quantified the extent of Antarctica’s wilderness using
several global and Antarctic regional definitions of wilderness (see
Figure 1), and found that:
Using criteria to identify globally-significant wilderness areas, the
entire Antarctic continent qualifies as a large, intact, ‘Globally
Significant Wilderness’ area due to the absence of urban, industrial
or agricultural land-use, and the very low human population
density (<0.0004 people per km2). This makes Antarctica one of
the largest remaining terrestrial wildernesses on Earth.
Using definitions of wilderness that exclude areas with human
infrastructure (‘Undeveloped Antarctic Wilderness’), or areas within
sight of infrastructure (‘Visibly Pristine Antarctic Wilderness’),
99.99% or 99.57% of the Antarctic land area qualifies as
wilderness, respectively.
Under a definition recognising that repeated human activity, such
as for scientific research or tourism, may also affect the wilderness
value of sites because of the sensitivity of Antarctic landscapes to
disturbance, 99.62% of Antarctica qualifies as a ‘Negligibly
Impacted Wilderness Area’, where human visitation is likely to have
been negligible or non-existent. Sites around scientific stations and
in ice-free areas, especially around the Antarctic Peninsula and on
offshore islands, are largely excluded from this wilderness category.
Using more stringent criteria to identify large areas (≥ 10,000
km2) with no human activity records in the historical activity
dataset, and so which might present outstanding wilderness value,
‘Inviolate Wilderness Areas’ cover 31.74% of the continent, mostly
in the inland region of East Antarctica (see Figure 2).
Sites with well-established biodiversity value (e.g. Important Bird
Areas, places with biodiversity records, and Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas designated to protect biodiversity and ecosystems)
were poorly represented in the Negligibly Impacted Wilderness
Area, because human activity has been most extensive in such areas
(e.g. ice-free areas) and because visitation has often been necessary
to determine the biodiversity value of sites. For these reasons, no
sites with high biodiversity value were represented in the Inviolate
Wilderness Areas.
Conclusions
This research shows that, using several global and Antarctic
regional definitions, many areas of the Antarctic continent can be
considered wilderness. While some historical human activities have
not been documented, digitized, or were not captured in the
literature search, the freely accessible database (Leihy et al. 2020b)
developed through this research represents the most comprehensive
record of historical human activity and the finest resolution
currently possible for these data at a continental scale. The
inclusion of additional spatially-explicit data for both historical and
ongoing human activities could further refine the wilderness
estimates.
These data and findings can support the activities of the CEP and
Parties, including by:
informing and supporting ongoing efforts to develop an agreed
understanding of Antarctic wilderness and to develop methods for
improved protection of Antarctica’s wilderness values;
supporting the planning and conduct of activities, including
consideration of potential impacts on wilderness values and
inviolate areas in the environmental impact assessment process; and
providing further spatial layers that could be used consistently and
in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty
system (e.g. Environmental Domains Analysis, Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Regions, Important Bird Areas) to help
develop and identify areas that could be designated as ASPAs,
within the systematic environmental-geographic framework
referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol.
References
Leihy, R.I., Coetzee, B.W.T., Morgan, F. et al. Antarctica’s
wilderness fails to capture continent’s biodiversity. Nature 583,
567–571 (2020a). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2506-3
Leihy, R. I. et al. Antarctica’s wilderness fails to capture continent’s
biodiversity. https://doi.org/10.26180/5c32bf1b041ea (2020b).
Figure 1. Antarctic wilderness areas (from Leihy et al., 2020a)
Figure 2. Inviolate Antarctic Wilderness areas (from Leihy et al.,
2020a)
