Gender Agenda of the Chilean Scientific Program
English version provided by the author
Gender Agenda of the Chilean Scientific Program
Information paper submitted by Chile
Background
In 2019, the Chilean Antarctic Institute incorporated, for the first
time, a gender agenda in its management, which is part of the Equal
Rights and Gender Equity Agenda of the Magellan and Chilean
Antarctic Region for 2018-2022. This Agenda has three areas of
action:
Applying a gender approach in the collection of information and
databases of our different programs. This allows us to understand
the dynamics between the scientific community and allow better
decision-making in public policy.
Gender mainstreaming of the strategic communications and
products of INACH. Aware of the importance of communications
and the role that gender stereotypes can have in people's
development, we aim to avoid perpetuating them, mainly those
who could discourage girls and young women from the scientific
vocation. Thus, it also emphasizes the dissemination and visibility
of women's participation in Antarctic science.
Finally, in internal management, the agenda promotes an
organizational culture based on equality and equity among people,
training staff on gender issues and preventing abuse and sexual and
sexual harassment.
Results
The number of projects of Chile's National Antarctic Science
Program has quintupled over the past twenty years. For instance, in
2002, INACH funded seventeen initiatives, and since 2016, more
than 90. Moreover, until 2012, only a third of Antarctic research
projects were led by women, and this number reached 47% and
49% in the last two years.
Although the figures are promising, disaggregated data shows that
women's participation occurs mostly early in the scientific career,
including graduate, postdoctoral, and initiation projects.
In the competition fund for Postgraduate Antarctic Research,
women, who have a higher award rate than their male peers at this
stage, have led 57% of the applications and 67% of the funded
projects. Female participation in Chilean postgraduate programs is
51% in master's studies and 41% in Ph.D. However, much of these
enrolments are concentrated in health and education, while in
science, it goes from 30% to 40%.
In the regular phase, the percentage of participation is comparable
with the national and international level figures, around 35-40 %.
However, so far, it has not been observed that women's
participation in the early stages of the career positions women as
project leaders in the regular phase. This gap persists and could
grow due to social crises, such as the Covid-19 pandemic.
Moreover, according to the analysis of the applications to the
National Antarctic Scientific and Technological Research
Competition, from 2015 to 2019, there are significant differences in
the composition of project teams depending on the sex of the person
who applies. Thus, we evidenced that while women make up their
work teams with an equal number of women and men, men only
include, on average, one woman for every three men. Moreover,
36% of these projects did not have women in the group, and in
projects submitted by women, only 7% did not include men in their
team.
The applications for the Antarctic School Fair were also analyzed,
which in its versions 2017-2019 received more than 700 projects.
Of these projects, a female teacher accompanied 58% of the teams
of secondary students. This figure is quite close to the percentage of
female classroom teachers in middle school, which is in the order of
56%. Of about 1,500 applicant students, 60% were girls, ten more
points above the middle school enrollment. This shows a scientific
vocation among female students; however, they choose fewer STEM
careers in higher education, where we have a significant gap as a
country.
In 2020, we organized the First Seminar of Women and Antarctic
Science, transmitted through the social networks of the Institute,
which showed the experience of researchers, teachers, and students
and their involvement with the white continent in various
disciplines. The second version is scheduled for the X Chilean
Congress of Antarctic Research.
The latest topic of the ILAIA journal was devoted to the social
sciences and included articles on feminism and female participation
in Antarctic science. The latter was also disseminated in the media
and presented as an educational picture inserted in "La Prensa
Austral", a regional circulation newspaper in the region.
In 2021, the first Guide to Inclusive and Gender-Sensitive Language
in INACH Communications was developed. The objective of the
document is: guide the use of written, oral and graphic language
without sexism and in an inclusive manner; make women's
participation and contribution visible in science and Antarctica;
value and represent the diversity of people in the community; and
promote collaborative and education networks as engines of Chile's
scientific and technological development.
In terms of internal management, we updated the procedure for
preventing and sanctioning abuse, labor harassment, and sexual
harassment. We included personal relations and prevention of abuse
and harassment in the Antarctic induction program for those who
participated in the last Antarctic Scientific Expedition. In the same
sense, the Institute's staff has received training on this topic through
the workshop on gender perspective in the intervention of INACH
and the course "Chile chooses equity: Induction to gender pro-
equity policies, both developed by the Ministry of Women and
Gender Equity.
Some of the measures that promote equity in INACH's action are
forming gender-parity project evaluation panels; funding tickets and
accommodation for teams to participate in the Antarctic School Fair
in Punta Arenas; a more extended period of assessment in the
scientific productivity of female applicants who have had children
in the last five years; maternity and paternity leave, to promotes
maternity and co-responsibility and the extension of the project
duration to take care of children. Furthermore, for the graduate
contest, an additional position is provided if the beneficiary is in a
situation of disability and requires some special assistance, such as
a sign language interpreter, and language is gender-neutral.
Conclusion
We are sharing the first results of the Gender Agenda adopted at the
Chilean Antarctic Institute to raise awareness of the importance of
ensuring gender equality and parity in Chile's Antarctic work,
particularly in women's participation in Antarctic science. In this
line, the other Parties are invited to share their experiences and
good practices regarding women's participation in Antarctic science
and operations.
