On the work of the Russian Antarctic Expedition during the
COVID-19 pandemic: lessons from the 2020–2021 season
English version provided by the author
On the work of the Russian Antarctic Expedition during the
COVID-19 pandemic: lessons from the 2020–2021 season
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
All operations and work of the 66th Russian Antarctic Expedition
(RAE) took place in conditions of severe restrictions associated with
the coronavirus pandemic, therefore the expedition program,
according to the recommendations of Roshydromet and COMNAP,
was minimized and contained only urgent expeditionary activities
to ensure the functioning of permanent Antarctic stations and
seasonal field bases. It was also decided to cancel the
intracontinental Novolazarevskaya – Progress – Vostok flights.
In total, the reduced 66th RAE seasonal personnel included 69
people (usually up to 120 people take part in a season). During
summer season only a few seasonal scientific programs were carried
out (oceanography and marine biology program onboard of two
expeditional ships and the work of two geologists in the area of
Progress station). Other members of the seasonal expedition
performed urgent repair work, routine maintenance of equipment,
improvement of the communication infrastructure (deployment of
mobile communication systems) and applied research (GPR surveys)
to ensure safety on both, the routes on glaciers and snow/ice RW.
In accordance with 66th RAE program, the R/V “Akademik
Tryoshnikov” left from St. Petersburg on November 15. The ship’s
sailing was delayed for three weeks due to the detection of positive
test results in several candidates and the need for additional testing
for coronavirus, as well as isolation of both, the crew on board a
ship and expedition members in a special isolation ward.
The vessel ensured the start of operations at the seasonal base
Molodezhnaya (including delivery of Belarus cargo and expedition
members to their Gora Vechernyaya station) and at Progress and
Mirny stations. After supplying Mirny station, the ship followed the
route Mirny – Russkaya – Bellingshausen – marine research – Punta
Arenas and returned to St. Petersburg on April 21, 2021.
Under the 66th RAE program the R/V “Akademik Fedorov” started
a voyage on January 20, 2021, also with a delay of more than a
week due to additional testing for coronavirus and isolation of the
crew and expedition members on board. At Progress and Mirny
stations, the vessel changed over the 65th RAE wintering personnel
and supplied these stations with materials and technical equipment.
The personnel change-over and provision supply of Vostok station
was carried out by transport traverses along the Progress – Vostok
route. Then R/V “Akademik Fedorov” changed over the wintering
staff and supplied food and other cargo to Novolazarevskaya and
Bellingshausen stations. The return of the vessel back to St.
Petersburg is expected on June 12.
In the framework of aviation logistics operations the ALSI
performed 3 Cape Town – Novolazarevskaya station IL-76 flights in
November–December 2020, which made it possible to ensure
seasonal maintenance and repair works at this station. All delivery
operations of RAE members to Novolazarevskaya station were
carried out in compliance with the COMNAP protocol to prevent
the introduction of coronavirus into Antarctica.
In general, the work of the RAE in the season 2020–2021 showed
that the anticoronavirus measures undertaken were not excessive.
They prevented the entry of coronavirus into Russian Antarctic
stations. It was also found out that under strict restrictions for RAE,
there are options for carrying out seasonal work and personnel
change-over with vessels only, without using the Cape Town –
Novolazarevskaya and Punta Arenas – King George air-bridges, as
well as without Novolazarevskaya – Progress – Vostok feeder
flights.
Medical accidents not related to COVID-19 should be noted
separately. In 2020–2021 summer season two RAE members passed
away:
On January 15, onboard “Akademik Treshnikov” Aleksey Korneev,
1975, the driver-mechanic suddenly died on his way to the Mirny
station for the wintering;
On January 29, at Mirny station, Yuri Nezderov, 1954, Mirny
station Leader, suddenly died.
The preliminary cause of death for both men is acute heart failure.
The experience gained indicates the need for strict adherence to the
conditions of isolation and the organization of quarantine, as well
as personnel testing before the ship leaves for an Antarctic voyage
during a pandemic. Early vaccination of expedition members in
order to develop immunity to the disease is also highly desirable
and significantly reduces the risk of accompanying complication
development.
Apart from the anticoronavirus measures, more attention should be
paid to identifying latent forms of chronic diseases in expedition
candidates during the medical check-up, in particular, conduct
stress testing.
