Evaluation of Ecosystem Services and preliminary identification of
their trade-offs
Evaluation of Ecosystem Services and preliminary identification of
their trade-offs
Information Paper submitted by Spain
Summary
Spain presents the recently published assessment (Pertierra et al.
2021) Pertierra, LR. Santos-Martin, F. Avila C. Caceres J. De Pablo
M.A., Hughes, K.A, Gonzalez, S. Lynch H., Marina-Montes, C.
Tejedo, P. Tin, T. Quesada, A. Benayas, J. (2021) Ecosystem
Services in Antarctica: global assessment of the current state, future
challenges and managing opportunities. Ecosystem services, in
press. towards the identification and evaluation of Ecosystem
Services (nature’s contribution to people) in Terrestrial Antarctica.
The study centres around the examination of the current status and
trends on the utilization of the service-providing units (i.e., those
biotic and abiotic elements of Antarctic that provide values and
services to humankind). For example, penguin colonies provide
recreational and scientific services in the form of tourist and
scientific visitation, but they also have a role in the regulation of
the ecosystems. The Ecosystem Services Assessment framework can
deliver a comprehensive identification of the stakeholders, drivers
of change and future scenarios that would assist with the effective
preservation of the Antarctic values.
Introduction
Cumulative increase of human activities in the continent (science,
logistics and recreation) imposes a pressure to Antarctic
conservation values (intrinsic, instrumental, wilderness and
aesthetic). Our cumulative presence erodes some of the outstanding
features of Antarctica, thus causing it to provide diminishing
returns. In turn these presential activities generate a diverse list of
cultural services with direct and indirect beneficiaries across global
societies. Thus, we face an important dilemma on how to find a
sustainable use of the Antarctic values where we preserve usage
benefits at minimal costs. Therefore, the Antarctic values active
usage needs to be balanced against non-use benefits (e.g. heritage
and bequest values). Identification of the main trade-offs (positive
and negative) between services utilization provides the tools to
build future scenarios and support decision-making to develop a
strategic management. For instance, the absence of tourism in a site
severely limits the capacity to service aesthetic values, but a strong
concentration of visitors generates substantial visual impacts.
Future development of local and regional ES cartographic
assessments can contribute to the protection of Antarctic
Ecosystems by setting spatially-explicit assessments of potentially
conflicting land uses around local activities.
Ecosystem services are the many and varied benefits that humans
freely gain from the natural environment and from properly-
functioning ecosystems (figure 1). Such ecosystems include, for
example, the terrestrial tundra in ice-free areas, coastal grounds and
aquatic ecosystems of Antarctica. There, ecosystem services are
grouped into three broad categories: 1) provisioning, such as the
production of water for facilities (but other provisioning
exploitations are largely excluded by the Antarctic Treaty System);
2) regulating, such as the control of climate and disease (and
notably sea level, oceans salinity and other services largely absent
elsewhere) while also supporting nutrient cycles and oxygen
production (including the rich Antarctic native biodiversity); and 3)
cultural, such as scientific (e.g. Antarctic multidisciplinary
sciences), spiritual (Antarctic vast wilderness) and recreational
(Antarctic tourism) benefits. While Ecosystem Services Assessment
(ESA) methodology has been already discussed in the Southern
Ocean in a very comprehensive manner (Grant et al. 2013)Grant, S.,
Hill, S., Trathan, P., & Murphy, E. (2013). Ecosystem services of the
Southern Ocean: Trade-offs in decision-making. Antarctic Science,
25(5), 603-617. doi:10.1017/S0954102013000308., this has yet to
be mirrored in the terrestrial environment. Understanding and
assessing the current and future state of Ecosystem Services in
Antarctica provides a logical framework to operate. It allows to
consolidate strategic actions in the planning ahead towards the
Antarctic values sustainable utilization and long-term preservation.
Research findings
A preliminary quantification of spatial and temporal trends of
Ecosystem Services in Antarctica have been published in Pertierra et
al. (2021). Regulation services (climate regulation, sea level
balance, etc) derived from Antarctica are practically immeasurable,
representing a major contribution to humankind welfare (Figs 2-3
in Pertierra et al. 2021). Provisioning services are an important
contribution of the marine domain (Fig 4 in Pertierra et al. 2021),
but are currently diversifying, particularly in the form of
bioprospecting, and rely in a delicate balance between resource
preservation against extraction. Lastly, cultural services in
Antarctica are remarkably rich and diverse, and yet they often
wider lack recognition (Figs 5-8 in Pertierra et al. 2021). For one,
scientific research knowledge in Antarctica has a strong impact in
worldwide sciences, a key engine for the modernization of societies.
However, field research activities inevitably contribute to hinder
Antarctic intrinsic values. Despite the best efforts to operate under
impact minimization protocols that generate minor or transitory
disturbances science still contributes to a cumulative footprint in
Antarctica. Resilience of Ecosystem Services (including research
opportunities themselves) and the associated carrying capacities to
research activities remain to be determined. In turn, Antarctic
tourism brings a social benefit from the experiential use of the
intrinsic and aesthetic values on the continent. IAATO promotes
safe operations within the continent but faces increasing challenges
in the coordination of fast-growing operator activities. In addition,
unregulated visits also occur and risk the infringement of
environmental provisions. Visitations levels increase annually and
call for establishment of carrying capacities of Ecosystem Services.
Future scenarios ought to account for visitation trends and the
diminishing return of wilderness for the consideration of expanding
the Protected Area System. Overall these trends indicate that
cultural ES require further regulation but the operating mechanisms
need to be established and communicated. A prominent three-way
trade-off was identified by the authors between science, recreation
and conservation in order to maintain ecosystems productivity,
health, resilience and services in the terrestrial domain (Pertierra et
al. 2021, Fig. 9). In turn the marine domain finds an important
trade-off between provisioning uses (fisheries) and biotic regulation
services in the form of the supporting marine ecosystems (also see
Fig. 9).
Conclusions
This surging research line provides a complementary conceptual
framework that could be used as a tool for being informed on the
prevailing trade-off between ecosystem services. The Ecosystem
Services Assessment framework can deliver a comprehensive
identification of the stakeholders, drivers of change and future
scenarios that would assist with the effective preservation of the
Antarctic values. Systematic ES assessments would help to prioritize
area protection and conservation measures, based on the best
available data, and ultimately contribute to maximize the likelihood
of meeting the objectives of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and thus ensuring long-term
protection and conservation of Antarctic biodiversity.
Figure 1. Antarctic Ecosystem Services visual representation.
Ecosystem services in Antarctica have been represented using
common/iconic features.
