Potential for zoonotic transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from humans to
Antarctic wildlife
Potential for zoonotic transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from humans to
Antarctic wildlife
Information Paper presented by Chile
Background
The global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic continues to advance in the world
and the number of infections goes on a growing curve. Although
vaccination programs are beginning to show the first positive
results, the global health situation is still critical. This situation has
not been the exception for the Antarctic continent as the first cases
of Covid-19 were reported in December 2020.
The scientific community has expressed its concern about the
possible human introduction of this virus in the continent through
research activities, logistical support or tourism, also focusing the
discussion on how to avoid the serious effects of SARS-CoV-2 on
human health, which would increased its risks due to limitations in
the medical infrastructure in said territory.
It is common for other species to transfer viruses. Bats are good
examples of transfers of these types of coronaviruses to other
species. Coronaviruses belong to the order Nidovirales, a group of
viruses that are rapidly expanding our knowledge as a result of an
increase in high-throughput sequencing studies.
In the case of Antarctic fauna, the risk of reverse zoonotic
transmission can be complex and dangerous, due to the fact that
environmental conditions in Antarctica appear to be favorable for
the stability of the virus. In the case of Chile, positive cases of
Covid-19 were detected in closed spaces such as ships and
permanent stations, which are favorable environments for the
transmission of the virus, even taking the measures of social
distancing and use of a mask recommended by the WHO. Recent
work by Antarctic researchers suggests that cetaceans are at
increased risk of infection, while seals and birds appear to be at low
risk of infection.
Since 2013, our scientific program has developed field research on
the effects of pathogens such as bacteria and viruses that can affect
populations of marine organisms. Projects have been carried out
about the penguin virome to understand the ecological diversity of
Antarctic microorganisms and the potential origin of emerging
diseases, or evaluating the role of the Snowy Sheathbill (Chionis
albus) as a reservoir or transport of viruses with zoonotic risk. The
environmental aspects of the presence of viruses in the marine
environment has also been evaluated.
In May 2020, measures were taken to be implement in the future
Antarctic expeditions to be carried out during the austral summer
2020/2021 both at the bases and in the field. Those measures
consisted in: reducing the number of activities and, therefore, the
number of personnel in the field; treating the cargo and scientific
instruments sent to Antarctica with sanitizers (such as quaternary
ammonium) in Punta Arenas, to later use only 70% alcohol and
other types of environmentally friendly detergents in Antarctica
(the excessive use of quaternary ammonium can increase bacterial
resistance and affect the proper functioning of sewage treatment
plant. A fieldwork protocol for researchers who handle animals was
also implemented, since they pose the highest risk of transmission
to animals (Barbosa et al. "Risk assessment of SARS-CoV-2 in
Antarctic wildlife", 2020).
Presence of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater after detected sprouts of
Covid-19 is predictable because SARS-CoV-2 can infect the
gastrointestinal tract and break off through the feces. For the most
part, investigations occurrence and persistence of viruses in the
aquatic environment have focused on enteric non-enveloped
viruses, given that these viruses are characterized by high resistance
to a variety of environmental conditions. However, the number of
studies on the occurrence of enveloped viruses in aquatic
compartments, as in the case of SARS-CoV-2, is rather limited,
because enveloped viruses are predisposed to inactivation in water.
The persistence of viruses can be affected by both the environment
(for example, the surface water, wastewater) and by the physical
and chemical properties of the environment (for example,
temperature, pH, humidity, exposure to sunlight and the type of
surface). Coronaviruses are not quantitatively significant
components of marine virioplankton. Members of the Nidovirales
infect marine mammals, fish, and possibly invertebrates,
and human coronaviruses can persist in marine plankton that
receives sewage effluents. However, virions are likely to experience
significant decreases in particle number and infectivity rate in
seawater, similar to other enveloped RNA viruses.
The decay rates of viral infectivity of enveloped RNA viruses can be
similar to those of virioplankton. The high decline and dilution
rates in seawater suggest that coronaviruses may not persist for long
periods in natural waters, which would help minimizing the risk of
infecting any potential susceptible hosts in the marine environment
that could act as animal reservoirs for the virus.
However, it is important to note that surviving virions can
potentially infect marine mammals, since cetaceans and land
mammals share receptor-binding domains similar to the ACE2
protein, which in humans is the receptor that interacts with the
virus and allows entry into tissues.
Conclusion
Since 2013, Chile has constantly monitored Antarctic bird
populations in the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic
Peninsula, looking for pathogens and viruses as part of its Scientific
Program. Based on that experience along with what happened
during the pandemic, Chilean scientists will continue working on
these priority lines of research.
Chile agrees with the importance expressed by COMNAP through
WP 47 and supports its suggestions to strengthen monitoring,
control and education on this issue.
In addition, also suggests the following measures:
Based on the different bibliographic reviews and scientific evidence
developed to date, it is important to optimize the systems of sewage
treatment plant to make them more efficient and perhaps to
incorporate new technologies. The possibility of adding a final
disinfection step prior to discharge of wastewater to the sea, for
instance the ozonation of wastewater, may further reduce the risk
posed by viral pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2,.
On the other hand, the implementation of monitoring programs is
recommended, particularly regarding the presence of SARS-CoV-2
in sewage treatment plant (by means of PCR techniques or
technologies based on biosensors that has been widely used for the
detection of viruses), and the corresponding affected Antarctic
ecosystem and food chain levels.
