Implementation of the IMO Polar Code in Spain: Certification of the
Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa
English translation provided by the author
Implementation of the IMO Polar Code in Spain: Certification of the
Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa
Information Paper presented by Spain
Summary
The entry into force on 1 January 2017 of the International Code
for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) adopted by the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) necessitated its
incorporation into Spanish law. To date, the Spanish Maritime
Administration, due to the characteristics of the fleet operating
under its flag and of the zones where it operates, has only certified
one ship, the Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa. This
document details the principal aspects of the Polar Code’s
implementation, as well as the most salient aspects of the ship’s
certification process.
Implementation of the IMO Polar Code in Spain
Incorporation of the Polar Code into Spanish law
The Kingdom of Spain tacitly accepted the Resolutions to amend the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)
(MSC.386(94)); the International Convention for the Prevention of
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) (MEPC.265(68)); the International
Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW) (MSC.416(97)); and the STCW
Code (MSC.417(97)). Therefore, due to the need to comply with
Resolutions MSC.385(94) and MEPC.264(68) adopting different
parts of the Polar Code, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, at the request of the Ministry of Transport, Mobility
and the Urban Agenda (MITMA), subsequently sent the texts of the
amending Resolutions to the Council of Ministers for their
information, pursuant to article 36.2 b) of Act 25/2014 of 27
November, on Treaties and other International Agreements.
Thereafter, the texts were published in the Official State Gazette
(BOE) of 5 May 2017, and on 1 January 2017 they entered into
force, and the Polar Code was incorporated into Spanish law.
Necessary steps for an existing ship under the Spanish flag to be
certified in Spain
In Spain, the State has sole jurisdiction over the certification of
ships, which is carried out by the Maritime Administration through
the Directorate-General for the Merchant Marine (DGMM), a
management body under the aegis of MITMA that sets forth and
imparts guidelines to the Maritime Authorities, which constitute the
local Maritime Administration network.
Requests for certification and the general procedures for it are
available to interested parties at all administrative offices and
online.
In the particular case of the polar certification of an existing ship,
the technical department of the shipowner/operator, should there
be any doubts regarding how to proceed, may assess—together with
the inspection service of the Maritime Administration—whether the
certification will entail carrying out renovations and therefore
require technical plans which must be submitted for prior
authorization, or whether this certification will only involve
bringing aboard additional equipment and/or adapting the ship’s
operational procedures regarding safety and the prevention of
pollution of the marine environment.
The administrative steps to be followed for polar certification,
whether of a new or an existing ship, are no different from those to
be followed for any other certification.
Management facilities made available to shipowners/operators to
attain the Polar Certificate
The DGMM has procedures, manuals (some currently being drafted)
and other working documents for use by the Maritime Authorities,
which are responsible for making shipboard certification visits and
for providing any necessary assistance or management support to
interested parties.
The DGMM Training Plan includes a specific module on polar
certification, with an annex containing a checklist for polar
certification.
For the certification of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, this checklist
was provided to the operator in advance so that a prior assessment
could be made of the scope of the work that would be required for
the ship to attain certification as a polar vessel.
Experience of the Spanish Maritime Administration: Certification of
the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa
To date, Spain, as a Flag State, has only certified one ship, the RV
Sarmiento de Gamboa, under Category C of the Polar Code.
The Sarmiento de Gamboa was delivered in 2008 by the Freire
Shipyard in Vigo; this ship belongs to and is operated by the
Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), affiliated with the
Ministry of Science and Innovation.
The ship was designed and built as a multidisciplinary scientific
platform, and originally certified by the Spanish Maritime
Administration under SOLAS as a cargo ship and as a ship for
special purposes, becoming the most high-powered research vessel
among those ships managed under the aegis of the Ministry of
Science and Innovation.
Since the entry into force of the Polar Code, and to expand Spanish
research activities in the Antarctic, it was decided to certify the
Sarmiento de Gamboa under that Code, taking advantage of its
flexibility and goal-based focus. This certification was carried out in
2018, enabling the ship to go on oceanographic campaigns within
the area of Spain’s Antarctic bases, around the South Shetland
Islands.
Due to its structure and design, the Sarmiento de Gamboa meets the
requirements for operating, within certain limitations, in the zones
covered by the Code, such that the ship’s Polar Certificate confines
operations in the Antarctic to the area north of 63ºS, during the
Antarctic summer. The Sarmiento de Gamboa is only authorized to
sail in ice-free waters, and is not authorized to sail at low air
temperatures nor at high latitudes; under these authorized
conditions, the ship’s stability and the functioning of equipment on
board will not be compromised, and will comply with the Polar
Code.
Since the ship’s construction, the Sarmiento de Gamboa has
complied with all MARPOL provisions, having the relevant
International Oil Pollution Prevention (IOPP), International Air
Pollution Prevention (IAPP) and International Sewage Pollution
Prevention (ISPP) certificates, inu addition to complying with the
provisions on the prevention of garbage pollution.
Most controversial aspects of the certification of the Sarmiento de
Gamboa
Goal-based standards
The Polar Code has four chapters (Ship Structure, Machinery
Installations, Fire Safety/Protection and Life-Saving Appliances and
Arrangements) which may be applied not by complying with their
associated regulations but rather with their functional requirements
through an alternative project. This is the main difference between
the application of this Code compared with that of other standards
with which we are more familiar.
In the case of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, functional criteria were
not used; rather, operational limits were established, which
facilitated the process.
Polar Service Temperature requirements
The Polar Service Temperature (PST) is a determining factor due to
its crucial importance to the application of the Polar Code, and is
calculated using the temperature data set from the past 10 years in
the zone of operation during the months of operation.
In the case of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, the calculations were
based on a report from Spain’s National Meteorological Agency
(AEMET), which is responsible for the development,
implementation and provision of the meteorological services of the
Spanish State and which, furthermore, has for the past 25 years
operated and maintained weather stations of reference at Spain’s
Antarctic bases.
Since the navigable routes necessarily run through zones in which
there is no data from direct temperature measurement, it is
necessary to extrapolate the data taken from these stations based on
the applicable environmental conditions, establishing a temperature
map that makes it possible to select those of interest. The Code
specifications should be implemented in this manner, and it should
be made clear which extrapolation models are considered
acceptable.
Operational assessment. Development of risk assessment models
The operational assessment set forth in Section 1.5 of Chapter 1 of
Part I-A is considered a core issue in the Polar Code.
The RV Sarmiento de Gamboa is an existing ship that was not
designed for polar navigation and, as has already been stated, its
certification necessarily entailed the establishment of a number of
operational limits to preclude the risks inherent in polar navigation
(e.g. ice, low temperatures, high latitudes), and it was therefore
unnecessary to carry out the risk assessments, the lack of models for
which has been commented on.
The problem is that to date, and based on Spain's experience, with
regard to the hazards listed in Section 3 of the Polar Code’s
Introduction and requiring study, the only risk assessment model
that has been implemented is that for ice hazards (Polar
Operational Limit Assessment Risk Indexing System, or POLARIS, in
MSC.1/Circ.1519).
Without a standard assessment model for the other hazards (e.g.
low temperatures, high latitudes) it can be very difficult for
operators to carry out risk assessments and for the relevant
administrations to analyse them, considering that the second
greatest hazard would be that of sailing in zones with low air
temperatures, due to their implications for the ship’s structure.
Certification of life-saving equipment and arrangements for polar
conditions
The Polar Code requires that life-saving equipment and systems be
fully operational at the PST during the maximum expected rescue
time (never less than 5 days).
The problem with this equipment is the lack of corresponding
testing standards under these conditions. Moreover, the certificates
for conventional equipment do not indicate the temperature limits
for the product’s use, the conclusion being that very few current
standards guarantee that they would be operational at the PST.
It would be desirable to link the Polar Code to testing standards
that could serve as a benchmark so that it would be possible to find
equipment on the market with a clear range of applicability, based
on a temperature and a time.
The RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, does not operate at low
temperatures, and therefore the ship’s PST is never below the
temperature limit for conventional equipment testing.
Comparison of requirements for ships classified as Category C,
which has much lower requirements with regard to times and
needs, very different from those ships to be classified as Category A
Category C ships may essentially have variable requirements based
on the eight different kinds of waters included in this category (risk
of ice impact), PST, and latitude of operations. Certification
therefore, may range from a document review—when the
establishment of operational limits mitigates all hazards inherent in
polar navigation (which could extend to practically every steel-
hulled ship with an average construction standard)—to much
higher certification levels entailing the verification of the hull
scantling, ice strengthening, suction design, materials and
operational temperature limit of motor fluids in essential systems
depending on the PST, the installation of appliances to prevent
essential systems and equipment from freezing, as well as the
carrying of the Polar Water Operational Manual (PWOM) and other
related documents.
Necessary modifications, life-saving equipment acquired, how
operations for the Antarctic campaign are reflected in the PWOM,
etc.
The Sarmiento de Gamboa is an example of a conventional ship
certified for polar navigation in which the mitigation of risk is
absolute due to the operational limits established: the ship may only
sail in the Antarctic to the north of 63ºS, during the Antarctic
summer, in ice-free waters; i.e. restricted to lower latitudes, outside
of low temperature zones, and where there is no possibility of
encountering ice. The equipment that had to be brought on board
included liferafts that were specially designed to ensure the launch
mechanisms will not freeze, personal survival kits, and equipment
for communications with aircraft. Moreover, a PWOM had to be
drafted, and the MARPOL procedures with which the ship already
complied had to be adapted to a polar environment.
Training of onboard personnel
In the case of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, pursuant to Section 3
of Chapter 12 of Part I-A1 of the Polar Code, and taking into
account the type of ship, Class C classification, and operational
limitations in polar waters, it was not necessary for the ship’s
masters, chief mates and officers in charge of a navigational watch
to be certified under the provisions of Regulation V/4 of the
amended STCW-78 Convention and Section A-V/4 of the Training
Code.
At the time when the Sarmiento de Gamboa was certified, a
national law had not been promulgated in Spain to regulate the
necessary conditions and courses for obtaining a competency
certificate in basic and advanced training for ships operating in
polar waters. Directive 2019/1159/EU specifies 2 August 2021 as
the date for its transposition into national law.
Nevertheless, an agreement was reached and it was considered
prudent for masters and officers in charge of a navigational watch
to obtain the basic training certificates provided for in Regulation
V/4 of STCW as amended by the Polar Code. The officers received
the necessary training at a nautical academy in Latvia.
