Progress and plan towards eradication of the Non-native flies in
King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Progress and plan towards eradication of the Non-native Flies in
King George Island, South Shetland Islands
Information Paper submitted by the Chile, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Uruguay
Summary
Non-native flies (NNF, Trichocera maculipennis) have colonised
several station sewage treatment plants on King George Island,
South Shetland Islands. Chile, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation and Uruguay would provide to the Parties our
achievement, progress of international collaboration up to now and
future plans to develop effective NNF eradication manual.
To assess the genetic variability of NNF populations in King George
Island (KGI), DNA barcode fragments of mitochondrial DNA COI
and 12 polymorphic microsatellite loci were used. Based on the
analyses, we assume that there were at least two separate NNF
introduction events from different localities. Despite the low levels
of diversity and the geographically short distances between the
stations in KGI, the microsatellite results suggest the presence of
four genetically distinct populations.
We tried to ascertain if there are established populations of NNF in
natural ecosystems of KGI and surrounding islets. For this purpose,
twelve different-type organic-rich wet habitats (potentially most
attractive for NNF and suitable for its larvae development) situated
in ten localities were examined for the presence of NNF immatures
or traces/remains of NNF. No data was found testifying to the
presence of NNF populations in natural Antarctic environment. We
also used environmental DNA (eDNA) to identify the traces of it in
the ecosystems. Freshwater and sediment samples from KGI were
examined to test the presence of NNF DNA fragments. So far, no
positive sign has been detected.
To understand the communication system of NNF, we examined the
olfactory and visual sensory systems of NNF. The electron
microscope observations and electrophysiological recordings
indicate that NNF has sensitive and selective olfactory sensory
system, suggesting that olfactory communication is important in
NNF’s main activities such as mating and oviposition. The
electroretinnogram recordings have also indicated that adult NNF’s
well-developed compound eyes are highly sensitive to green and
blue lights as well as UV light. We will complete an eradication
manual for NNF by development of species-specific attractant
combining olfactory and visual sensory cues, pesticide impregnated
netting, and environmentally sound tools to eliminate NNF larvae.
To prevent further introduction and spread of NNF in KGI, we
urgently need to establish unique source localities and pathways of
introduction, as well as extend our monitoring program in
collaboration with all stations and facilities to develop successful
NNF management strategies.
Background
Within the past decade there have been reports of sewage treatment
plant infestations by the boreal trichocerid fly Trichocera
maculipennis at research stations around Maxwell Bay (Guardia
Nacional/Fildes Bay), King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo, all of
which lie within 10 km of one another (ATCM XXXIX – WP52). The
Republic of Korea, United Kingdom, Chile and Uruguay
recommended that the CEP promoted a co-ordinated international
response by encouraging Parties with stations on King George
Island to check their sewage treatment plants for non-native
invertebrate infestations and, if present, join collaborative research
to identify and determine the origin of these species.
As the first step of a co-ordinated international response to manage
this non-native fly (NNF), in 2017 most of the overwintering
stations on King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo checked their
station buildings, facilities, and surrounding areas in response to the
survey entitled ‘A short questionnaire on Non-native Flies at
Antarctic Stations’. Based on the findings of this survey, the
Republic of Korea, Uruguay, Chile, and the United Kingdom
recommend that the CEP: (1) continues to encourage Parties with
stations on King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo to check their
facilities for non-native flies and to undertake both continuous and
periodic monitoring to indicate, if there are any non-native flies
inhabiting the environment; (2) encourages the Parties to jointly
develop co-ordinated standardized monitoring and eradication
programmes to effectively control the
spread of the flies, and join the collaborative research project; and
(3) asks COMNAP to play a central role in sharing information and
best practices between Parties and other stakeholders (ATCM XL –
WP26). According to that survey, T. maculipennis had been
recorded within or in the surroundings of the following stations:
Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero, Frei, Fildes and King Sejong, without
further confirmation of the presence or absence of the species in the
other stations of King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo.
In the Antarctic summer season 2017/2018 Uruguay, the Republic
of Korea, Chile and the Russian Federation started a pilot
monitoring programme with support from Germany, to track and
avoid the expansion of T. maculipennis in King George Island/Isla
25 de Mayo (ATCM XLI – IP50). The coordinated actions
implemented were installation of 1) adhesive traps inside the
facilities (Artigas, Bellingshausen, Fildes and King Sejong stations)
to identify population trends throughout the year, and 2) pitfall
traps in the surroundings of Artigas and King Sejong stations during
the summer season to assess the presence of the species beyond the
limits of these stations.
In the 2018/2019 season Argentina, Brazil and China joined the
monitoring programme. Adhesive traps installed in Artigas,
Bellingshausen, Carlini, Escudero, Ferraz, Great Wall and King
Sejong stations. During the summer season, pitfall traps were
installed in the surroundings of stations at Fildes Peninsula and
water samples of several lakes were taken to perform analyses using
environmental DNA techniques. Genetic analyses were also
performed to assess population structure from individuals collected
in Artigas, Escudero and King Sejong stations (ATCM XLII – IP120).
In the 2019/2020 season the Russian Federation started research to
locate larval habitats of T. maculipennis in the anthropogenic
habitats (indoors and outdoors) located in the territory of
Bellingshausen station and to assess presence of this species
immatures in selected natural habitats on Fildes Peninsula, King
George Island and on surrounding islets. In addition, that season
Peru, Poland and Spain joined the joint monitoring, installing sticky
traps in Arctowski and Machu Picchu (King George Island/Isla 25
de Mayo), Gabriel de Castilla (Deception Island) and Juan Carlos I
(Livingston Island) stations.
We would provide to the Parties our achievement and progress of
international collaboration and plans to develop effective NNF
eradication manual.
Genetic variability analyses of NNF
Identifying the origin (source locality) of NNF is a crucial step in
designing management strategy, and the level of genetic variation is
a key factor influencing the longevity and adaptive potential of
founder individuals (Lee, 2002; Genton et al., 2006). To assess the
genetic variability of NNF populations in King George Island, DNA
barcode fragments of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) COI
(cytochrome c oxidase subunit I) and 12 polymorphic microsatellite
loci were used.
For the mtDNA (COI) analysis, we analysed 10 NNF individuals
taken from four stations (Frei, Bellingshausen, Artigas, King Sejong)
during 2017/2018 - 2019/2020 austral summer seasons and one
individual of the same species from Spitsbergen, Svalbard Islands in
the Arctic. Three COI sequences including the sequence from Polish
Arctowski station uploaded at NCBI were analysed together. As the
result, two distinct lineages were identified from the mtDNA
analysis. Lineage I is associated with the Arctic and Polish
sequences, while Lineage II is associated with the Northern
American. The genetic variation (3%) existing between two lineages
indicates possible population structures in native ranges and
multiple introductions of NNF from at least two different origins
(Annex Figure 1). A total of five haplotypes are examined and
distribution varies depending on the stations (Annex Figure 2). Only
Chilean Frei base is occupied by both lineages, which is anticipated
in terms of its position as a transport hub in King George Island
(Potocka and Krzemińska 2018). Based on mtDNA analysis, we
assume there were at least two separate NNF introduction events
from different localities. Annex provides further details with figures.
Microsatellite variation was investigated in five populations from
the stations (Artigas, Bellingshausen, Escudero, Frei, King Sejong).
Microsatellites provide more power to discern population structure
even in low genetic diversity due to their high mutation rate.
Despite the low levels of diversity and the geographically short
distances between the stations, the result shows the evidence of 4
genetically distinct populations (Annex Figure 3).
The founder effect, in which a small number of flies settle to form a
new population in each station while losing genetic diversity from
the original population, explains this phenomenon. Its reproduction
has been
reliant on isolated sewage treatment facilities, and as a result of the
factor, there has been substantial population differentiation in each
station. The results of genetic analyses are being prepared for
publication.
Possibility of survival of NNF in Antarctic environment
Although there is no indication that NNF completes its life cycle
under outdoor conditions in King George Island, future successful
expansion of the cold-tolerant NNF into terrestrial and semiaquatic
organic-rich natural habitats cannot be excluded with global
warming. T. maculipennis is already a persistent non-native species
in the natural environment of some sub-Antarctic islands (Frenot et
al., 2005).
The establishment of NNF in natural Antarctic habitats could be
catastrophic as saprophagous larvae can alter the existing
environments. The analysis of the published data on life history and
larval habitats of T. maculipennis (NNF), other species of
Trichoceridae, and own observations on anthropogenic larval
habitats of NNF on KGI enabled us to suppose that future successful
expansion of NNF into natural Antarctic environments is possible.
According to existing knowledge, the larvae are saprophagous, i.e.
they feed on dead organic matter. The larval habitats include
terrestrial wet and semiaquatic organic-rich substrata, which can be
from wet to semiliquid.
Studies by Republic of Korea
The multi-year monitoring of King Sejong station indicates that the
occurrence of NNF has been persistent with two adult peaks each
year. Currently, the distribution of NNF appears to be limited to the
station, and we do not yet have any evidence that larval breeding
takes place elsewhere except two sewage treatment facilities in the
station. However, indoor and outdoor behavioral tests indicate that
the edge of freshwater lakes around the station can be an ideal
place for the oviposition and pre- and post-embryonic developments
of NNF, once temperature condition becomes favourable. Female
NNF prefer laying eggs in the lake water, and NNF larvae actively
feed on various organic matters in the edge of freshwater lake. In
contrast, the predation of young NNF larvae by native arthropods
such as springtails and midges were observed, and parasitism by
microscopic organisms present in the freshwater was also found.
Although long larval period, and predation and parasitism by highly
populated native organisms make it less likely that NNF completes
its life cycle in the nearby freshwater lakes, more information is
needed regarding potential survival of NNF in Antarctic
environment. At present, the most limiting factor for NNF’s outdoor
survival appears to be the long larval period that would make it
difficult to grow to pupae before the lake gets frozen.
Studies by Russian Federation
The laboratory tests conducted on KGI in the 2019/2020 season
confirmed that the larvae of NNF are able to complete development
in organic-rich substrata taken from natural habitats of KGI.
In the same season, we tried to ascertain if established populations
of NNF already existed in natural ecosystems of KGI (Fildes
Peninsula) and surrounding islets. For this purpose, twelve
different-type organic-rich wet habitats situated in ten localities
were examined for the presence of NNF immatures or traces/
remains of NNF. We have chosen the habitats potentially most
attractive for NNF and suitable for its larvae development,
according to the published data on life history and larval habitats of
NNF and own observations on larval bionomics of NNF. The
habitats examined were most similar to the known natural (boreal)
habitats of this species, as well as to the few known anthropogenic
habitats of this species in the Antarctic. Four sites examined were
situated near Bellingshausen station, while the other sites were at a
distance of several kilometers from any station. In all habitats and
localities, no specimens of NNF were found. No remains of larvae,
pupae or adults were found either. Hence, we can preliminarily
conclude that so far no evidence has been found for NNF
development in natural habitats of King George Island, and for
colonization of Antarctic ecosystems by NNF.
Studies by Uruguay
The multi-year monitoring of Artigas shows a persistent occurrence
of NNF, with higher numbers of individuals captured during the
summer season. 93% of total captures were recorded in the septic
tank of the staff accommodation building.
Through the use of pitfall traps around Artigas station, some
individuals have been recorded outside the station; however no
larvae presence or colonisation of environments outside the
buildings has been detected.
As an additional control measure to the UV traps, in the 2019/2020
season, an air fan extractor with a mesh at the free end was
installed at the site with the most individuals to retain the sucked
individuals. As reported by station staff, this system is very
effective, capturing a high number of individuals. Due to the
pandemic, data from last season's adhesive traps could not be
processed, so the evaluation of this new measure based on
statistical data is not yet available.
Furthermore, the pandemic situation prevented the start of
experiments on eco-physiology and morphology of the species,
planned to be carried out in Artigas during the summer season
2020/2021, which are expected to be carried out next season.
Environmental DNA analysis
Identifying the presence and distribution of invasive species is
critical for invasive species research, and species detection methods
based on environmental DNA (eDNA) have emerged as new
monitoring tools (Goldberg et al., 2016). We examined freshwater
and sediment samples from King George Island to test the presence
of NNF DNA fragments. So far, no positive result has been reported
but we must continue to monitor the situation. Because of global
warming and the growing possibility of NNF persisting outside of
stations, continuous and frequent monitoring of the occurrence of
NNF in the natural environment is needed.
Progress of eradication programme
The study at different research stations in King George Island
indicates that UV traps are much more attractive to NNF adults
than delta traps with white adhesive bases or white adhesive trap
alone. It also shows that the conventional UV light bulbs are more
attractive to NNF than UV LEDs. Although UV traps seem to be
suitable for the monitoring of NNF, however, more powerful
attractant and more convenient traps would be needed for
eradication programme since effective lure-and-kill and delimitation
with potent attractant is essential in successful eradication.
Currently, UV traps require electricity for UV light and electrical
fan, which limits trap placement. Species-specific odour bait can be
an ideal attractant, alone or in combination with visual cues, in
eradication programme, as shown in a number of successful
eradications of invasive insects.
The electron microscope observations and electrophysiological
recordings indicate that NNF has sensitive and selective olfactory
sensory system, suggesting that olfactory communication is
important in NNF’s main activities such as mating and oviposition.
Based on this, we have initiated our effort to develop odour-based
attractants for NNF: headspace samples have been prepared,
electroantennogram recording system constructed, and odour-baited
trapping system established at the King Sejong station. In the
preliminary study using this system, it has been found that 1) NNF
adults have well developed olfactory sensilla on the antennae and
maxillary palps, 2) the antennae of NNF are specialized for
detecting a narrow range of volatile compounds, and 3) the
headspace samples collected from the sewage treatment facility
contain highly olfactory active compounds for NNF. The
electroretinnogram recordings have also indicated that adult NNF’s
well-developed compound eyes are highly sensitive to green and
blue lights as well as UV light.
In the 2019/2020 season the larval habitats and larval populations
were found on Bellingshausen station. The larvae were found only
indoors, in a single building. No larvae, pupae or their remains
were found in anthropogenically affected habitats outdoors. The
recommendations have been formulated for eradication of existing
larval populations and preventive measures for their re-
establishment in future. We suppose that absence of available
indoor larval habitats is critical for successful eradication of existing
populations of T. maculipennis.
Future plans
Over the next few years, we will complete an eradication manual
for NNF and initiate eradication practice according to the manual.
To complete the eradication manual,
new attractant will be developed by combining olfactory and visual
sensory cues,
pesticide-impregnated netting will be prepared to prevent the
movement of adult NNF between inside and outside of sewage
treatment facility, and
environmentally sound tools will be introduced to eliminate NNF
larvae in the sewage treatment facility.
To develop new attractants, olfactory-active compounds will first be
identified, then the chemical structure of the olfactory-active
compounds will be elucidated by chemical analysis. Attractiveness
of the olfactory-active compounds will be evaluated through
trapping tests individually and in combination.
Pesticide-impregnated netting will be carefully selected and
designed so that the pesticide does not spill over to the environment
while maintaining effective contact-toxicity for NNF adults, for
which necessary parameters can be measured using lab-reared and
field-collected colonies of NNF or related species.
While adult NNF are managed, NNF larvae present inside the
sewage treating tanks will be removed by using non-toxic means
such as targeted spray of hot water, suffocating larvae with
vegetable oil, and ultrasonic treatment. The effectiveness of these
tools has been yet to be evaluated over the next couple of years.
To prevent further introduction and spread of NNF in King George
Island, we urgently need to establish unique source localities and
pathways of introduction, as well as extend our monitoring program
in collaboration with all stations and facilities in King George Island
to develop successful NNF management strategies.
Supporting documentation
Earl, D. A. and vonHoldt, B. M. 2012. STRUCTURE HARVESTER: a
website and program for visualizing STRUCTURE output and
implementing the Evanno method. Conservation Genetics Resources
4(2): 359-361.
Facon, B., Genton, B. J. Shykoff, J., Jarne, P., Estoup, A., David, P.
2006. A general eco-evolutionary framework for understanding
bioinvasions. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 21(3): 130-135.
Frenot, Y., Chown, S.L., Whinam, J., Selkirk, P., Convey, P.,
Skotnicki, M., Bergstrom, D. 2005. Biological invasions in the
Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications. Biological Reviews 80:
45-72.
Goldberg, C. S., et al. 2016. Critical considerations for the
application of environmental DNA methods to detect aquatic
species. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7(11): 1299-1307.
Lee, C. E. 2002. Evolutionary genetics of invasive species. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 17(8): 386-391.
Potocka, M. and Krzemińska, E. 2018. Trichocera maculipennis
(Diptera)—an invasive species in Maritime Antarctica. PeerJ 6:
e5408.
Pritchard, J. K., and Wen, X. 2002. Documentation for STRUCTURE
software: version 2. Chicago, IL: Department of Human Genetics,
University of Chicago.
