Closing of the Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station for tourist traffic
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing renovation of
station facilities
Closing of the Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station for tourist traffic
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing renovation of
station facilities
An Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing renovation of
Station facilities, the Polish Antarctic Station is closed to tourist
traffic. This decision remains valid until further notice.
Background
The Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station is a year-round research
facility managed by the Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of
the Polish Academy of Sciences. Ongoing and previous research in
the fields of biology, oceanography, geology, geomorphology,
glaciology, meteorology, and seismology, have been undertaken at
the station. Continuous ecological, glaciological, hydrological,
meteorological, and marine monitoring programs are also
conducted at and around the station. For over 40 years, the station
has provided technical and logistic support for Polish and
international scientific groups conducting research in the Antarctic.
As a consequence of the current pandemic and ongoing renovation
of the station, we are forced to take action to maintain the ongoing
research, as well as the safety of personnel, at the station. We are
committed to maintaining and enhancing the quality of Polish
Antarctic scientific research; however, current circumstances dictate
that our ability to support science and building process is extremely
limited. Nevertheless, long-term science monitoring, essential
operational activities, and planned maintenance will go ahead as
previously planned. The station has limited medical facilities,
therefore, in the event of any emergencies, the crew of the station,
builders, and visitors are completely dependent on rescuers from
other nations stationed on King George Island. To ensure the safety,
health, and well-being of Polish scientific expedition members,
building workers, and visitors, as well as to keep Antarctica
COVID-19-free, the Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station will be closed
for touristic traffic until further notice.
