Chile’s experience in the implementation of the COVID-19 protocol
for control and monitoring
English version provided by the author
Chile’s experience in the implementation of the COVID-19 protocol
for control and monitoring
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Background
Since the beginning of the SAR COV2/COVID-19 Pandemic, Chile
saw the need to coordinate all antarctic operators around a
procedure to safely enter Antarctica via Punta Arenas that allowed
an effective commitment to a general framework.
Accordingly, since March 2020, the Chilean antarctic state
operators (Chilean Army, Chilean Navy, Chilean Air Force, and
Chilean Antarctic Institute, INACH) and the Antarctic Division of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, they agreed to develop the
"COVID-19 Protocol for control and monitoring passengers and
cargo transit between Punta Arenas and the Antarctic Peninsula".
Additionally, this working group involved the participation of
Magellan Region and Chilean Antarctica authorities, including the
health authorities responsible for the public health planning and the
regional pandemic control.
Subsequently, on 3 August 2020, the Protocol, approved and agreed
at the national level, was communicated internationally through the
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and
the Antarctic Treaty Parties through “Circular Number 15” of the
Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty COMNAP formed an
international committee to address the emergency, supported by
specialists from various National Antarctic Programs. The
suggestions from this committee are based on pre-deployment
isolation (quarantine) and testing procedures for all personnel of
the National Antarctic Program, stating: "The isolation managed if
taken seriously by all involved and carried out appropriately, is the
best defense we have against the spread of coronavirus at this time."
Continuing with the isolation period of "... at least 14 days..." before
deployment to Antarctica. .
Therefore, National Antarctic operators and National Antarctic
Programs (NAP), using Punta Arenas and other Chilean cities as
their gateway to Antarctica, had an early protocol validated by the
competent authorities in Chile, as well as internationally. As
COMNAP pointed out in their communication before the
massification of vaccines, the full respect of the Protocols appeared
to be the only effective tool to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in
Antarctica.
The Protocol seeks to reduce the possibilities of a person traveling
to Antarctica carrying the virus, based on three essential aspects
that are indispensable to comply with:
Personal protection and prevention measures.
Strict and individual quarantine in special facilities located in Punta
Arenas (or the last port before Antarctica)
Two negative PCR tests, at the beginning and the end of quarantine.
At the same time, the preventive isolation of all Antarctic bases was
agreed upon, including the adjacent bases.
INACH, in close collaboration with the Regional Ministerial
Secretariat of Health of the Magellan Region and Chilean
Antarctica, and under strict application of the protocol, has
coordinated the sampling and analysis for PCR tests of all
individuals in quarantine, including the scientific and logistic
personal of other NAP’s operating via Punta Arenas.
According to the Protocol, the isolation is strict, in single rooms,
with food provided to the rooms, and an absolute prohibition of
using common spaces. Each PCR test is taken 72-48 hours before
the quarantine ends, and the departure to Antarctica begins to
ensure the individuals' health status before their departure. In
addition, Sanitary corridors are coordinated to transport the
passengers from the quarantine facilities to the airport or pier.
All staff participating in the Chilean Antarctic Scientific Expedition
(SAE) had to quarantine at the facilities chosen for this purpose,
including Punta Arenas-based staff. Additionally, all contact in the
sanitary corridor was prohibited, such as family farewells or
transporting packages to Antarctica which have not gone through
the transporting cargo protocol.
To keep the information on the protocol updated, INACH uploaded
Spanish and English versions of the simplified protocol to their
website (https://www.inach.cl/inach/?page_id=29086), as well as
all the documentation that each NAP must send to the Antarctic
Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and INACH, 30 days
before the trip.
On December 17, 2020, through Circular of the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty No. 25, Chile informed the States Parties the
following: "On December 16, 2020, the Chilean Antarctic Institute
(INACH) has been informed of positive Covid-19 cases in people
who would have disembarked in the ports of Punta Arenas and
Talcahuano from the vessel "Sargento Aldea" from de Chilean Navy,
which had operations in the O'Higgins Antarctic Station in the
Antarctic Peninsula. For this reason, the Chilean Antarctic Program
has decided to monitor the health status of those at its stations and
perform PCR tests for COVID-19, in coordination with Chile's
Health Authorities".
As shown above, Chile immediately notified the Antarctic Treaty
Parties about the situation. Moreover, rapid detection and contact
tracing of the cases were possible thanks to the travel of health
professionals from Punta Arenas to King George Island on December
18, 2020, evacuating all the confirmed and probable cases to the
city of Punta Arenas in the following days. In March 2021, a
vaccination process was carried out for all Chilean personnel in
Antarctica. The respective investigations at local level are currently
underway to determine how the outbreak occurred and identify
possible gaps in the Protocol.
Final Considerations
Chile organized a Protocol of entry to Antarctica through the
national territory and informed the Parties. The National Antarctic
Programs were informed of these measures and restrictions adopted
to prevent Covid-19 from entering into the Antarctic Peninsula area,
which has been updated according to the global and national
pandemic evolution. The Protocol allowed the entry to Antarctica
through Chile of about ten NAP during the last summer without any
significant drawbacks. Furthermore, the Chilean experience,
including the detection of COVID-19 cases and the possible gaps
detected in the program, will improve the coordination mechanisms
of the different entities involved in the implementation and
supervision of this Protocol and the exchange of experiences with
other gateways cities.
Through the communication channels established, Chile will
continue reporting to the National Antarctic Programs and parties
the developments in the implementation of this Protocol for the
next Antarctic campaign.
