Report of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) 2019–2021
Report of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) 2019–2021
Introduction
AFoPS was established in May 2004 when the three Directors-
General of the polar research institutes of China, Japan, and the
Republic of Korea gathered in Shanghai to encourage and facilitate
cooperation for the advance of polar sciences among countries in
the Asian region. Later, India, Malaysia, and Thailand joined AFoPS.
Much cooperation among Asian countries, such as inviting
observers for each training course for polar expeditions,
collaborative field research in the Arctic and Antarctic, and joint
publication of the AFoPS special issue have been carried out with
the support of this research network. Further information on AFoPS
members, structures, etc. can be found at www.afops.org. This
report has been prepared by Japan to update the new developments
as chair country for AFoPS from 2018 to 2020.
2019 AFoPS Annual General Meeting
The Annual General Meeting was held from October 30 to
November 1, 2019, at the National Institute of Polar Research
(NIPR) in Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Takuji Nakamura, the Director-General
of NIPR, as the Chair of AFoPS, welcomed 18 overseas participants
from AFoPS member countries and New Zealand as an observer
along with 30 Japanese participants to the AGM. Plenary lectures
and national reports, including updates on each national program,
were presented by the members on the first day. A special session
titled “AFoPS Collaborations from Antarctic to the Arctic” was held
in the morning on the second day, followed by the Business
Meeting, closed to nonmembers.
The Business Meeting was attended by 12 overseas participants and
5 NIPR participants. With the handing-over of the secretariat from
the Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) to NIPR, it was
reported that the AFoPS Web server was transferred from PRIC to
NIPR. NIPR proposed that it can offer technical maintenance for
years after the chairmanship to avoid efforts to relocate the web
server every two years at the moment of handover of the
chairmanship. It was reported that an introduction of AFoPS was
presented at the Forum of Arctic Research Operators (FARO) by
NIPR according to a request from FARO’s EXCOM during ASSW in
May 2019. Members agreed to continue to increase the number of
coauthored papers between the member countries through
collaborative research projects. The Chair announced that the next
AFoPS AGM was to be held in Kyoto, Japan, in autumn 2020.
AFoPS informal online meeting at ASSW 2020
The AFoPS informal online meeting was held on March 30, 2020,
organized by NIPR, with 18 participants from five member
countries. Members from Malaysia could not join the meeting
because of network problems.
The Chair introduced the preparation status of the AGM scheduled
for September in Kyoto and announced that the AGM should be
held before March 2021 in case the schedule was postponed due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. It was proposed by the Korea Polar
Research Institute (KOPRI) that AFoPS be added to the International
Coordination Group list of IASC, as it was not included in the
group. The AFoPS Secretariat informed the meeting that Malaysia
and Thailand were being asked to join the Third Arctic Science
Ministerial (ASM3), to be cohosted by Iceland and Japan in Tokyo
in 2021.
AFoPS informal online meeting in July 2020
The AFoPS informal online meeting was held on July 29, 2020,
hosted by NIPR, to share the situation of COVID-19 impacts on the
activity of each institute and country and the national polar
programs and share the proposals and views on when and how to
hold the next AGM, scheduled for September. Representatives and
coordinators from all the member countries attended the meeting.
Each member reported that under the COVID-19 pandemic, national
Antarctic programs were to be canceled or mostly canceled for the
summer research projects, with year-round observations to
continue. The editorial schedule was announced for the fourth
AFoPS Special Issue of the journal Environmental Research by
KOPRI. The Chair proposed holding an online AFoPS Business
Meeting in September, and an AFoPS
Science Symposium, possibly online, with national report updates
on polar programs after and during COVID-19, scheduled in
February–March 2021.
2020 online Business Meeting
The online Business Meeting was held on September 22, 2020,
organized by NIPR. Twenty-five participants from six member
countries attended the meeting. Activity reports of AFoPS in other
forums were presented, and scholarship programs of member
countries for collaborative research and those of SCAR, COMNAP,
IAATO, and CCAMLR were introduced.
KOPRI introduced the schedule of the fourth AFoPS Special Issue of
Environmental Research with the theme of “Climate Change and
Adaptation of Life in the Polar Regions.” The call for submissions
was to be open from January 1 to May 20, aiming for publication in
October or November 2021. The Chair announced the transfer of
the chairmanship to Malaysia and Dr. Azizan Abu Samah of the
National Antarctic Research Center, University of Malaya, as an
AFoPS representative of Malaysia accepted the proposal. The Chair
proposed managing the website of AFoPS after transferring the
chairmanship to Malaysia, and all members agreed.
Online Science Symposium 2021
The online Science Symposium was held from March 3 to 4, 2021,
organized by NIPR, with a focus on the stimulation of joint
observations in the polar regions among Asian countries. Due to the
influence of COVID-19, it was held online for the first time and
attended by 61 participants from 11 countries. Six member
countries (China, Japan, Korea, India, Malaysia, and Thailand)
presented their latest results in the “Scientific Projects for Future
Collaborations” session. Collaborative research projects among the
members were reported. Also, sessions were planned to introduce
research from Australia, Egypt, Iran, Sri Lanka, and Turkey, who
participated as observers. Through the lively question-and-answer
session, the symposium successfully provided an opportunity to
exchange information and ideas for new collaborative research. It
was a great pleasure as the host institute that this first online
symposium was very effective and that there were many positive
comments from the participants, including the expectation to hold
such meetings repeatedly.
A Member Countries’ Meeting was held following the symposium on
March 4, inviting the AFoPS chair, Dr. Azizan Abu Samah, as a
chair of the meeting. Representatives of the AFoPS members
exchanged information and views on the current status of polar
observations under the COVID-19 pandemic and discussed the
future activities of the Forum. As the only polar research network
among Asian countries, AFoPS plans to promote advanced polar
research continuously and contribute to further cooperation under
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Finally, we would like to note that the two-year period in this
report was a transition between the COVID-19 free year and the
year under COVID-19. AFoPS is successfully being adjusted to such
a pre- and under-COVID time. However, the members do
understand the importance of in-person meeting opportunities, and
are looking forward to the time to organize such meetings as well.
