United States Report of Inspection, February 2020
United States Report of Inspection, February 2020
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
The United States conducted an inspection pursuant to the Antarctic
Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic
Treaty (the Protocol) from February 7 – 10, 2020. The attached
report describes the observations and conclusions of the Inspection
Team. A summary of those observations and conclusions is included
in this Information Paper.
Introduction
The United States conducted its fifteenth inspection since the
Antarctic Treaty entered into force in 1961 and the first since
December 2012. From February 7 – 10, 2020, the U.S. Inspection
Team inspected Mario Zucchelli Station and Boulder Clay runway
(Italy – ITA); Jang Bogo Station (Republic of Korea – ROK); the
station under construction on Inexpressible Island (People’s
Republic of China – PRC); and Antarctic Specially Protected Area
(ASPA) 161, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea.
The United States conducted the inspection pursuant to Article VII
of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and Article 14 of the Protocol.
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol
grant to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties the right of
unannounced inspection of stations, installations, equipment,
aircraft and vessels in Antarctica. Article VII states that designated
observers shall have complete freedom of access at any time to any
and all areas of Antarctica, including via aerial observation. Article
14 of the Protocol also provides that inspections should promote the
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems, and compliance with the Protocol.
General Conclusions
Prior to the inspection, the United States reviewed information from
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), and national government websites.
During the inspection, the Inspection Team used checklists
developed by the ATCM to guide the observers. After the
inspection, the United States provided Parties whose facilities had
been inspected an opportunity to comment on the draft report and
took into account the comments received. On the basis of that
information, the Inspection Team reached the following general
observations and conclusions.
The Inspection Team was warmly welcomed and given complete
freedom of access to all areas of the three stations inspected and
found no violations of Treaty provisions reserving Antarctica solely
for peaceful purposes. Each of the stations was well-managed and
impressive in terms of their general facilities and professional
character. Officials from each welcomed international collaboration
on scientific research and were committed to increasing use of
renewable energy at their station. The Team commended the
collaboration amongst the PRC, Italy and the Republic of Korea to
establish a new ASPA at Inexpressible Island (ATCM XLII, WP 47,
Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at
Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea).
The Inspection Team encourages all Parties to continue to increase
scientific efficiency through international collaboration, including
the submission of underlying data to relevant collaborative
databases and the publication of peer-reviewed scientific findings.
The Team also encourages all Parties to share with other Parties,
particularly those considering building new or upgrading existing
stations, their successes and challenges in installing and using
renewable energy.
The Inspection Team encourages the station under construction on
Inexpressible Island to consider scheduling communications with
the nearby ITA and ROK stations to further develop its emergency
contingency plans. It encourages all Parties to ensure
communications connectivity, including providing to COMNAP
reliable contact information and monitoring communications
equipment.
The Inspection Team encourages all Parties to maintain or increase
the information they share to the ATCM and public about their
operations in Antarctica. In particular, the Team calls attention to
the significant disparity in the use of the Electronic Information
Exchange System (EIES) by national programs. It also strongly
encourages the PRC to submit as soon as possible a final CEE, as
required under Annex I, Article 3(6) to the Protocol. The Team
notes that this should have occurred before the construction
activities observed by the Team had started and encourages the PRC
to regularly update the ATCM about the progress of the
construction of the station on Inexpressible Island.
