The Ice Memory Programme
The Ice Memory Programme
Information Paper submitted by France and Italy
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to provide an update about the Ice
Memory Programme within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM), following its initial presentation
during the 42nd ATCM meeting in Prague in 2019. The worldwide
importance of the Ice Memory (IM) Programme, launched in 2015,
was acknowledged by UNESCO (through the solicitation of its
French and Italian National Commissions), calling on its Member
States to support the initiative. The IM Programme features
international scientific collaboration between national Antarctic
programmes.
The first phase of the Programme is currently underway, and
involves collecting ice cores from the deep layers of key endangered
glaciers along the world before they lose their ability to preserve
environmental history in optimal conditions. The second phase of
the Programme involves the long-term storage of these ice cores for
future generations of scientists. The safest long-term storage place
on Earth is the Antarctic plateau, where the ice never melts, even in
summer. Mean annual temperatures are such that cold storage will
be possible for hundreds to thousands of years, even in the current
context of global warming. The IM Programme initiators therefore
intend to store on the Antarctic plateau the precious samples
collected in the endangered glaciers.
Discussions are still needed between ATCM Parties and observers on
the Programme’s next steps, given that collaboration and
endorsement by Parties would be beneficial as the goal of the
Programme is of global importance to humanity. This means
launching a process that complies with the Antarctic Treaty and its
Protocol on Environmental Protection (Madrid Protocol), especially
Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment.
Background
The Ice Memory (IM) Programme was launched by France and Italy
in 2015. Its international dimension has grown following
contributions by Russia and Switzerland. The international scientific
community is now working to make it a global initiative in the
coming years. A notable progress toward this goal was the creation
of a Foundation Ice Memory (FIM) in January 2021, under the
auspice of the Foundation University Grenoble-Alpes in France,
supported actually by 7 founding institutions (4 in France, 2 in
Italy, 1 in Switzerland) and open to new international founders
during the following steps.
At a later stage of the Programme, a governance framework will
need to be defined with involvement of the ATCM Parties which
plan to contribute to the long-term storage of ice cores in
Antarctica, particularly to ensure this complies with the Antarctic
Treaty and the Madrid Protocol.
Goals of the IM Programme
The IM Programme is based on the observation, made 60 years ago,
that the natural snow and ice forming glaciers contains
environmental information for periods ranging from decades to
hundreds of thousands of years. Natural snow and ice are mainly
constituted of water vapour, which condenses and solidifies in the
atmosphere to form snowflakes. During this natural process,
impurities are trapped in snowflakes and buried in snow
precipitation for long periods of time.
Every year, new snow covers earlier precipitation. Under this
accumulated weight, snow layers densify until they become
impermeable ice. The resulting glacier flows towards lower
altitudes, powered by gravity. In mountain ranges, glaciers end up
becoming rivers. In Greenland and Antarctica, they mainly result in
icebergs, which leave the coast and melt in seawater.
Around the world, glaciologists seek to study glaciers that contain
the oldest possible information stored in their depths. When they
identify these glaciers, they drill through them until they reach
bedrock. This drilling results in several sections of ice core
measuring generally one metre in length and 8 to 10 centimetres in
diameter. Their total accumulated length can reach 100 to 250
metres for mountain glaciers, and up to 3,700 metres in Antarctica.
Small sections of these ice cores are used for geochemical and
physics studies in laboratories. They are used to research past
climate conditions (temperature and precipitation levels),
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs), natural
and anthropogenic aerosols, the intensity of desert dust events, sea
ice surface area, radioactive fallout from nuclear testing, volcanic
activity, solar activity, and the intensity of cosmic rays. For
example, ice cores have been used to demonstrate how GHGs affect
natural climate variability, and how human activity has resulted in
accelerating levels of GHGs over the past 200 years.
Although the ice caps in Antarctica and Greenland are not yet
threatened by climate change to the point that they will disappear
in the short term, this is not the case for mountain glaciers at low or
medium latitudes, nor of smaller ice caps in the Arctic or sub-
Antarctic areas. The surface areas and volumes of most glaciers
around the world are shrinking rapidly. As this happens, we are
losing forever precious information on the history of our planet.
The overall goal of the IM Programme is to: 1- Collect an ice core
archive from the deep layers of key endangered glaciers before they
lose their ability to preserve environmental history in optimal
conditions; 2- Store these ice cores on a long-term basis (possibly
hundreds to thousands of years) for future generations of scientists
and humanity in general.
The idea underlying the IM Programme is that scientific ideas and
technologies will continue to evolve in the future, making new
discoveries possible using ice cores. However, for this to happen,
snow and ice cores must be available to future generations of
scientists when valuable glaciers will have gone forever, the
resulting ice cores being protected from the harmful effects of
climate change and becoming the only remains of extremely
precious environmental archives accumulated over centuries to
millennia before global warming definitely affected the glaciers.
Relationship between the IM Programme and ATCM and CEP
activities
The goal of the IM Programme is to ensure the safest possible cold
storage of the ice core archive collected for this Programme. Safe
storage should be guaranteed for the longest possible periods,
possibly up to several centuries to millennia.
Currently, no cold storage chamber is capable of guaranteeing the
conservation of ice cores with 100% certainty. In other words, long-
term conservation is threatened by the risks of technical and
economic failure. Indeed, there are recent examples of commercial
storage failures that led to the definitive loss of previous ice core
archives. Consequently, the IM Programme involves creating a
repository (or series of repositories) in Antarctica, where the ice
core archive will be stored on a long-term basis. The Antarctic
plateau is naturally very cold and does not experience melting, even
during summer in the southern hemisphere. Mean annual
temperatures are such that cold storage will be possible for
hundreds to thousands of years, even in the context of current
global warming scenarios.
France and Italy, which jointly run the Concordia research station
on the Antarctic plateau, have agreed to support the Programme at
Concordia station where ice cores collected as part of the IM
Programme could be transported. This means to give the logistic
assistance in the building and maintenance of the future repository
and in the management of the access and transportation of the ice
cores.
Other interested Parties are warmly welcome to forward proposals
to build repositories on the Antarctic plateau, taking the
commitment to provide the necessary logistical long term means for
construction, transportation, monitoring and maintenance. The
participation of other interested Parties in the building of
repositories could lead to the creation of an international repository
network, which would facilitate the constitution of ice core archives
by the country managing the repository where these are stored,
through its national Antarctic programme. Interested Parties could
also contribute by facilitating the transportation of ice cores from
different places of the world to the Concordia station repository,
once built. The Ice Memory initiative would have therefore a
beneficial effect in terms of increasing collaboration among Parties.
As every activity carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, the
creation of a long-term storage repository will need to follow the
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection, and the appropriate authorization
process. To minimize the impact, the environmental aspects will be
considered since the planning activities, and the decommissioning
phase will be examined too. The implementation near Concordia
Station, will allow to use the available expertise and logistics. An
environmental impact assessment will be carried out and will be
completed in accordance with the provisions of Annex I of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection. France and Italy will
collaborate during all the process. Future access to the IM ice cores
will rely on agreements made through the National Antarctic
Programs managing the repository.
Design of the ice core repository
To ensure that ice cores are stored in optimal conditions, not only
must the temperature be kept well below 0°C, but variations in
temperature must also be avoided as they could damage the
physical and chemical information in ice cores. For this reason, the
IM Programme will involve storage of the cores at approximately 10
metres depth below the surface.
At this depth, due to temperature smoothing by thermal diffusion,
the snow temperature corresponds to the mean annual temperature
for any given site, meaning that seasonal variations in temperature
in the atmosphere are smoothed out at the corresponding depth.
At the time of the WP41 submitted to the 42nd ATCM meeting in
Prague in 2019, two different concepts of repository were under
evaluation: the first one had foreseen the construction of a metallic
structure, made of interconnected shipping containers with
reinforced roofs to bear the weight of accumulated snowfall. The
second one involved accommodating a set of normal containers
placed on sledges inside a set of buried ice caves of around 5 m
diameter each. This second concept brought the advantage of a
lower environmental impact during both construction
(approximatively 7 days of work for each cave) and
decommissioning, as the ice caves are obtained by putting thin
layers of snow (using a snow blower) over an inflatable balloon that
is deflated and removed once the roof is solid, leaving the ice cave
with an arched roof only made of snow on its top. The access to
these caves would be initially via a slope that would be buried once
the cave is closed, and then via traps prepared in the upper part
during construction.
The second concept was retained for a pilot scale trial
implementation and stability assessment at Concordia station,
considering its lower environmental impact.
The ice cave repository concept, with containers installed inside
parallel snow caves
During the 2018-2019 summer campaign, in the immediate vicinity
of Concordia station, a first pilot snow cave was built, under
technical coordination of ENEA-UTA in Italy and manpower help
from IPEV in France. A second pilot cave succeeded during the
2019-2020 summer campaign, made with an improved procedure.
Snow was blown on top of the inflated balloon through several
successive steps of a few tens of centimetres each, using a large
snow blower (4 meter width), leaving time between each sequence
for the snow to sinter and to become denser. A complete 3D model
was obtained on both pilot caves using a laser scan. Sensors were
placed to study the vertical temperature profile inside the cave.
These data coupled with analysis of deformation and of ice cores
extracted from the ice cave roof allowed to evaluate grain sintering
of the
snowflakes, the overall strength of the construction and to feed a
3D model of snow / ice deformation developed in France, in order
to estimate the life span of future snow caves.
Construction of a pilot snow cave at Concordia station during the
field campaign 2019-2020. The resulting snow cave with the arched
roof made of snow can be visualized in the lower right picture.
Modelling of IM snow cave deformation
To assess the duration over time of such a facility, computer
simulations were performed. The Elmer/Ice finite-element software
for ice sheet, glaciers and ice flow modelling was used to model the
temporal deformation of a snow cave in the conditions of Concordia
station (Brondex et al., 2020). Different scenarios were evaluated to
compare the deformation rate, depending on the shape and density
of the snow layers recovering the cave and making the columnar
structure alongside.
Simulations of the temporal evolution of the shape of a snow cave
under Concordia conditions. Original shape (@0a), shape after 50
years of deformation (@50a) and after 100 years of deformation
(@100a). From left to right : using a standard snow density profile
(black), with blown snow focused on the top of the cave (green),
with blown snow on top and alongside the cave (blue), with blown
snow following a T-shape.
The results from the simulations appear encouraging. When
building a snow cave using blown snow on top and alongside the
cave, the snow cave would loose about half of its original height
after one century of deformation. Simulation results indicate that
the need to reconstruct the IM snow caves will be unfrequent, albeit
requiring regular monitoring. A precautionary approach could
consider rebuilding the ice caves every few decades.
The status of the IM drilling operations
To date, the IM consortium, made up of French, Italian, Russian and
Swiss scientists (others may join in the future), has drilled into four
mountain glaciers with a view to collecting ice cores and achieving
the Programme’s goals. The first drilling operation took place at the
Col du Dôme glacier, near the summit of Mont-Blanc in the French
Alps, at an altitude of 4,300 metres. Three ice cores were
successfully retrieved down to bedrock in 2016. In 2017, another
drilling operation took place on Nevado Illimani in Bolivia, at an
altitude of 6,300 metres. Here, two ice cores were retrieved down
to bedrock. In 2018, a Swiss-Russian team successfully drilled two
ice cores at Belukha glacier in the Russian Altai Mountains. Lastly, a
Russian team retrieved two ice cores from Mount Elbrus in the
Russian Caucasus. These ice cores are all stored in commercial
freezers in Grenoble, France, Switzerland or Russia, pending the
construction of the long-term storage repository in Antarctica.
A fifth IM operation was conducted on the Grand Combin glacier in
the Alps, at the Swiss-Italian border, on Fall 2020. Unfortunately,
after about 20 metres of drilling, the operation was stopped due to
the too warm snow/ice conditions encountered, illustrating that for
some glaciers such as Grand Combin, it is already too late.
Current on-going IM projects consider Colle Gnifetti (Swiss Alps)
and Kilimanjaro (Tanzania) as the next targets.
Current governance of IM: the Ice Memory Foundation (FIM)
On January 18th, 2021, seven founding institutions have signed the
agreement officialising the creation of the Foundation Ice Memory
(FIM) under French law. From France: French national center for
scientific research (CNRS), University Grenoble-Alpes, French
national institute for research and development (IRD) and IPEV.
From Italy: Italian national center for scientific research (CNR) and
University Ca’Foscari in Venice. From Swizerland: Paul Scherrer
Institute.
The missions of the FIM are the following:
Define, run and ensure the implementation of the IM Programme at
the strategic, scientific and technical level, in particular within the
framework of the drafting of a charter laying down the conditions
for membership of this Programme and access to the IM heritage by
the entire international scientific community,
Develop fundamental links with international and national
institutions in order to ensure the sustainability of the IM
Programme,
Coordinate communication with the stakeholders involved in the IM
Programme,
Coordinate and contribute to ensure the implementation of the
fundraising campaigns required for the implementation of the IM
Programme,
Coordinate the establishment of long-term governance and ensure
the timely transfer of the IM Programme to (a) sustainable
institution(s).
The FIM is open to new founders wanting to contribute to the
international IM endeavour.
References
Brondex J., Gagliardini O., Gillet-Chaulet F. and Chekki M.
Comparing the long-term fate of a snow cave and a rigid container
buried at Dome C, Antarctica
Cold Regions Science and Technology, n° 180, Article number
103164, DOI: 10.1016/j.coldregions.2020.103164, Dec. 2020.
