On the issue of consideration of the application of the Republic of
Belarus for obtaining the status of a Consultative Party
English version provided by the author
On the issue of consideration of the application of the Republic of
Belarus for obtaining the status of a Consultative Party
Information Paper submitted by Belarus
1. The summary
In the present document the actual information on separate
questions of activity of Belarus in Antarctic in addition to the
information stated in the Appendix 1 to inquiry of the Government
of Belarus about a recognition of the status of the Advisory Party is
represented.
2. Participation in work of public organizations of the Antarctic
Treaty
Republic of Belarus is:
- a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty, since 2006;
- a permanent member of the Committee for the Protection of the
Environment of the Antarctic, since 2006 ;
- a permanent member of the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs, since 2015;
- a permanent member of the Organization of operators of the
Intraantarctic aviation flights (DROMLAN), since 2020;
- an associate member of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic
Research, since 2018.
From 2006 to 2020, the Republic of Belarus took part in the work:
- of ten Consultative Meetings on the Antarctic Treaty and the
Committee for Environmental Protection, where our country
presented 23 information documents on various issues of activity in
the Antarctic;
- of ten meetings of the Council of Governors of National Antarctic
Programs, at which our country presented 9 working documents
and 7 presentations;
- of three parliamentary sessions of the Scientific Committee for the
Study of the Antarctic in which our country presented 2 reports, 3
messages and 2 presentations.
3. National legislation regulating activities in the Antarctic
From 2006 to 2020, 18 regulatory legal acts were adopted in the
Republic of Belarus in relation to the Antarctic: 1 Republican Law,
2 Decrees of the President of the Republic of Belarus, 7 Decrees of
the Government of the Republic of Belarus, including accepted in
2020 the Decree of the Government of the Republic of Belarus “On
the procedure for reviewing and issuing permits for the activities of
legal entities and individual entrepreneurs in the Antarctic Treaty
area” and “On the approval of Measure 16” “Amendments to Annex
II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty "Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora”, and also 4
Decrees of Ministries and 4 bilateral international agreements. In
addition, the Decree of the Government of the Republic of Belarus
“On Approval of Measure 1 of the “Annex VI to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Liability resulting
from environmental emergencies” is in the consultation phase of the
Ministries and Departments of the Republic of Belarus.
4. Expeditions activity and creation of the Belarusian scientific
station in Antarctica
Regular scientific expeditions of the Republic of Belarus to the
Antarctic began in 2006 and are held annually in the summer
season. From 2006 to 2021, 13 Belarusian seasonal Antarctic
expeditions were organized and conducted, in which 71 Belarusian
specialists took part and 6 foreign scientists.
Since 2015, in East Antarctica, Enderby Land near Vechernyaya
Mountain, a Belarusian research station has been built on the basis
of domestic design developments. Separate objects of the station are
shown in the Attachment A (see Figure A.1 – A.9). In the season
2020-2021 the creation of its first stage with the subsequent
transition to a year-round operation was almost completed. The
limited number of station personnel (11-15 people), the
introduction of alternative energy sources (solar energy and wind
energy), as well as modern equipment for wastewater treatment,
recycling and waste management, guarantee a minimum impact on
the Antarctic environment.
In January 2020, representatives of the Australian Antarctic
Division (AAD) of the Australian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Trade inspected the Belarusian Antarctic Station Mountain Evening/
Vechernyaya
in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. In the
final inspection report, it was noted that the members of the
inspection team were impressed by the high level of design and
construction of the station, its minimal impact on the landscape,
efficient use of solar energy and water, as well as its commitment to
scientific research. The inspection team considered the modular and
efficient plant design to be a good example of a modern facility and
noted that all existing new facilities were fully operational and
operating efficiently. The AAD Inspection Team highly appreciated
the rational use of existing buildings and the clearance work on the
site of the former field base of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition
Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya in cooperation with the Russian
Federation, and also has noticed, that the construction of the
facilities of the Belarusian Antarctic Station is carried out in strict
accordance with the Final Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation submitted by the Republic of Belarus at ATCM XXXVIII -
CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria) under IP 39 Construction and
Operation of the Belarusian Antarctic Station on mountain
Vechernyaya, Enderby Land - Final Comprehensive Assessment
environment. The inspection team noted that the plans of the
Republic of Belarus for the start of winter activities are at a high
level.
5. Scientific activities in the Antarctic
The intentions of the Republic of Belarus for the further research of
the Antarctic for the next 5 years are determined by the subprogram
“Development of the activities of the Belarusian Antarctic station”
of the State program “Scientific and innovative activities of the
National Academy of Sciences of Belarus” for 2021-2025. Scientific
programs in Antarctica are carried out with the participation of
scientific research institutes of the National Academy of Sciences of
Belarus (Institute of Physics, Institute of Nature Management,
Scientific and Practical Center for Bioresources, Institute of
Physiology, Institute of Microbiology, etc.) and the Belarusian State
University. Scientific organizations, scientists and specialists from
other countries-parties to the Antarctic Treaty also take part in the
research.
The Republic of Belarus and Belarusian research organizations have
15 agreements on scientific and technical cooperation in the
Antarctic with Governments and organizations from 10 countries-
participants of the Antarctic Treaty (Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria,
Turkish Republic, New Zealand, Great Britain, France, Finland,
Germany, Canada). The results of scientific activities of Belarusian
scientists in Antarctica for the period from 2007 to 2020 have been
published in 4 separate monographs (books), more than 20 articles
in high-ranking scientific journals (impact factor more than 1.3).
More than 110 articles and abstracts have been published in the
proceedings of international scientific conferences held in different
countries, of which 78 publications have been published in English.
The number of publications in collaboration with specialists from
other countries is at least 52. More than 60 public lectures on
Antarctic topics have been delivered. 3 national exhibitions were
held on the activities of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica. 10
documentary films covering the activities of the Republic of Belarus
and international scientific cooperation in Antarctica have been
created.
Long-term goals and research plans include the following set of
research and monitoring of the state of the natural environment in
Antarctica:
- studies of the parameters of atmospheric aerosol and the reflection
spectra of the underlying surface;
- carrying out synchronous ground-based measurements and
observations of agreed parameters and natural objects in the
periods of remote sensing of the area of activity of the BAE by pace
satellites;
- studies of the state of the ozonosphere and components of the
radiation balance;
- production of standard meteorological observations and climate
research;
- measurements of variations of the Earth’s magnetic field;
- studies of living marine, freshwater and terrestrial biological
objects, as well as microbiological studies;
- conducting environmental and microbiological monitoring of key
environmental parameters in the area of work of the Belarusian
Antarctic Expedition;
- medical research and registration of the functional indicators of
the expedition staff, as well as indicators of physical activity.
The researches in all areas are provided with modern scientific
equipment and instruments. Their photographs and not a complete
list are shown in in Attachment B (see Figure B.1 – B.10). There are
separate specialized laboratories (biological, atmospheric physics,
meteorological bureau, etc.). Photos of scientific laboratories and
premises of individual services are shown in Attachment C (see
Figure С.1 – С.8).
The plans of environmental protection activities of the Republic of
Belarus in Antarctica for the period 2021-2025 provide to equip the
station with a domestic wastewater treatment system, a new oil
depot and other environmental and technological equipment.
6. Final provisions
The Republic of Belarus fully supports all the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty of December 1, 1959, the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of October 4,
1991 with five appendices, and the Recommendations and
Measures of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings that entered
into force, and expresses its readiness, as before, to follow such
basic principles of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991 as support
for the peaceful coexistence of Antarctica, development of
international cooperation, freedom of research and environmental
protection in Antarctica.
Based on the above, we believe that the current activities of our
State in the Antarctic meet the necessary criteria for the
Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, which are set out in
Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and Decision 2 of the
Fortieth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting Guidelines for the
Provision of the Status of a Consultative Party (May 22 - June 1,
2017, Beijing, China).
We express confidence, that in a question of an estimation of
scientific and logistic activity of our country in Antarctic the
Advisory Parties will show a constructive approach and objectivity
according to spirit and principles of the Antarctic Treaty.
Attachment А
Individual objects of the Belarusian Antarctic station Mountain
Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure А.1 - General view of the station
Figure А.2 - Laboratory-living module
Figure А.3 - Control, communication and navigation module
Figure А.4 – Satellite complex VSAT
Figure А.5 - Diesel power plant complex
Figure А.6 - Refrigerator container
Figure А.7 - Isotainer fuel storage
Figure А.8 - Incinerator IU-32
Figure А.9 - Barrel press HSM FP 3000
Attachment В
Instruments and equipment for scientific research at the Belarusian
Antarctic Station Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure В.1 – Lidar sounding of
tropospheric aerosol
Figure В.2 - Automatic
meteorological station М-49М
Figure В.3 - Unmanned underwater
vehicle GNOM
Figure В.4 - Hydrological
thermo-scraper SIMBA
Figure В.5 - Solar photometer
CIMEL CE 318N-EBM9
Figure В.6 - Ultraviolet spectroradio
meter PION-F
Figure В.7 - Spectral
albedometer AS-A
Figure В.8 - Surface ozone meter
PION-PO
Figure В.9 - Automatic
actinometric station
PELENG CF-16
Figure В.10 - Magnetic variation
station MMPOS-1
Attachment С
Scientific laboratories and individual rooms of the Belarusian
Antarctic Station Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure С.1 – Meteorological office
Figure С.2 - Atmospheric physics laboratory
Figure С.3 - Biological laboratory
Figure С.4 - Control, communication and
navigation center
Figure С.5 - Operational and surgical block
Figure С.6 - Mess-room
Figure С.7 - Living cabin
Figure С.8 - Sanitary and hygienic section
