A custom Green Star Antarctic Tool: A sustainable design standard
A custom Antarctic Green Star Tool: A sustainable design standard
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
The Green Star Antarctic Tool is a custom Antarctic sustainable
design standard developed in collaboration with the New Zealand
and Australian Green Building Councils as part of the proposed
Scott Base Redevelopment project (WP XX1). Parties could consider
using the Tool to minimise carbon emissions when undertaking
modernisation or infrastructure projects in Antarctica (WP XX2).
Trends in Sustainable Design Standards
The goal of the sustainable building movement led by the World
Green Building Council (WGBC) is to facilitate the sustainable
transformation of the built environment by addressing both the
ambitions of the Paris Agreement and the United Nations’
Sustainable Development Goals. This goal is divided into three
impact areas; (i) to decarbonise the built environment, (ii) to
deliver healthy, equitable and resilient buildings, and (iii) to
support regeneration of resources and natural systems.
Tools for addressing these impact areas include research, advocacy,
education, and sustainable design standards. Two well-known
standards administered under the WGBC umbrella are Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) via the United States
Green Building Council, and Green Star via the New Zealand and
Australian Green Building Councils (NZGBC and GBCA).
The WGBC, who administers 69 member countries Green Building
Councils (GBCs), has provided trends in ‘Green Building’ in the
2020 annual report (WGBC, 2020). Between 2010 and 2020, the
number of GBCs worldwide has increased from 41 to 69, the
number of organisations registered with GBCs has increased from
21,000 to 36,000, and the amount of building floor area certified by
a GBC (under a sustainable design standard) has increased from 300
million square meters to 3.5 billion square meters.
New Zealand Green Building Council’s Green Star
Established in 2006 as a not-for-profit organisation, the NZGBC
administers New Zealand’s only sustainable design standard, Green
Star (NZGBC, 2021). Green Star’s mission reflects that of the WGBC,
“Lead the sustainable transformation of the built environment”.
Green Star aims to achieve this mission by encouraging practices
that:
Reduce the impact of climate change;
Enhance the health and quality of life of inhabitants and the
sustainability of the built environment;
Restore and protect the planet’s biodiversity and ecosystems;
Ensure ongoing optimum operations performance of buildings; and
Contribute to market transformation and a sustainable economy.
The NZGBC developed four sustainability design standards relevant
to distinct areas of the built environment:
Design and As Built – for commercial builds;
Interiors – for retrofitted existing buildings;
Performance – for operation of buildings, can apply for any
building; and
Communities – for large scale developments.
The “Green Star – Design and As Built” tool is focussed around new
commercial buildings, and is the tool that the “Green Star Antarctic
Tool” sustainable design standard was based.
Scope of the Green Star Antarctic Tool
Sustainable design standards are designed for the majority of new
buildings based in towns and cities. These standards are linked to
the function of the building within the city context. As a means of
independently verifying sustainability goals and outcomes,
Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand’s Antarctic Program) worked
with the NZGBC and GBCA in 2018 to identify a tool for application
in the Scott Base Redevelopment project. Given the isolated
location, extreme climate, and the mixed-use functionality of the
building, it was identified that a custom Green Star Antarctic Tool
needed to be created.
The Tool was developed to be used as a sustainable design standard
for the Scott Base Redevelopment, and for application by any
building development project in Antarctica. Some of the key
changes for the custom Green Star Antarctic Tool include:
A shift in the focus from environmental restoration to
environmental protection, and aligning the scope to the provisions
outlined in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty.
The Antarctic context require strong policies relating to operations,
biosecurity, waste, procurement, emergency preparedness, and
health and wellbeing so an enhanced focus was placed on
operational policy and plan development.
Excluding categories specific to cities, such as transport and
occupant commuting, which are not relevant in an Antarctic
context.
A focus on the health and wellbeing of occupants, in addition to the
indoor environmental quality, to reflect the extended length of time
occupants spend in the building and the mixed functionality of the
buildings.
Implementation and Benefits
The implementation of Green Star starts in the design phase and
finishes after commissioning in the final building. The Tool is
structured around credits which are based on aspects of the
building design, construction, and operation (Appendix A).
Individual credits are achieved by adhering to the aim of the credit,
and achieving the desired outcome. Every credit has a number of
possible points which can be awarded (Appendix A). Evidence to
support a claim of credit points is then provided to the NZGBC in a
submission for certification. The structure and form of evidence
required is detailed in the Green Star submission guideline.
Credits can be implemented by adhering to the performance
standards or criteria detailed in the Green Star submission
guidelines. By way of an example, for the credit concerning
greenhouse gas emissions (20 points), a project must demonstrate
that the proposed building meets standards relating to thermal
performance, and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. The
submission guidelines require computer modelling of the design,
with points awarded based on improvements in thermal
performance and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions compared
to a standard reference building (ASHRAE American Society of
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning standards are used in
comparison. ). This process drives continual improvements in the
design of the building by modification to cladding systems, heating
and cooling systems, electrical systems, and operational procedures.
The resulting benefit is realised as a reduction in emissions and
savings in energy production.
A Green Star rating is determined by adding the total number of
points achieved against each credit for the project and comparing to
the total available points in the tool. In Green Star, there are 100
base points and 10 innovation points. The proportion of points
required to achieve different levels of certification are presented in
Table 1. Under Green Star, a project must meet at a minimum of 45
points, the threshold for Four Stars.
Table 1 - The Green Star rating scale. Zero to three stars are not
certified, four stars and above are certified.
% of available points
Rating
Outcome
Less than 10
Zero Star
Assessed
10 - 19
One Star
Minimum Practice
20 - 29
Two Star
Average Practice
30 - 44
Three Star
Good Practice
45 - 59
Four Star
Best Practice
60 - 74
Five Star
Excellence
75 +
Six Star
World Leadership
The proposed Scott Base Redevelopment project is aiming for five-
star accreditation. At this level, the project has seen benefits in the
design resulting from:
Significant weighting to environmental protection introduced into
design decisions.
Focus on reducing emissions by modelling and continuous
improvement.
Designing for operational efficiency in mechanical plant, and ease
of maintenance of all plant.
Setting of performance targets for environmental and operational
outcomes. These targets are then considered at every stage of
design. Targets include, energy use, greenhouse gas emissions,
water use, waste generation, and wastewater treatment.
Consideration of the long-term health of occupants through the
elimination of pollutants in materials and consideration of
wellbeing through design of spaces.
Introduction of prescriptive standards to standardise and drive
improvement of building elements.
References
NZGBC, 2021. New Zealand Green Building Council. https://
www.nzgbc.org.nz/ Accessed 10/03/2021
WGBC, 2020. World Green Building Council Annual Report 2020.
https://www.worldgbc.org/news-media/annual-report-2020
Appendix A: Table of credits included in the custom Antarctic Green
Star tool.
Credit
Aim
Points
Management
Green Star Accredited Professional
To recognise the appointment and active involvement of a Green
Star Accredited Professional in order to ensure that the rating tool is
applied effectively and as intended.
1
Commissioning and Tuning
To encourage and recognise commissioning, handover and tuning
initiatives that ensure all building services operate to their full
potential.
5
Adaptation and Resilience
To encourage and recognise projects that are resilient to the impacts
of a changing climate and natural disasters.
2
Building Information
To recognise the development and provision of building information
that facilitates understanding of a building's systems, operation and
maintenance requirements, and environmental targets to enable the
optimised performance.
1
Commitment to Performance
To recognise practices that encourage building owners, building
occupants and facilities management teams to set targets and
monitor environmental performance in a collaborative way.
6
Metering and Monitoring
To recognise the implementation of effective energy and water
metering and monitoring systems.
2
Responsible Construction Practices
To reward projects that use best practice formal environmental
management procedures during construction.
2
Operational Waste
To recognise projects that implement waste management plans that
facilitate the re-use, upcycling, or conversion of waste into energy,
and stewardship of items to reduce the quantity of outgoing waste.
1
Site Planning and Layout
To recognise projects in which the activity of planning and detailed
design for land use takes into consideration pedestrian safety,
environmental protection, and ongoing snow management.
2
Occupant Health and Wellbeing
Quality of Amenities
To encourage and recognise projects that promote healthy and
active living through the provision of high-quality amenities for
occupants' use and a Health and Wellbeing Policy or Plan is in place
to support the successful operation of these amenities.
2
Emergency Preparedness
To encourage projects to provide safe facilities and procedures to
prevent emergency situations and to ensure life safety during and
following emergency events.
2
Indoor Air Quality
To recognise projects that provide high air quality to occupants.
3
Acoustic Comfort
To reward projects that provide appropriate and comfortable
acoustic conditions for occupants.
3
Lighting Control
To encourage and recognise well-lit spaces that provide a high
degree of comfort to users.
3
Visual Comfort
To recognise the delivery of well-lit spaces that provide high levels
of visual comfort to, and that support the natural circadian rhythm
of, building occupants.
5
Sensory Environment
To recognise the delivery of projects that consider all the senses to
provide high levels of sensory comfort to building occupants.
1
Indoor Pollutants
To recognise projects that safeguard occupant health through the
reduction in internal air pollutant levels.
2
Thermal Comfort
To encourage and recognise projects that achieve high levels of
thermal comfort.
3
Universal Design
To encourage projects to provide safe, equitable and dignified
access for persons with disabilities.
1
Energy
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
To encourage energy efficient buildings and the reduction of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with the use of energy
in building operations.
20
Peak Electricity Demand Reduction
To encourage the reduction of peak demand load on the electricity
network infrastructure.
2
Water
Potable Water
To encourage building design that minimises potable water
consumption in operations.
8
Materials
Life Cycle Impacts
To reward project that undertake a whole-of-building, whole-of-life,
life cycle assessment and where outputs of the LCA are translated
into reductions in environmental impacts through meaningful
changes in design.
8
Responsible Building Materials
To reward projects that include materials that are responsibly
sourced or have a sustainable supply chain.
3
Sustainable Products
To encourage sustainability and transparency in product
specification.
3
Construction and Demolition Waste
To reward projects that reduce construction waste going to landfill
by reusing or recycling building materials.
1
Environment and Wildlife Protection
Environmental Protection
To ensure projects are delivered in accordance with requirements of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
0
Biosecurity
To reward projects that protect the environment through
biosecurity measures which address potential risks of construction
and building operations.
2
Site Remediation
To reward projects that choose to reuse previously developed land,
and that remediate contaminated land.
2
Light Pollution
To reward projects that minimise light pollution.
1
Water Pollution
To reward projects that reduce pollutants entering water bodies.
2
Refrigerant Impacts
To encourage operational practices that minimise the
environmental impacts of refrigeration equipment.
1
Innovation
Innovation
To recognise and encourage pioneering initiatives in sustainable
design, process or advocacy.
10
