Operationalizing the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) for
assessing Antarctic wildlife populations
Operationalizing the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) for
assessing Antarctic wildlife populations
Submitted by Germany
Summary
This paper discusses opportunities to operationalize UAV surveys
for the assessment of wildlife populations in the Antarctic. On the
basis of three publications, it is shown how, beyond taking
spectacular pictures, reliable, comprehensible and reproducible
results can be achieved.
Background
The use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) Also known as
remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS) or colloquially as "drones".
has increased during the last decade worldwide and in the
Antarctic. A number of studies have demonstrated the general
suitability of this technology to support the assessment of wildlife
populations. However, the questions of how different species can be
identified and differentiated operationally, and how efficient flight
planning can be combined with high recognition quality, have
received little attention so far. In order to identify regional
differences or temporal changes, it is also necessary to achieve
comparability with data collected by using other methods.
Study site
The studies were performed in season 2016/2017 at Fildes
Peninsula (King George Island) and an adjacent 30 km coastal
section adjoining thereto to the west of north-western Nelson Island
and south-western King George Island, (South Shetland Islands,
maritime Antarctic). While Fildes Peninsula is the largest ice-free
part of King George Island with diverse topography, the coastal
section is characterized by hundreds of small ice-free islands and
rocks within 5 km of the coastline.
Detecting flying seabirds and seals by UAV
One (Mustafa et al., 2019) of the three studies presented here
investigated the detectability of five seal and six flying seabird
species by UAV, leading to practical advice for the planning of UAV
missions in terms of mapping and data analysis. Whether certain
species qualify for UAV based population assessment depends on
their detectability from the distance and the distinctiveness of their
characteristics in comparison to other species. Mustafa et al. (2019)
evaluated how and under which conditions, particularly flight
height, Antarctic flying seabird and seal species are detectable in
aerial imagery. The detection rates of different observers were
compared for several Antarctic species in aerial images of different
‘ground sample distances’. A ground sample distance refers to the
distance between pixel centres measured on the ground.
Descriptions of individual appearance as well as body size
dimensions are delivered for all species. For most of the
investigated species, population assessment proves to be possible
from flight heights which allow efficient mapping missions, while
others are still very hard to detect even at low altitudes. A
concluding table (Appendix 1) is given with the aim to provide
guidance for future surveys on which flight altitudes to choose and
how to identify focal study objects.
Mapping colonies of chinstrap penguins and Antarctic shags by UAV
Two further studies (Pfeifer et al., 2019 & 2021) demonstrated the
successful implementation of a mapping mission to simultaneously
survey colonies of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) and
Antarctic shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps). Apart from the planning
and realization of the data acquisition, the studies also describe
how to distinguish the species, derive breeding pair numbers and
make comparisons with heterogeneous historical data.
Multiple flights of a battery-powered fixed-wing micro UAV were
used to map the rocks, cliffs and islands of a coastal section that is
difficult to access over a total distance of 317 km at a flight height
of 30 - 100 m above ground level to achieve a ground sample
distance of 1-3.4 cm. The characteristics of breeding sites and the
habitus of individuals were elaborated for both species from the
UAV images (Appendix 2). The figures in Appendix 3 illustrate
exemplarily that it is necessary to consider these characteristics
when analyzing images. The surveys were able to determine the
exact positions of 14 chinstrap penguin colonies and four colonies
of Antarctic shag, with some of the colonies not known before.
In total, 35,604 adult chinstrap penguins were detected by
analysing the UAV images. Terrestrial time-lapse imagery was used
to model the number of occupied nests based on the number of
adults, resulting in a total of 29,396 ± 1,722. Comparison with the
rare published historic data revealed a general decline in the total
abundance of occupied nests in the South Shetland Island area.
However, four chinstrap penguin colonies in this region showed an
increase since the 1980s (see Appendix 4).
For Antarctic shags, in sum 106 occupied nests were counted. For
comparison with historic abundance data it was necessary to adjust
their unprecise position information and to apply a factor to obtain
numbers of occupied nests. This revealed evidence of a population
increase by a factor of 2.86 compared to the end of the 1980s (see
Appendix 4).
The results of these studies were submitted to the MAPPPD
database (www.penguinmap.com) and will be included in the next
database update.
Operationalizing UAV-based population assessment of Antarctic
wildlife
In addition to the results mentioned above, the three studies (Pfeifer
et al. 2019 & 2021, Mustafa et al. 2019) also provide useful
information for planning and operationalizing future UAV surveys.
Necessary issues that need to be clarified prior to an UAV survey
are:
Topography of the survey area,
Size of the survey area in relation to the flight range of the UAV
model,
Necessary flight height to detect the target species and to
distinguish it from similar species,
Optimal flight date (regarding e.g. the visibility of juveniles or the
ratio between chicks and adults),
Sufficient weather conditions (e.g. fresh snow, direct sunlight, wind
speed and direction).
For the analysis of population assessment data from UAV surveys,
the following issues need consideration:
The characteristics of the species regarding habitus of the
individuals and appearance of the breeding site should be known
from the perspective of UAV images,
The assessment of seabird population trends should be based on
numbers of breeding pairs or occupied nests as the target variable,
Changes in abundance during day and during the course of a
breeding season should be taken into account.
Considering these aspects, UAVs are a useful tool to significantly
increase the data base on the status and dynamics of populations of
certain animals in Antarctica. They allow access to areas that were
previously inaccessible or difficult to reach. The risk of serious
accidents is lower since these aircrafts do not carry personnel.
Furthermore, it is time and cost saving compared to ground-based
methods, as it is possible to map large areas in a relatively short
time. Provided the Environmental Guidelines for operation of
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (ATCM
Resolution 4 (2018)) are followed, UAV overflights also have a
lower impact on animals and vegetation than traditional methods.
Typically, the flight paths are programmed in detail before UAV
missions. This makes them highly repeatable, which is particularly
valuable for determining trends in population development.
Another advantage of this method is the
reproducibility of the results, since the images are also available as
basic data for later evaluations with other methods or for other
studies. Satellite-based methods surpass some of these advantages,
yet do not provide the high resolution of UAV imagery which
allows recognizing single animals. Satellite-based methods are also
highly dependent on the cloud coverage in the area which is
particularly frequent in the maritime Antarctic. All these
characteristics qualify the use of UAVs as a very suitable tool for
carrying out monitoring programs and complementing the
methodological set of ground-based mapping and population census
and satellite-based remote sensing techniques.
References
Mustafa, O., Braun, C., Esefeld, J., Knetsch, S., Maercker, J., Pfeifer,
C., Rümmler, M.-C., 2019. Detecting Antarctic seals and flying
seabirds by UAV. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial
Inf. Sci. IV-2/W5, 141–148. https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-annals-
IV-2-W5-141-2019
Pfeifer, C., Barbosa, A., Mustafa, O., Peter, H.-U., Rümmler, M.-C.,
Brenning, A., 2019. Using Fixed-Wing UAV for Detecting and
Mapping the Distribution and Abundance of Penguins on the South
Shetlands Islands, Antarctica. Drones 3, 39. https://
doi.org/10.3390/drones3020039
Pfeifer, C., Rümmler, M.-C., Mustafa, O., 2021. Assessing colonies of
Antarctic shags by unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) at South
Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Antarctic Science 1–17. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0954102020000644
Appendix 1
Antarctic Fur Seal
Arctocephalus gazella
Crabeater Seal
Lobodon carcinophagus
Leopard Seal
Hydrurga leptonyx
Southern Elephant Seal
Mirounga leonina
Weddell Seal
Leptonychotes weddelli
Length
Width [m]
1.09-1.50
0.38-0.48
2.06-2.30
0.48-0.56
2.64-3.08
0.57-0.69
2.51-3.73
0.58-1.00
2.30-2.70
0.58-0.71
Description
Colorful: brown, blonde, black, grey; smallest seal in the Antarctic;
hind flippers are mostly not visible, as they are rotated forward;
head often turned to the side
Color variably: brown, blonde, creamy, grey, silver-white; usually
brighter than other seals, body relatively slender
Grey, dorsal almost black, large head, usually stretched, cigar-like,
often at floating ice, appears a little stiff
Color variably: dark to pale grey, brown, blotchy during moult;
relatively rotund body shape; head end often appears cigar-shaped
pointed; adult males larger than all other seals; immature like
females; often close together in groups
Grey, ventral brighter, small head, small flippers, rotund body
shape, often with bend posture
Confusion risk
-
Weddell Seal
Weddell Seal, Crabeater Seal
Weddell Seal
Leopard Seal, Crabeater Seal
GSD* [mm] (min/recom.)
86/86
30/<30
100/30
170/30
30/<30
* ground sampling distance
Antarctic Shag
Phalacrocorax atriceps
Antarctic Tern
Sterna vittata
Kelp Gull
Larus dominicanus
Skua
Catharacta spec.
Snowy Sheathbill
Chionis alba
S. Giant Petrel
Macronectes giganteus
Length
Width [m]
0.42-0.54
1.11-1.65*
0.25-0.30
0.11-0.13
0.42-0.50
0.20-0.25
0.45-0.55
0.21-0.30
0.27-0.33
0.13-0.15
0.53-0.68
0.28-0.32**
Description
Nests are distinct circular with star-shaped guano stains; usually at
rocks and cliffs; adult individuals appear irregular black and white;
juveniles brown
Greyish and white; black cap and deeply forked tail are distinctive
White head and tail; dorsal slate-black back often with a white
mark close to the tail; curved boundary between head and back
coloring; in high resolutions the yellow bill can be visible
well camouflaged; heterogeneous in color and pattern; greyish-
brown in different variations; tail and head mostly darker than the
back
Entirely white with slight shades of grey; distinct drop-shaped;
often in colonies of other birds
Adult: mostly heterogeneous greyish-brown; head, neck and breast
often brighter or white; completely dark or white morphs possible;
large pale yellowish bill; Juvenile: gray with lighter head; roundish;
fluffy appearance
Confusion risk
Penguins
Snowy Sheathbill
-
S. Giant Petrel
Antarctic Tern
Skua
GSD [mm] (min/recom.)
120/90
70/<70
44/16
17/<17
40/20
50/10
(50/30)
* nest diameter/nest distance; ** ‘length and width’ for juvenile
Giant petrels not suitable
This guide is intended to support the identification of seals and
birds in aerial images based on (Mustafa et al., 2019)
Appendix 2
Comparison of Antarctic shag and chinstrap penguins features
visible in aerial images of the study area.(Pfeifer et al., 2021)
Antarctic shags
Chinstrap penguins
Colony position
highest part of plateau, close to cliff
above supralittoral zone
Guano colour
whitish
reddish
Guano ring radius (cm)
50–80
30–50
Mean min. nest distance(cm)
142
70 (Carrascal et al.1995)
Nest appearance
bowl shaped, sometimes bright edge
not visible
Nest shadow
visible
not visible
Nest height (cm)
10–40
5–20
Density on guano covered ground
0.2–0.37 nest m-2
0.31–0.6 adults m-2
not detectable
0.6–0.97 adults m-2
Mean visible body length/width (cm)
29/17
30/18
Adults upper back
white
black
Adults neck
long
short
Adults tail width (cm)
4
2
Adults wings/flippers
folded
sometimes spread
Chicks colour
brown
light grey
Appendix 3
a. & b. At Fregata Island Antarctic shag and chinstrap penguin
colonies were impossible to distinguish by guano colour after rain
(20 December 2016)
c. & d. At Kwarecki Point Antarctic shags breed within a chinstrap
penguin colony. Single nests of both species were difficult to
distinguish reliably from each other (28 December 2016).
e. & f. At the eastern part of Rzepecki Islands Antarctic shag and
chinstrap penguin colonies overlap partially, but predominantly use
different topographic positions (28 December 2016). (Pfeifer et al.,
2021)
Appendix 4
Left: Size and location of chinstrap penguin colonies in the study
area. Right: Estimated changes in the population compared to
previous counts (Pfeifer et al., 2019)
Left: Positions of the Antarctic shag colonies in the study area.
Right: Change in the distribution and abundance of Antarctic shag
colonies compared to previous counts 2016/17 (Pfeifer et al., 2021)
