Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from the Western
Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
– update 2020/2021
Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128
Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands – update 2020/2021
Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
The paper presents the results of research study on the eradication
of non-native species Poa annua from ASPA No 128 Western Shore
of Admiralty Bay and from Arctowski Station are presented. Follow-
up activities from the 2020/2021 Antarctic season .
Background
The non-native grass Poa annua L. was accidentally introduced at
the Polish Antarctic Arctowski Station during 1980s. Its presence
was initially recorded in the austral summer of 1985/86, first in
sites disturbed by human activities, later on the deglaciated
moraines of the Ecology Glacier, inside ASPA No 128 Western Shore
of Admiralty Bay, about 1.5 km from the station.
In accordance with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native
species manual, and the Management Plan of ASPA No 128,
measures to eradicate P. annua from the area were taken. Progress
was reported to ATCM XXXVIII/CEP XVIII (IP78), ATCM XXXIX/
CEP XIX (IP60), ATCM XL/CEP XX (IP47) and ATCM XLII/CEP XXII
(IP150).
Research study on P. annua eradication
The eradication program was preceded by detailed investigation of
the biology of P. annua in accordance with guidelines regarding the
eradication/control of alien species (Galera et al. 2016). The
distribution, morphology, ecology, genetics, physiology, expansion
history, and potential sources of introduction of the species were
determined. Authors concluded that the species is expanding from
the anthropogenic sites to native communities and presents a
potential threat to native flora. Spatial and temporal dynamics of P.
annua spread is deemed sufficient to declare this species invasive at
the scale of Point Thomas Oasis. At the same time, it was not
exceptionally intense in comparison with other alien plant invasions
worldwide, which make the control/eradication effort a realistic
goal.
Point Thomas Oasis and ice-free areas of ASPA No 128 were
surveyed, and the location of P. annua tussocks were mapped.
Thereafter, non-native plants were gradually removed, beginning
with those found in the area as well as those closest to moss carpet
formations. The removal was conducted carefully by hand, in such a
manner as not to disturb native plant species. It was estimated that
the negative impact of the eradication program on native flora was
negligible.
Earlier research indicated that the structure of the soil seed bank is
highly associated with the location of tussocks. Therefore,
additional topsoil (0-10 cm) removal from underneath the tussocks
should efficiently restrict population recovery from the soil seed
bank. Authors also noted that the biology of the species (i.e.,
autogamy, seed persistence, small seed size, minimal requirements
for germination, short life cycle, small plant size) may still hamper
effective total eradication.
Authors estimated that it was the largest non-native plant
eradication conducted so far in Antarctica.
Follow-up activities taken in 2020/2021 season
In the 2020/2021 season, the vicinity of the Henryk Arctowski
Polish Antarctic Station was thoroughly checked for the presence of
tussocks and seedlings of this invasive species.
Eradication was carried out in accordance with the methods used in
the multi-year research program “The causes, course and
consequences of the expansion of Poa annua L. in Western
Antarctica, a multi-aspect population study” which was carried out
in 2014 – 2017 (Galera et al. 2016). The removal was conducted by
hand by a trained member of the station staff, ensuring not to
disturb native plant species. In the 2020/2021 season, 1620
tussocks were removed from the vicinity of the station. Each
tussock was dug up with the roots and surrounding soil. All of the
material was burned in the incinerator at the station. Invasive
plants were taken from 76 sites, all in the vicinity of the station.
The amount of observed grass was higher than in the previous
season (109 tussocks from 58 sites). No tussocks were found in the
ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay. Each site was
photographed, and the GPS location was noted.
The actions, both around Arctowski Station, and in ASPA No 128
will be continued during the next Antarctic seasons.
References
Galera H., Wódkiewicz M., Czyż E., Łapiński S., Kowalska M.E.,
Pasik M., Rajner M., Bylina P., Chwedorzewska K.J. 2017. First step
to eradication of Poa annua L. from Point Thomas Oasis (King
George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctica). Polar Biology, 40, 939–
945
