The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2021 to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLIII
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2021 to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLIII
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This paper presents the annual report of The Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting. For ease of consideration, the main features of the report
are presented as an infographic (attachment 1).
Background
The mission of SCAR is to advance Antarctic research, including
observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge,
understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region.
To this end, SCAR is charged with the initiation and international
coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to
global society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific
advice and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other
bodies, and acts as the main international exchange of Antarctic
information within the scientific community. Descriptions of SCAR’s
activities and scientific outputs are available at: https://
www.scar.org/.
Science Priorities
Three new flagship scientific research programmes (SRPs) were
approved in 2020 and six existing SRPs came to an end. The new
SRPs are:
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (Ant-ICON) will answer fundamental science
questions (as identified by the SCAR Horizon Scan), relating to the
conservation and management of Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean and focus on research to drive and inform international
decision-making and policy change.
INStabilities and Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) will address
a first-order question about Antarctica’s contribution to sea level.
Encompassing geoscience, physical sciences and biological sciences,
it aims to quantify the Antarctic ice sheet's contribution to past and
future global sea-level change.
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) will investigate the prediction of near-term
conditions in the Antarctic climate system on timescales of years to
multiple decades. Taking an integrated approach, it will consider
the Antarctic environment as a whole.
Details of these programmes can be found at https://www.scar.org/
science/srp/.
Recent Developments
Key outcomes and activities of SCAR are presented in Attachment 1.
SCAR’s three science groups, scientific research programmes, and
specialized subsidiary groups have undertaken a wide variety of
activities and produced many outputs, a range of which are
formally presented at this meeting.
In January 2020, SCAR took over the hosting of the Antarctic
Environments Portal from the University of Canterbury, New
Zealand. Further details can be found in WP 19 Antarctic
Environments Portal.
Following the cancellation of SCAR’s biennial Open Science
Conference in Hobart in August 2020 as a result of the pandemic, in
August 2020 SCAR hosted SCAR 2020 Online, which featured many
of the
highlights of the Hobart meeting and attracted 2712 participants
from 60 countries. Further details are available from https://
www.scar2020.org/.
SCAR, through its Antarctic Biodiversity Portal, is coordinating a
community effort to contribute to the UN Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development (2021-2030) through the development
of a Southern Ocean Action Plan. This is a partnership with the
Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) and many other groups
and organisations collectively termed the Southern Ocean Task
Force. A website has recently been launched (https://
www.sodecade.org) to share information about the process and
further detail is provided in IP 136 The Southern Ocean
contribution to the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development.
In order to further understand the complex and far-reaching
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic for the Antarctic
community, SCAR’s Standing Committee on the Humanities and
Social Sciences (SC-HASS) has initiated a research programme to
assess the pandemic’s impacts on Antarctic research and
researchers, as well as the long-term implications of COVID-19 for
Antarctic operations, tourism and governance, with the overarching
aim to help inform decisions on how to mitigate adverse impacts.
Further information can be found at https://www.scar.org/science/
hass/covid-project/info/.
In March 2021, the first virtual meeting of the SCAR Delegates took
place. At the meeting, the Czech Republic and Turkey were
upgraded from Associate to Full Membership of SCAR, and Mexico
was admitted as an Associate Member. In addition, two new
Executive Committee members were elected by the Delegates: Dr
Yeadong Kim (Republic of Korea) was elected as SCAR President,
and Prof Deneb Karentz (USA) was elected as Vice President and
takes on responsibility for Science. Prof Jefferson Simoes (Brazil)
was re-elected for a second term as Vice President and retains
responsibility for Finance. Two Vice Presidents remain in position:
Dr M. Ravichandran (India) as Vice President for Capacity Building,
Education and Training, and Dr Gary Wilson (New Zealand) as Vice
President for Administration. Prof Steven Chown remains on the
Executive Committee for two years as immediate Past President.
Dr Chandrika Nath is SCAR’s Executive Director. Dr Susie Grant is
SCAR’s representative to the Committee for Environmental
Protection. Dr Grant took over this role from Dr Aleks Terauds in
September 2020.
Selected Forthcoming Meetings
The 2022 Open Science Conference and SCAR Meetings will be
hosted by India in the city of Hyderabad from August 19th – 28th.
The meetings are currently being planned as in-person and
contingencies are being included for online and hybrid options for
the meetings due to uncertainties arising from the pandemic.
The 2024 Open Science Conference and SCAR Meetings will be
hosted by Chile in the city of Pucón. The 2026 Open Science
Conference and SCAR Meetings will be hosted by Norway in the
city of Oslo. Dates for both meetings will be confirmed at a later
stage.
