The response of the Italian National Antarctic Program to COVID-19
pandemic in the 2020-2021 expedition
The response of the Italian National Antarctic Program to COVID-19
pandemic in the 2020-2021 expedition
Information Paper submitted by Italy
Summary
COVID-19 pandemic represented a challenge in the implementation
of the 36th Italian Antarctic expedition. Italy was one of the most
touched countries by the first wave of COVID-19 infections.
Although initially the planning of the expedition was done in a
business as usual scheme, the uncertainties and the unknown
evolution of the situation required the implementation of an
emergency executive operation plan. Decisions were taken in close
coordination with the other national Antarctic programs in the
frame of COMNAP meetings, the main goal being to avoid
COVID-19 entering in Antarctica. All precautions taken resulted in
only one case of COVID detected during the quarantine in
Christchurch (NZ) among one member of the crew of the Laura
Bassi ice-breaker vessel. Italy wishes to thank Australia and New
Zealand for the support offered at the gateways.
Introduction
The Italian National Antarctic Program (PNRA) operates in
Antarctica the summer season only Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS)
in Terra Nova Bay, Concordia Station in Dome C co-managed with
the French Polar Institute (IPEV) and the Laura Bassi polar vessel.
Besides transportation with the vessel, PNRA normally organises an
air intercontinental link. In a normal season, aircrafts from AAD
(A319) and the Italian Air Force (LC-130) are used and land at MZS
on a runway prepared on the fast ice. This runway is operational
from mid-October to the 20th November only. Continental air links
are organized between Mario Zucchelli Station, Concordia, Dumont
D’Urville (DDU) and Mc Murdo stations.
Organization of the 36th Italian Antarctic Expedition
Due to the pandemic evolution, an emergency operation plan has
been prepared by ENEA (the Italian National Agency for New
Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development in
charge of the logistics of PNRA). Constant consultation was carried
on with the neighbouring Antarctic programs.
The design of the 36th Italian Antarctic expedition followed the
principles hereafter:
Limits to international exchange of personnel and logistics.
Reduction of expedition personnel to reduce the risk of introduction
of COVID-19.
Selection of only veteran and already trained personnel because of
the cancellation of the usual training course, the only exception
being winter over personnel.
Accurate medical pre departure screening. Precautionary pre-
departure isolation and COVID -19 test before departure from Italy.
Quarantine at the gateways. Specific precautions such as use of face
masks and disinfection means before departure for Antarctica.
Specific protocols at the stations and on the vessel for new arrivals,
specific COVID-19 protocols in case of suspicious case, specific
additional cleaning of surfaces.
Interaction with participants of other National Antarctic Programs
was limited with the exception of the French Antarctic Program.
The Concordia system, MZS and DDU were considered as a unique
“COVID-19 bubble” and logistic means for entering and evacuation
of personnel were shared.
A dedicated charter flight was organized for the majority of
personnel from Paris to Rome to Hobart where a governmental
quarantine was organized. Personnel was tested for COVID-19
before departure from Europe. Advise for precautionary pre-
departure isolation was also given to participants. Once at Hobart,
personnel
underwent a strict 14 d quarantine not being allowed to exit
assigned room. Two more COVID-19 tests were performed on site.
The strict quarantine was followed by prolonged isolation, social
distancing and use of facemasks in the hotel until final departure
for MZS with the A319 chartered from AAD.
Personnel of the group opening MZS and personnel on board the
Laura Bassi transited through Christchurch and flew with
commercial flights. Personnel was tested before departure and upon
arrival in New Zealand, a 14 day strict quarantine was organized.
Personnel was tested twice on site for COVID-19. At the end of the
quarantine personnel was directly embarked on USAP flights or on
the Laura Bassi. Once on board Laura Bassi, a prolonged separation
from the crew was performed for other 3 d and an additional
COVID-19 test was performed. Personnel was not allowed to
disembark Laura Bassi 14 d prior its departure for Antarctica.
During quarantine, one member of the Laura Bassi crew was found
positive to COVID-19 test.
The overall personnel reduction was of around 70%. The activities
conducted were focused on the maintenance of the stations and on
long-term scientific experiments. No new project was allowed and
the activity of already ongoing research was rescheduled and
prioritized. Only unavoidable activities were performed. While
logistic reduction was about 20% science suffered the biggest
reduction in personnel and few scientists worked on several projects
in perfect synergy in order to ensure maintenance and data
collection.
Mario Zucchelli Station, Concordia and Laura Bassi were equipped
with COVID-19 PCR test devices and specific personnel was trained
for their use.
Specific sanitary protocol at Mario Zucchelli Station
In order to minimize the possibility of spreading COVID-19
infection in Antarctica, despite all precautions taken at the
gateways before departure, additional measures were implemented
at Mario Zucchelli Station following the arrival of new personnel for
the next 5 days, to ensure an additional "window period" to detect
the possible occurrence of suspicious symptoms.
The implemented measures have been:
Separate accommodation of incoming personnel and shifts
organized for meals and toilets
Use of surgical masks inside the station and in common areas, social
distancing in common areas and workplaces, use of hand sanitizer
before and after the use of common areas in addition to normal
frequent hand washing.
Clinical observation: measurement of body temperature and request
to report any suspicious symptom. In case of symptoms immediate
isolation.
A specific medical protocol was in place in case a suspicious case
was detected and a separate building was dedicated to isolation.
Conclusions
COVID-19 pandemic represented a challenge in the implementation
of the 36th Italian Antarctic expedition; however, despite the heavy
reduction of personnel, all planned operations were successfully
completed.
All precautions taken for COVID-19 resulted in only one case
detected among a member of the Laura Bassi crew during the
quarantine in Christchurch (NZ). Italy wishes to thank Australia and
New Zealand for the support offered at the gateways.
