Adoption of the Polish Polar Policy
From Past Expeditions to Future Challenges
Adoption of the Polish Polar Policy
From Past Expeditions to Future Challenges
An Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
The document, entitled “From past expeditions to future challenges.
Polish Polar Policy,” adopted by Council of Ministers on September
11th 2020, both summarises Polish presence and activity in the
Arctic and Antarctic to date, and outlines the long-term objectives
of Poland’s polar policy.
Background
Polish Polar Policy, adopted by Council of Ministers on 11 of
September 2020 is a first, Polish strategic document that covers
both polar regions. It constitutes part of the Polish policy aimed at
safeguarding key interests and strategic needs of Poland related to
the Arctic and Antarctic regions. This task involves both activities
undertaken in the implementation of foreign policy in a broad
sense, as well as activities in the domestic dimension. The acquired
experience and the awareness of probable challenges and threats in
the future (medium- and long term) currently require not only a
summary of the achievements to date, but primarily a clear
definition of goals and solid Poland’s position in rapidly developing
polar affairs.
The document recognizes as the principal long-term objective that
Poland should constantly and actively be present in dialogue,
cooperation, and the programming of polar policy in the world
while using its own resources and looking for new ones. Informed
planning in the strategic dimension must be based on knowledge
which can be used to project various possible scenarios for the
future. Poland's activity to implement polar policy must have an
inclusive and inherently multidisciplinary character. It requires
constant monitoring, analysing, and planning of activities and
engaged participation on the international forum.
The principal objective should be achieved through a wide range of
political, legal, institutional and investment measures, by pursuing
the following specific goals:
ensuring Poland’s active participation in and influence on processes
affecting the future of polar regions,
enhancing Poland’s presence in polar regions, including ensuring
the development of scientific activities of Polish researchers,
ensuring that polar policy is given due attention in domestic policy,
actively looking for new and innovative paths to develop Poland's
position in polar affairs.
The detailed goals of Polish polar policy with respect to the
Antarctic include:
maintaining and expanding permanent Polish presence in the
Antarctic, including through academic research and scientific and
logistical infrastructure;
maintaining the diplomatic presence of Poland and expanding its
influence in the Antarctic, including through the active involvement
on the international arena (especially within the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM)) in all activities related to
management of the Antarctic;
taking advantage of the opportunity associated with Antarctic
presence to conduct world-class research in key areas of priority for
Poland, including areas related to the protection of the unique
Antarctic environment;
leveraging economic prospects offered by Antarctic presence,
especially as in the area of innovative technologies.
Overall the Policy emphasizes the importance of Poland’s position
in the Antarctic in accordance with international law. In particular,
Poland ratified the Antarctic Treaty in 1961 and began to take steps
to obtain consultative status. This objective was achieved on 29
July 1977, when Poland joined the then exclusive club of states
governing the Antarctic as its 13th member. This was possible due
to Poland’s involvement in Antarctic scientific research (for instance
through organising scientific expeditions, and the establishment and
maintenance of a research station). Since joining the Treaty, Poland
has actively participated in drafting the Convention on
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, of which it is
one of the authors, and was one of the countries who moved to
adopt the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
