Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections:
January/February 2020
Australian Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol inspections:
January/February 2020
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In January 2020, Australian observers conducted inspections of six
Antarctic Stations: Jang Bogo Station (Republic of Korea);
Inexpressible Island facility (China); Gondwana Station (Germany);
Taishan camp (China); Molodezhnaya Station (Russian Federation);
and Mountain Evening Station (Belarus). The inspections of Jang
Bogo, Inexpressible Island facility, Taishan Camp and Mountain
Evening were the first inspections conducted of these facilities. The
inspection of Molodezhnaya Station was the first on-ground
inspection since 1983.
The inspection team was warmly welcomed at all locations, and
was provided with full access to all areas, and responses to all
queries. All facilities and activities observed were in compliance
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, including with respect
to peaceful use and non-militarisation. In conducting the
inspections the observer team was guided in part by the inspection
checklists adopted under Resolution 3 (2010).
This paper presents a summary of the inspection team’s report. The
full inspection report is attached.
In accordance with Article 14(4) of the Environmental Protocol,
copies of the reports were provided to the Republic of Korea, China,
Germany, the Russian Federation and Belarus for comment. Details
of comments received are included in the inspection report for each
facility inspected.
Australia draws the attention of the CEP to the conclusion of the
inspection team that the facilities and activities observed were in
general compliance with the provisions of the Environmental
Protocol, although some opportunities for improvements to
operational practices were identified.
Following the cancellation of the 2020 ATCM due to the COVID19
pandemic, the attached inspection report was circulated to
Antarctic Treaty Parties and CEP members in August 2020 via
online forums established by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.
Several Parties provided comments on the report which were
summarised by the Chairs of Working Group 2 and the CEP. The
comments are available on the forums and the Chairs’ summaries
are available in SP X (ATCM) and X (CEP).
Summary of observations
When inspecting Jang Bogo Station (Republic of Korea), Taishan
Camp (China), and Mountain Evening Station (Belarus), the
inspection team had reference to the Initial Environmental
Evaluation (IEE) or Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)
prepared for the construction and operation of those facilities. The
team also took note of China’s draft CEE for a proposed new station
at Inexpressible Island while conducting the inspection of China’s
temporary facility at the planned location.
The inspection team was pleased to observe innovative approaches
to design, operations, efficiency and environmental performance.
Jang Bogo Station (Republic of Korea)
The inspection team noted the significant operational monitoring
and automation technologies, use of renewable power generation,
science support capabilities, and innovation and high standards in
waste management. The construction and operation of the station,
and mitigation measures for impacts identified in the environmental
assessment process adhere to the final CEE prepared by the
Republic of Korea.
Inexpressible Island facility (China)
China’s Inexpressible Island facility, intended to support activities
associated with the development of China’s planned year-round
station, is compact and well fitted-out. The facility is still
undergoing completion, with a number of systems yet to be
installed and commissioned. The inspection team understands the
current focus of effort to be on completing the existing temporary
facility and gathering more detailed information to support
decisions about the precise location of the planned year-round
station buildings and associated infrastructure.
Gondwana Station (Germany)
Gondwana Station has a small environmental footprint, and the
buildings and associated infrastructure are in good condition. The
station surrounds are free of modification, debris, spills, or other
obvious impacts. Since the previous inspection (by Australia in
2011), the station has been modernised, with energy efficiency and
renewable energy generation measures evident.
Taishan Camp (China)
The design of Taishan Camp and its support systems are innovative,
and the camp has a small environmental footprint. The inspection
team regarded the commitment to renewable energy and battery
storage, and planned wastewater treatment systems, as particularly
notable. When all planned systems and installations are completed,
Taishan will be an effective and comfortable facility for the support
of China’s activities.
Molodezhnaya Station (Russian Federation)
Molodezhnaya Station is an extensive complex of buildings,
infrastructure, scientific installations, storages and associated
materials, many of which are not utilised for the current operations
at the station. Environmental issues associated with ongoing
deterioration of unused station infrastructure, contaminants, storage
of materials including potentially hazardous substances, and wastes
were regarded as a concern by the inspection team. As noted in
reports of previous inspections by Australia and other Parties, there
are significant environmental issues associated with older stations.
Reducing the risk of further environmental impacts associated with
these facilities poses very substantial logistical and environmental
management challenges for many Parties. These issues were evident
in the case of Molodezhnaya Station, and in the view of the
inspection team, addressing them should be regarded as a priority.
Mountain Evening Station (Belarus)
The inspection team members were impressed with the high
standard of design and construction of Belarus’s Mount
Vechernyaya Station, its small footprint and minimal landscape
modification, the commitment to efficient energy and water usage,
and commitment to scientific research. The inspection team noted
that Belarus’s plans to commence winter operations are well
advanced. The construction and operation of the station, and
mitigation measures for impacts identified in the environmental
assessment process, adhere closely to the final CEE prepared by
Belarus.
Acknowledgements
At all occupied facilities Australia’s inspection team was welcomed
with warm hospitality, characteristic of the cooperative foundations
of the Antarctic Treaty. Australia extends its gratitude to the
Republic of Korea, China, Germany, Belarus and the Russian
Federation for their cooperation in the conduct of these inspections.
Australia also gratefully acknowledges the Italian National Antarctic
Program and personnel of Mario Zucchelli Station, the Russian
Antarctic Expedition and personnel of Molodezhnaya Station, and
the United States Antarctic Program and personnel of McMurdo
Station, for logistic support and the generous hospitality provided
to the inspection team.
