State of Antarctic Penguins 2020 Report
State of Antarctic Penguins 2020 Report
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Oceanites’s State of Antarctic Penguins 2020 report is available at:
https://oceanites.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/
SOAP-2020.pdf
The report summarizes the status — population size and population
trends — of Antarctica’s five penguin species, continent-wide and in
key regions.
Introduction
Oceanites, Inc. is a nonprofit scientific and educational organization
founded in 1987 (https://oceanites.org). Its mission is to advance
science-based conservation and to increase the awareness of climate
change, its potential impacts, and climate change adaptation
through the lens of Antarctic penguins.
Since 1994, for 27 consecutive field seasons, its Antarctic Site
Inventory has been monitoring and analyzing penguin and seabird
population changes across the entirety of the vastly warmed
Antarctic Peninsula, and is focused on distinguishing the direct and
interactive effects of climate change, fishing, tourism, and other
human activities on the Antarctic Peninsula ecosystem.
In 2016, the Mapping Application for Penguin Populations and
Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD) launched (http://
www.penguinmap.com). MAPPPD is an open access, decision-
support tool developed for Oceanites that assembles Antarctic
penguin population data and makes such data easily and publicly
available. MAPPPD integrates expert biological field surveys,
satellite imagery analyses, and citizen science and, over the past
five years, has quickly become a key research tool used throughout
the Antarctic community and a primary resource for scientific and
other information about Antarctic penguins.
This continent-wide penguin population database is continually
being updated and is utilized by Oceanites to generate its annual
State of Antarctic Penguins reports. As in previous reports, this most
recent report encourages those who have not yet contributed data
to do so.
State of Antarctic Penguins Report 2020
The latest State of Antarctic Penguins 2020 report (“SOAP 2020”)
comprehensively summarizes the present status — population size
and population trends — of Antarctica’s five penguin species,
outlining the population size and trends for the continent and in
key regions that have been the focus of conservation management
efforts by CCAMLR — the Antarctic Peninsula (CCAMLR Areas 48.1,
48.2 and 48.5), the Ross Sea (CCAMLR Areas 88.1 and 88.2), and
Eastern Antarctica (CCAMLR Areas 58.4.1 and 58.4.2). Naveen R.,
Humphries G.R.W, and Robbins, A.M.C. 2020. State of Antarctic
Penguins Report 2020. Oceanites, Inc., Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
SOAP 2020 uses the most current scientific data in the Antarctic
continent-wide penguin MAPPPD database that Oceanites
maintains, which now contains 4,010 records from 130 data sources
of on-the-ground colony counts and satellite photo analyses. This
year, the number of records in MAPPPD has increased by 7% and
the number of data sources by 12%.
The report and its underlying database provide evidence to assist all
Antarctic stakeholders in their deliberations and activities: decision-
makers and governments, scientists, NGOs, the private sector
including fishing and tourism operators, and concerned citizens
throughout the world. The goal is to make available the latest, most
accurate population data about Antarctic penguins; both continent-
wide and regionally, and of the latest trends in such numbers.
This most recent report and previous reports may be accessed via
the Oceanites website (https://oceanites.org/future-of-antarctica/
penguin-conservation/state-of-antarctic-penguins-reports/), either
online or through mobile devices.
Key Report Findings
The report notes population declines in two Antarctic penguin
species, with new and critical data documenting a further chinstrap
penguin population decline in the Antarctic Peninsula (specifically,
at Elephant Island).
Per data available of October 2020, the five Antarctic penguin
species totalled 5.77 million breeding pairs nesting at 698 sites
across the entire Antarctic continent. Oceanites greatly appreciates
the growing use of our open-sourced, publicly available data
repository by the entire Antarctic community — and again, those
who have not yet contributed to, or utilized MAPPPD, are
encouraged to do so. These totals will be updated when the next
State of Antarctic Penguins report is released in October 2021.
For these reports, per the Antarctic Treaty, Antarctica is defined as
all of the land and ice shelves south of 60°S latitude, which excludes
penguins nesting in the south Atlantic Ocean and the South
Sandwich Islands. Also, note that in the table below, “N” refers to
the number of nesting pairs.
ANTARCTICA N TOTALS
N Oct 2020
N 2019
N CHANGE
% CHANGE
EMPE (Emperor)
238,340
238,000
340
0.14%
ADPE (Adélie)
4,001,631
4,211,530
-209,899
-4.98%
CHPE (Chinstrap)
1,395,774
1,563,119
-167,345
-10.71%
GEPE (Gentoo)
122,549
116,083
6,466
+5.57%
MCPE (Macaroni)
13,249
13,249
0 Insufficient recent survey data to allow for an updated trend
assessment.
0.00%
TOTAL
5,771,543
6,141,981
-370,438
-6.03%
Oceanites continues to closely track the significant changes in the
Antarctic Peninsula, where Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae) and
chinstrap (P. antarctica) penguins have declined and gentoo (P.
papua) penguins have increased.
Oceanites’ 2016 Future of Antarctica Forum noted the key roles of
Antarctic science, management, and diplomacy in addressing
climate change; and specific concern about overall changes across
the Antarctic and Southern Oceans, the notable warming trend that
has recently occurred in the western Antarctic Peninsula, and its
implications for the Antarctic ecosystem (https://oceanites.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/FOA-Forum-REPORT.pdf).
The recent, comprehensive survey work at the Elephant Island and
Low Island vicinity of the Antarctic Peninsula have filled some
critical gaps for chinstrap penguins, but a number of key, under-
surveyed areas should be considered high priorities for future data
collection; for example, large chinstrap colonies in the South
Orkney Islands, and Cape Garry (Low Island). With regard to Adélie
penguins, it would be helpful to have updated census data from
Marguerite Bay south to the Red Rock Ridge and the Rhyolite
Islands, which would further inform the differences in trends we
have noticed north and south of Marguerite Bay.
Oceanites collaborators, as well as many other researchers, are
focused on distinguishing the interactive effects of climate change
vis-à-vis human activities and other causes that might definitively
explain penguin population changes.
These analyses continue and are examining a suite of potential
causal factors, including: a potentially shifting or shrinking krill
stock; the amount of krill fishing and higher exposure to fishing
interference during the penguin breeding season; competition for
krill with whales and seals; penguins’ winter foraging ranges and
other nonbreeding season impacts; and rising temperatures and
retreating sea ice due to global warming.
Primary Contacts:
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc. oceanites@icloud.com
Grant Humphries, Black Bawks Data Science Ltd, Director of
Science, Oceanites grwhumphries@blackbawks.net
