Participation of a Russian scientist in Heritage Expeditions voyage
English version provided by the author
Participation of a Russian scientist in Heritage Expeditions voyage
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
New Zealand travel company Heritage Expeditions Limited invited
a Russian scientist to participate in the Antarctic voyage in the Ross
Sea area from January 8 to February 6, 2020.
The Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, Roshydromet, which,
according to the order of the Government of the Russian Federation,
is a state operator organizing and carrying out activities in
Antarctica, sent Dr. Igor Chupin, PhD, an ornithologist, a member
of the 65th Russian Antarctic Expedition, from the Institute of
Systematics and Ecology of Animals of the Siberian Branch of the
Russian Academy of Science.
The tourist cruise on a chartered Russian passenger ship “Akademik
Shokalsky” went along the route as follows: south-western tip of
New Zealand (Port Bluff) – Snares Islands – Auckland island –
Macquarie island – Ross Sea – Campbell island – southwestern tip of
New Zealand.
The research objectives included studying of populations and large-
scale surveys of marine animals along the route of the passenger
ship “Akademik Shokalsky”, collecting of data to monitor the
impact of tourism activities on the Antarctic environment.
Ornithological and nature conservation works along the latitudinal
transect in the western part of the Pacific Ocean sector of the
Southern Ocean and in the Ross Sea made it possible to reveal the
seasonal characteristics of the distribution of seabirds and mammals
during the Antarctic summer. In places of short-term landings on
the coast of Antarctica, Antarctic and subantarctic islands, a
quantitative characterization of the colonies of seabirds and coastal
seals was given. When studying the impact of tourist activity on the
populations of seabirds and mammals, recommendations for their
protection are given.
The registration of marine fauna, its distribution and abundance
gave an idea of the stocks of krill, an important element of the
nutritional chain in the Ross Sea area – the area, which is poorly
studied by Russian scientists. During this period no significant
accumulations of krill was observed along the vessel's route in the
open waters of the Ross Sea. The lack of krill stocks in the Ross Sea
area is likely to have affected the number of fin whales, minke
whales and humpback whales. At this time, water “bloom” was
observed. The color of the water had a greenish tint, which
indicated the mass reproduction of phytoplankton and the
possibility of further development of zooplankton on its basis.
During the survey of seabirds and mammals, the vessel covered
2,360 km; 7,593 sightings, 43 bird species; and 116 sightings, 12
species of mammals, mainly cetaceans were recorded.
The research materials were included in the scientific report of the
65th seasonal Russian Antarctic expedition (Igor Chupin. Species
composition, seasonal dynamics, distribution and abundance of
seabirds and mammals along the route of the passenger ship
“Akademik Shokalsky” // Report of the 65th seasonal RAE. – St.
Petersburg, 2020, 59 p.), located in the State Fund of the State
Research Center of the AARI. Currently, a number of articles on
these studies have been prepared for publication in scientific
journals.
The routes of marine tour operators cover many inaccessible pelagic
regions and islands of the world's oceans, which are of great
scientific interest. On the other hand, the participation of scientists
in tourist cruises allows tourists to better understand the nature of
Antarctica, to feel the involvement in its research and to feel the
relationship between man and nature.
The experience of such cooperation between scientists and travel
companies makes it possible to conduct scientific research without
organizing special expeditions and attracting additional funds.
The Russian Antarctic Expedition expresses its gratitude to the
Heritage Expeditions tour operator, to Ambassador Stuart Prior
(New Zealand head Antarctic Policy 1992 – 1999; New Zealand
Ambassador to Russia 2003-2006) and to Ambassador Georgy V.
Zuev for organizing the participation of a Russian scientist in a
tourist voyage.
