Modernisation of Australia’s Antarctic Program
Modernisation of Australia’s Antarctic Program
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
In ATCM XLII/IP89 (2019) Australia reported on progress with
commitments in the 2016 Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year
Action Plan to modernise the Australian Antarctic Program.
This paper provides updates on progress with key modernisation
activities outlined within the Strategy and Action Plan. The
objectives and provisions of the Environmental Protocol, including
environmental impact assessment requirements, are incorporated
into the management of these projects. Information Paper 52
provides an update on developments with Australia’s Antarctic
Science Program, which continues to benefit significantly from
national and international research and operational collaborations.
A key initiative that has commenced is planning activities for a
proposal to construct and operate a new aerodrome near Davis
research station in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica (the Davis
Aerodrome Project). Planning activities include progressing the
environmental impact assessments and approvals required for the
Davis Aerodrome Project to proceed. Australia would be pleased to
provide further information, and discuss opportunities for
international collaboration. Online consultation sessions are
planned and details will be circulated separately to Parties,
Observers and Experts.
Introduction
The 2016 Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan sets
out Australia’s vision for future engagement in Antarctica, including
commitments and actions to future-proof the Australian Antarctic
Program and enhance Australia’s Antarctic scientific capabilities.
Australia is committed to continuing its strong support for the
Antarctic Treaty system, delivering world-class science, and running
its Antarctic operations safely and efficiently.
Further information about the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20
Year Action Plan is available from the Australian Antarctic
Division’s website.
New Antarctic Research Vessel
A key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year
Action Plan is the new Antarctic icebreaker, RSV Nuyina. The vessel
will provide a state-of-the-art capability to conduct
multidisciplinary science, both in sea ice and open water. It will
also be the main lifeline for delivering essential personnel, cargo
and equipment to and from Australia’s Antarctic and sub-Antarctic
research stations.
The first steel was cut at Damen Shipyards Galati in Romania in
May 2017, marking the formal commencement of the construction
process. While the progress of the project has been significantly
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, substantial progress has been
achieved since November 2020 with the successful completion of
the first two sea acceptance trials voyages in the North Sea and the
Bay of Biscay. Underwater acoustic radiated noise performance tests
have also been successfully completed in the fjords of Norway.
Following arrival of Nuyina in its home port of Hobart later in
2021, the primary focus of activities will be to ensure operational
readiness of the vessel and crew to conduct station resupply
activities, anticipated for the 2021/22 season. Nuyina will undergo
a program of scientific research operational commissioning over the
first two seasons of operations, with the first full-scale research
voyages planned for the 2023/24 shipping season.
Further information about the Nuyina is available from the
Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 1 RSV Nuyina arriving at Vlissingen, the Netherlands, August
2020 (Photo: Flying Fishbone (AAD))
Enhanced traverse capability
Australia is committed to restoring and enhancing traverse and
mobile station capabilities. Under the Traverse and Island Station
Project, the intention is to operate at ranges beyond 1000
kilometres within inland East Antarctica.
The Traverse and Inland Station Project was developed to support
the scientific and operational requirements of the Australian
Antarctic Program for the next 20 years, through the delivery of a
mobile research station and associated equipment. These
capabilities are modular in design, to interface with the RSV
Nuyina. This will allow delivery to all Antarctic stations for onward
deployment to other remote areas, which will advance scientific
research opportunities.
The initial focus of the renewed and enhanced traverse capability is
to support Australia’s involvement in a collaborative project, to
recover an ice core with a million year climate history. Drilling for
the million year ice core will take place at a site named Little Dome
C, approximately 30 km south of Concordia station. Drilling is
expected to occur over four or five seasons, depending on the
weather and other conditions.
The traverse capability is now approaching completion with key
machinery and equipment delivered to Australia’s Casey research
station in early 2020 and 2021. This includes the delivery of
tractors and snow groomers which will be used to prepare the route
for the traverse. The traverse route will start from Casey research
station and will be 1200 km long. The proposed route to Little
Dome C is still being assessed and is anticipated to be confirmed
over the next season, with the first test planned to be undertaken
around February 2022.
Construction of the mobile research station has been undertaken in
Australia and is almost complete. The structure is modular and will
likely be deployed to Casey research station within the 2021/22
season for mobilisation before it starts the 1200 km traverse route
to site the following season.
A number of bespoke traverse vans have been designed and will be
delivered next season. These vans will provide the traverse team
with a safe environment to rest at the end of the working days
whilst travelling to site.
Further information about the Traverse and Inland Station Project is
available from the Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 2 Tractor that will be used for the traverse to Little Dome C
to support drilling for a million year ice core, February 2020
(Photo: Christopher Burns (AAD))
Modernising Antarctic research stations
In ATCM XLII/IP089 Australia reported that it was investigating
options for refurbishing or rebuilding its Antarctic research stations
and associated infrastructure, including the development of master
plans for stations and major facilities.
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan outlines
Australia’s commitment to develop modern and flexible research
infrastructure, and to consider options for more efficient and
flexible use of existing stations. The station modernisation program
will enhance Australia’s science support capabilities with research
stations and supporting infrastructure that can cater to Australia’s
long term scientific objectives and operational needs.
Master plans are in development for Australia’s Davis, Mawson and
Casey research stations, and for the seasonal Wilkins Aerodrome,
and will outline new infrastructure works, predicted station
capacity requirements and an asset renewal and replacement
program.
In 2020 the Australian Antarctic Division commenced planning for
the modernisation of Australia’s Davis research station, which is the
primary hub for Australian Antarctic Program activities in East
Antarctica. A draft Master Plan has been developed and the final
Master Plan for Davis research station is intended for completion in
2021. It aims to address the challenges of living and working in
Antarctica, whilst delivering sustainable, world-class facilities to
support Antarctic science and operations.
Further information about the Davis research station is available
from the Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 3 Davis research station early concept, November 2020
(Photo: Hugh Broughton Architects/AAD)
Davis Aerodrome Project
In ATCM XLII/IP089 Australia reported on progress towards
establishing year-round aviation access capability in East Antarctica
(the Davis Aerodrome Project).
The Davis Aerodrome Project would provide a step up in the
aviation capability available to the Australian Antarctic Program
and other national Antarctic programs that Australia works closely
with in East Antarctica.
Three field seasons of geotechnical and environmental
investigations have been undertaken to identify the proposed
aerodrome site, approximately 4.5 kilometres from Davis research
station in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica, and to inform the
required environmental impact assessment.
A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is being
prepared to assess the proposal to construct and operate the
aerodrome. Further details are provided in Information Paper 102,
submitted to CEP XXIII.
Australia is planning a series of online consultation sessions to
provide further information about the Davis Aerodrome Project and
will separately circulate details to Parties, Observers and Experts.
More details about the Davis Aerodrome Project are available on
the Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Figure 4 Surveyors in the Vestfold Hills (Photo: Aron Gavin)
