Persistent Organic Chemicals in Antarctica: A horizon scan of
priority challenges
Persistent Organic Chemicals in Antarctica: A horizon scan of
priority challenges
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This information paper has been developed by the SCAR ImPACT
(Input Pathways of Persistent Organic Pollutants in Antarctica)
Action Group and presents a horizon scan of priority challenges in
the field of persistent organic chemical research in Antarctica.
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are a subset of synthetic
chemicals that share the four characteristics of: i) persistence, ii)
mobility in the environment, iii) toxicity, and iv) tendency to
bioaccumulate. The SCAR ImPACT Action Group was established in
2018 to facilitate coordinated investigation and monitoring of
chemical input to the Antarctic region. In March 2021, all ImPACT
members were invited to participate in a scoping meeting to
identify key priorities for Antarctic persistent organic chemical
research.
This paper presents a summary of identified priority research gaps
and suggested actions arising from this meeting. It suggests
potential approaches for coordinated research and monitoring
efforts and highlights the importance of such activities for informed
policy decision-making. It also outlines a number of actions needed
to align Antarctic persistent organic chemical research with
international efforts and existing global monitoring frameworks.
The ImPACT Action Group aims to undertake further work towards
specific recommendations, in consultation with other interested
groups.
Background
Mitigating human influences in Antarctica has been identified as
one of six priorities for Antarctic science1, 2. Global chemical
production is increasing faster than chemical policy frameworks can
respond3. In the Antarctic context, these challenges are
compounded by considerable regional research gaps, serving to
elevate the need for timely progress in the field of Antarctic
chemical research via collaborative, policy-relevant research4.
Globally, a reliance on chemical innovation to meet industrial and
societal challenges has grown exponentially over the past 70 years.
Today, 1 million new chemicals are produced every year3.
Managing the myriad of chemicals present in the natural
environment represents one of the greatest Planetary Health
challenges of our time5, 6.
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are a subset of synthetic
chemicals that demonstrate the four shared characteristics of: i)
persistence, ii) mobility in the environment, iii) toxicity, and iv)
tendency to bioaccumulate. Concerns regarding the human and
environmental impacts of POPs led to the promulgation of the
Stockholm Convention in 2004, an international agreement that
aims to restrict and eliminate the use and production of such
chemicals.
The majority of listed POPs are semi-volatile compounds that
achieve environmental mobility via atmospheric transport, moving
along temperature gradients to progressively colder latitudes, thus
making the polar regions of the Earth ‘sink’ environments for these
compounds. An expanding diversity of chemical structures, and
therefore chemical behaviours, flagged as ‘of concern’ has meant
that increasingly hydrospheric, and even biological long-range
environmental transport pathways must also be considered when
trying to uncover Antarctica’s chemosphere. Frequent incomplete
knowledge surrounding each of the four POP risk criteria for
individual chemicals, and associated time lags in regulation of
chemicals, has led to a broadening of the research and monitoring
scope beyond regulated POPs, to include other persistent organic
chemicals, or “POP candidates”. Polar regions are special interest
areas for persistent organic chemical research, both from
environmental management and chemical policy viewpoints.
POPs have been detected in Antarctica since the 1960s7, yet
research on this topic is inherently slow. In 2009, the former SCAR
Environmental Contaminants in Antarctica (ECA) Action Group
carried out a review of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon and POP
research in Antarctica8, reporting just 35 publications between
2000 and 2008. This report, combined with several subsequent
review articles (e.g.9,10) contributed an overview of past organic
chemical research in the Antarctic context. The slow output of the
field is the result of common challenges associated with organic
chemical research, such as the high cost of analysis. These are
amplified in the Antarctic context where they are compounded by:
the logistical challenges of Antarctic fieldwork, and limitations in
infrastructure and service support; difficulties in detection/
contamination risk; and sporadic and unpredictable access to
Antarctica. Limited opportunity for successful research in turn
carries the risk of portraying the erroneous impression that there is
adequate understanding, and that current operational approaches
are appropriate.
The purpose of this information paper is to highlight key areas of
persistent organic chemical research in Antarctica that require
traction in order to close limiting research gaps; and secondly
provide a framework of suggested actions to address these gaps and
inform decisions on related chemical and environmental policy.
This paper is produced by the SCAR ImPACT Action Group, which
was established in 2018 to facilitate coordinated investigation and
monitoring of chemical input to the Antarctic region. ImPACT has
four objectives within the term of the Action Group, which are to:
Co-ordinate current and ongoing research efforts aligned with the
Action Group terms of reference, ensuring data collected meets
minimum quality assurance requirements for temporal trend
collation, and that data is made publicly available via open source
data repositories.
Pursue national and multi-national funding strategies for
establishment of permanent atmospheric monitoring stations at
multiple sites across the continent.
Publish collaborative synthesis works arising from coordinated
monitoring efforts.
Identify ways in which the ImPACT Action Group can facilitate the
establishment of an Antarctic Monitoring and Assessment (AnMAP)
body (acknowledging that this requires progress and actions beyond
the capacity and term of the Action Group)
In March 2021, all ImPACT members were invited to participate in
a scoping meeting to identify key priorities for Antarctic persistent
organic chemical research. This horizon scan is a summary of
identified priority research gaps and suggested actions arising from
this meeting.
Horizon scan – limiting research gaps
Regulated versus ‘suspect’ POPs in Antarctica
Environmental monitoring in Antarctica has to date focused on
chemicals of regulatory relevance, via targeted methods. Targeted
analytical approaches using mass spectrometry, present benefits in
terms of sensitivity, selectivity and reliability. These approaches,
however, require that the operator defines the chemicals of interest
a priori and, in doing so, only these selected chemicals can be
detected. Targeted approaches will as such always miss “unknowns”
regardless of how elevated or toxic the levels of unknowns are.11
Detection of new chemicals in Antarctica is largely fortuitous, yet
these discoveries underscore the fact that current analytical
repertoires capture only a fraction of chemicals making their way to
Antarctica. New and advanced technology developments are
allowing a broader, non-targeted analytical approach12, 13 to
identify contaminants without prior knowledge of their presence,
effectively moving the research question from “Is this chemical
here?” further towards, “What chemicals are here?” Such
approaches must be implemented on specially-collected Antarctic
environmental media to provide a truer picture of present-day
persistent organic chemical contamination in Antarctica. This
information will fit the needs of international chemical policy (e.g.
Stockholm Convention) by uncovering chemicals that meet the
chemical risk criteria of persistence and environmental mobility, as
demonstrated by their presence in the most remote region of the
planet.
Remote vs. local sources
Distinguishing long range sources from in-situ human usage (e.g.
stations and maritime activities)14, 15, 16 must serve as a quality
assurance component. Information regarding local emissions will in
turn inform policy, such as the Madrid Protocol, which explicitly
prohibits emissions of harmful chemicals in Antarctica.
How will climate change impact persistent organic chemical
contamination in Antarctica?
All major drivers of organic chemical behaviour and fate stand to be
impacted in a warming climate17. These include air and sea
temperature, cryosphere dynamics, organic carbon cycling, ocean
pH, and food web connections. Atmospherically delivered organic
chemicals may, for example, be trapped in the cryosphere until ice-
melt releases these, often hydrophobic, compounds into the marine
environment18. Here they will preferentially associate with organic
carbon-rich particulates, providing an efficient vector for transfer to
higher trophic levels, or the ocean floor. Reduced glacial ice may
initially result in enhanced release of historically deposited
persistent organic chemicals to the atmosphere19, whilst warmer
temperatures and expanded ice-free land areas may facilitate
greater terrestrial primary production and generate new terrestrial
sinks for persistent organic chemicals.
In the marine realm, ice-dependent species are expected to be
impacted most severely in a warming Antarctic20. These include
Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba), a keystone species of the
Antarctic sea-ice ecosystem. Altered food-web connections, driven
by reduced prey biomass, is expected to, in turn, impact chemical
exposure. Similarly, changed foraging ranges, particularly for highly
mobile and migratory species, may result in higher latitude feeding
with associated higher persistent organic chemical uptake.
Investigating, and temporally tracking, chemical dynamics in
response to shifts in bio-physical change in Antarctica, is
fundamental for accurate interpretation of observations and trends.
What is the role of hydrospheric and biological transport, compared
to atmospheric transport pathways of persistent organic chemicals
to Antarctica?
With a growing list of POP candidate compounds that will come
from a widened analytical scope, it is also anticipated that the range
of chemicals with properties that satisfy the risk criteria of mobility
and persistence will also grow. A historical example is provided by
perfluorolkyl substances (PFAS). In contrast to chlorinated and
brominated POPs that achieve environmental mobility largely
through atmospheric transport, these chemicals are hydrophilic and
their environmental transport is expected to be governed by ocean
currents.21 This has implications for how we monitor for the
presence of persistent organic chemicals in the Antarctic region.
Transport of chemicals to Antarctica via the hydrosphere, compared
to the atmosphere, will take decades, if not centuries.22 It is ~70
years since widespread commercial manufacture of POPs
commenced. We are therefore currently in a position to capture
initial input from which to monitor temporal trends22. Routine
observation systems that capture these trends remain an operational
limitation, preventing an information response targeted at this
research gap.
What is the toxicological sensitivity of Antarctic biota on account of
unique metabolism, extended life spans and often, capital breeding
life histories?
Polar biota has adapted to the seasonal productivity of high latitude
environments. Common adaptations include slower metabolism,
extended lifespans, and behavioural life-history adaptations such as
fasting and/or migration. Seasonal productivity has also driven a
dependence of polar biota on lipid-rich prey sources23. In
combination, a lipid-rich diet and adaptations that markedly impact
lipid dynamics may influence sensitivity to, and expression of, the
toxicological impacts of lipophilic organic chemicals. Advancing
understanding of the comparative toxicological sensitivity of
Antarctic biota, relative to temperate or tropical counterparts,
remains a key ecotoxicological research gap24. Often,
ecotoxicological assessment of Antarctic biota has generated
surprise findings of disproportionate relevance or impact outside of
the field. Examples include the discovery of families of organic
pollutant degrading bacteria25, which could lead to commercial
biotechnology applications, as well as the discovery of the ability of
Antarctic krill to crush microplastics to form nanoplastics, the first
species on the planet observed to do so26.
Next steps
In order to align Antarctic persistent organic chemical research with
international efforts and existing global monitoring frameworks, a
number of actions are needed. These are outlined below, and the
ImPACT Action Group aims to undertake further work towards
specific recommendations, in consultation with other interested
groups.
Antarctica as part of the Global Monitoring Plan of the Stockholm
Convention
The Global Monitoring Plan (GMP) forms one component of the
effectiveness evaluation of the Stockholm Convention. It seeks to
provide a harmonized organizational framework for the collection
of comparable monitoring data on the presence of POPs from all
regions and recommends longitudinal monitoring of ‘core media,’
including ambient air and seawater. Most consultative parties to the
Antarctic Treaty are also signatories of the Stockholm Convention.
However, routine, large-scale monitoring is lacking in Antarctica,
except for the continuous monitoring of atmospheric POPs at the
Norwegian Troll observatory since 2009. Consequently, temporal
assessment can only be made from Troll from 2009 onwards, while
spatial assessment cannot be made. This is in stark contrast to
Arctic nations where coordinated monitoring frameworks have been
in place for the past 40 years, and which now represent major
contributions via the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
(AMAP) towards evaluation and guidance of global chemical policy.
Globally standardized, systematic monitoring to contribute to the
requirements of the GMP could include:
Continuous air sampling. High volume air sampling will entail
installation of permanent, semi-automated, high volume sampling
equipment, as well as service agreements for the collection and
transport of samples to an approved laboratory for analysis and/or
archiving.
Seasonal collection of surface seawater in north-south transect
across the Antarctic circumpolar current. Such sampling would be
undertaken via research and re-supply voyages. Low effort sampling
may be conducted via service level agreements, with support for
subsequent transport of samples to an approved laboratory for
analysis and/or archiving.
Additional monitoring for the Antarctic region could include:
Non-targeted and suspect screening of specially-collected
environmental media to provide a truer picture of present-day
persistent organic chemical contamination in Antarctica. Findings
will guide policy and ongoing priority analyte lists for harmonized
monitoring across the region.
A network of summer-time, air and seawater passive sampling
stations could be integrated into the Global Atmospheric Passive
Sampling (GAPS) network27, and the recently launched AQUA-
GAPS monitoring program for POPs in the Waters of the World28.
In the absence of human media, it is proposed that one or more
model species, with a circum-polar distribution be selected for long-
term persistent organic chemical biomonitoring. Two options are
proposed to fulfill distinct purposes, 1) a coastal benthic
invertebrate for routine sampling around stations via service level
agreements, which could be used for the identification of local
source contamination. 2) Secondly, a higher trophic level species
could be targeted to provide integrated ecosystem information, and
information regarding bioaccumulation potential of specific
compounds. Such routine sampling could take place in conjunction
with the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)29, or the
Humpback Whale Sentinel Program (HWSP)30, two long-term
Antarctic sea-ice ecosystem observation programs. The HWSP
protocols encompass routine POP monitoring for this purpose.
Systematic collection of environmental samples for archiving and
retrospective analysis of persistent organic chemicals, as and when
either new priority chemicals are identified, or new methodologies
become available, is a robust strategy that has generated many
valuable contribution to global chemical policy. Coordination
between national Antarctic Programs and national Environmental
Specimen Banks for the inclusion of systematic collection and
archiving of Antarctic environmental samples is one proposed
approach.
Achievement of the above actions requires comparable, quality
assured, chemical analysis, and it is suggested that selected
laboratories could be nominated for analysis. Nominated
laboratories would need to be approved for delivery of data to the
GMP and as such, regularly participate in inter-laboratory
calibration exercises.
Finally, the ImPACT Action Group advocates a Planetary Health
approach to persistent organic chemical research in Antarctica.
Planetary Health acknowledges that the health of human
civilisation is dependent upon, and inextricably linked to, the state
of natural systems6. Investigations of human impacts must therefore
be viewed at a systems scale. Notably, the expression of toxic effects
in humans and wildlife alike, are typically exacerbated by
environmental factors. As such persistent organic chemical risk
must be considered through the lens of multiple stressors and
ecosystem health.
References
Kennicutt, M.; Chown, S.; Cassano, J.; Liggett, D.; Massom, R.; Peck,
L.; Rintoul, S. R.; Vaughan, D. G.; Wilson, T.; Sutherland, W., Polar
research: Six priorities for Antarctic science. Nature 2014, 512,
(7512).
Chown, S. L.; Lee, J. E.; Hughes, K. A.; Barnes, J.; Barrett, P. J.;
Bergstrom, D. M.; Convey, P.; Cowan, D. A.; Crosbie, K.; Dyer, G.;
Frenot, Y.; Grant, S. M.; Herr, D.; Kennicutt, M. C.; Lamers, M.;
Murray, A.; Possingham, H. P.; Reid, K.; Riddle, M. J.; Ryan, P. G.;
Sanson, L.; Shaw, J. D.; Sparrow, M. D.; Summerhayes, C.; Terauds,
A.; Wall, D. H., Challenges to the Future Conservation of the
Antarctic. Science 2012, 337, (6091), 158-159.
Burton, G. A.; Di Giulio, R.; Costello, D.; Rohr, J. R., Slipping
through the Cracks: Why is the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Not Funding Extramural Research on Chemicals in Our
Environment? Environmental Science & Technology 2017, 51, (2),
755-756.
Chown, S., Polar collaborations are key to successful policies.
Nature 13 June, 2018.
Rockstrom, J.; Steffen, W.; Noone, K.; Persson, A.; Chapin, F. S., III;
Lambin, E. F.; Lenton, T. M.; Scheffer, M.; Folke, C.; Schellnhuber,
H. J.; Nykvist, B.; de Wit, C. A.; Hughes, T.; van der Leeuw, S.;
Rodhe, H.; Sorlin, S.; Snyder, P. K.; Costanza, R.; Svedin, U.;
Falkenmark, M.; Karlberg, L.; Corell, R. W.; Fabry, V. J.; Hansen, J.;
Walker, B.; Liverman, D.; Richardson, K.; Crutzen, P.; Foley, J. A., A
safe operating space for humanity: identifying and quantifying
planetary boundaries that must not be transgressed could help
prevent human activities from causing unacceptable environmental
change, argue Johan Rockstrom and colleagues. Nature 2009, 461,
472+.
Whitmee, S.; Haines, A.; Beyrer, C.; Boltz, F.; Capon, A. G.; de Souza
Dias, B. F.; Ezeh, A.; Frumkin, H.; Gong, P.; Head, P.; Horton, R.;
Mace, G. M.; Marten, R.; Myers, S. S.; Nishtar, S.; Osofsky, S. A.;
Pattanayak, S. K.; Pongsiri, M. J.; Romanelli, C.; Soucat, A.; Vega,
J.; Yach, D., Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene
epoch: report of The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on
planetary health. The Lancet 2015, 386, (10007), 1973-2028.
Sladen, W. J. L.; Menzie, C. M.; Reichel, W. L., DDT Residues in
adelie penguins and crabeater seal from Antarctica. Nature 1966,
210, (May 14), 670-673.
Fuoco, R.; Capodaglio, G.; Muscatello, B.; Radaelli, M. Persistent
organic pollutants in the Antarctic environment: A review of
findings The SCAR action group on Environmental Contamination
in Antarctica (ECA): 2009.
Cincinelli, A.; Dickhut, R., Levels and trends of organochlorine
pesticides (OCPs) in Antarctica. In Antarctica: Global,
Environmental and Economic Issues, Mulder, T. J., Ed. Nova
Science Publishers: 2011, 2011; pp 143-164.
Corsolini, S., Industrial contaminants in Antarctic biota. Journal of
Chromatography A 2009, 1216, 598-612.
Schlabach, M. Non-target screening - a powerful tool for selecting
environmental pollutants; Miljødirektoratet: 2013.
Röhler, L.; Bohlin-Nizzetto, P.; Rostkowski, P.; Kallenborn, R.;
Schlabach, M., Non-target and suspect characterisation of organic
contaminants in ambient air, Part I: Combining a novel sample
clean-up method with comprehensive two-dimensional gas
chromatography. Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss. 2020, 2020, 1-33.
Liu, Y.; Richardson, E. S.; Derocher, A. E.; Lunn, N. J.; Lehmler, H.-
J.; Li, X.; Zhang, Y.; Cui, J. Y.; Cheng, L.; Martin, J. W., Hundreds of
Unrecognized Halogenated Contaminants Discovered in Polar Bear
Serum. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2018, 57, (50),
16401-16406.
Hale, R. C.; Kim, S. L.; Harvey, E.; La Guardia, M. J.; Bush, E. O.;
Jacobs, E. M., Antarctic research bases: Local sources of
polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE) flame retardants.
Environmental Science and Technology 2008, 42, 1452-1457.
Wild, S.; McLagan, D.; Schlabach, M.; Bossi, R.; Hawker, D.; Cropp,
R.; King, C.; Stark, J.; Mondon, J.; Bengtson Nash, S. M., An
Antarctic Research Station as a source of Brominated and
Perfluorinated Persistent Organic Pollutants to the Local
Environment. Environmental Science and Technology 2014, 49,
103-112.
Corsolini, S.; Metzdorff, A.; Baroni, D.; Roscales, J. L.; Jiménez, B.;
Cerro-Gálvez, E.; Dachs, J.; Galbán-Malagón, C.; Audy, O.;
Kohoutek, J.; Přibylova, P.; Poblete-Morales, M.; Avendaño-Herrera,
R.; Bergami, E.; Pozo, K., Legacy and novel flame retardants from
indoor dust in Antarctica: Sources and human exposure.
Environmental Research 2020, 110344.
Dachs, J., Coming in from the cold. Nature 2011, 1, 247-248.
Bigot, M.; Hawker, D.; Cropp, R.; Muir, D.; Jensen, B.; Bossi, R.;
Bengtson Nash, S., Spring melt and the redistribution of
organochlorine pesticides in the sea-ice environment: A
comparative study between Arctic and Antarctic regions.
Environmental Science and Technology 2017, 51, 8944-8952.
Bigot, M.; Curran, M. A. J.; Muir, D.; Hawker, D.; Cropp, R.;
Teixeira, C.; Bengtson Nash, S. M., Organochlorine pesticides in an
archived firn core from Law Dome, East Antarctica. Cryosphere
2016, 10, 2533–2539.
Laidre, K.; Stirling, I.; L., L.; Wiig, Ø.; Heide-Jørgensen, M.;
Ferguson, S., Quantifying the sensitivity of Arctic marine mammals
to climate-induced habitat change. Ecological Applications 2008,
18, (2), s97-s125.
Yamashita, N.; Taniyasu, S.; Petrick, G.; Wei, S.; Gamo, T.; Lam, P.
K. S.; Kannan, K., Perfluorinated acids as novel chemical tracers of
global circulation of ocean waters. Chemosphere 2008, 70,
1247-1255.
Bengtson Nash, S. M.; Rintoul, S. R.; Kawaguchi, S.; Staniland, I.;
Van den Hoff, J.; Tierney, M.; Bossi, R., Perfluorinated Compounds
in the Antarctic Region: Ocean Circulation Provides Prolonged
Protection. Environmental Pollution 2010, 158, 1985-1991.
Borgå, K.; Fisk, A. T.; Hoekstra, P. F.; Muir, D. C. G., Biological and
chemical factors of importance in the bioaccumulation and trophic
transfer of persistent organochlorine contaminants in Arctic marine
food webs. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 2004, 23,
(10), 2367-2385.
King, C.; Riddle, M. J., Effects of metal contamination on the
development of the common Antarctic sea urchin Sterechinus
neumayeri and comparisons of sensitivity with tropical and
temperate echinoids. Marine Ecology Progress Series 2001, 215,
143-154.
Martinez-Varela, A.; Casas, G.; Piña, B.; Dachs, J.; Vila-Costa, M.,
Large Enrichment of Anthropogenic Organic Matter Degrading
Bacteria in the Sea-Surface Microlayer at Coastal Livingston Island
(Antarctica). Frontiers in Microbiology 2020, 11, (2153).
Dawson, A. L.; Kawaguchi, S.; King, C. K.; Townsend, K. A.; King,
R.; Huston, W. M.; Bengtson Nash, S. M., Turning microplastics into
nanoplastics through digestive fragmentation by Antarctic krill.
Nature Communications 2018, 9, (1), 1001.
Pozo, K.; Harner, T.; Wania, F.; Muir, D. C. G.; Jones, K. C.; Barrie,
L. A., Toward a global network for persistent organic pollutants in
air: Results from the GAPS study. Environmental Science &
Technology 2006, 40, 4867-4873.
Lohmann, R.; Muir, D.; Zeng, E. Y.; Bao, L.-J.; Allan, I. J.; Arinaitwe,
K.; Booij, K.; Helm, P.; Kaserzon, S.; Mueller, J. F.; Shibata, Y.;
Smedes, F.; Tsapakis, M.; Wong, C. S.; You, J., Aquatic Global
Passive Sampling (AQUA-GAPS) Revisited: First Steps toward a
Network of Networks for Monitoring Organic Contaminants in the
Aquatic Environment. Environmental Science & Technology 2017,
51, (3), 1060-1067.
CCAMLR CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program Standard
Methods; Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR): Revised June 2014, 2004.
Bengtson Nash, S.; Castrillon, J.; Eisenmann, P. In Signals from the
South; Humpback Whales Carry Messages of Antarctic Sea-ice
Ecosystem Variability, 31st Annual Conference of the European
Cetacean Society, Middelfart, Denmark, 2017; Middelfart, Denmark,
2017.
