The Fifth Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-V)
The Fifth Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-V)
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the organization and the
conducted activities in the fifth Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-
V) in 2020/2021 Antarctic season.
Background
Turkey has been organizing scientific Antarctic expeditions since
2017 to increase the scientific knowledge and experience in the
national science community. Considerable work has been carried
out in the former 4 expeditions including the establishment of a
research camp, automatic weather station and Global Navigational
Satellite System (GNSS) stations. COVID-19 pandemic inevitably
impacted the national Antarctic research activities remarkably. In
2020/2021 Antarctic season, Turkey organized a compact Antarctic
expedition to mitigate these effects and to provide the sustainability
of former research activities.
The Expedition
The fifth Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE-V) was organized in
2020-2021 Antarctic season with a limited number of researchers
by taking all necessary health measures. The researchers were
vaccinated (two doses) for COVID-19 and used FFP3 masks, face
shields, and hands sanitizers during their flights to Antarctica from
Turkey. Besides, they were isolated on their arrival for 14 days as a
quarantine procedure. After this period, no symptoms were
observed and the expedition started from King George Island to
Horseshoe Island in West Antarctic Peninsula.
During the expedition, data retrieval and maintenance operations of
automatic weather station and Global Navigational Satellite System
(GNSS) stations were carried out on Horseshoe and Dismal Islands
of Marguerite Bay. In addition to these, biodiversity observations
were made on the Island and physicochemical characteristics of the
water bodies were measured.
Conclusion
Despite the risks involved, TAE-V was completed without any
problems and the planned activities were carried out successfully.
For obvious reasons, the expedition could not host any researchers
from other countries. Hoping that the pandemic will be eradicated
soon, Turkey intends to compensate this deficiency in international
cooperation in the upcoming expeditions.
