Polar Research Projects Contest for High School Students in Turkey
Polar Research Projects Contest for High School Students in Turkey
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
This paper presents information on the polar research project
contest organized in Turkey to direct the interest of the young
generation towards polar sciences.
Background
Within the context of the National Polar Science Program
(2018-2022), Turkey aims to increase the awareness of the young
generation on polar sciences. Since the establishment, the Scientific
and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK),
Marmara Research Center (MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI)
has been undertaking education and outreach activities throughout
Turkey. Besides, for long years, TUBITAK has been organizing
Science Olympics for middle and high-school students on various
themes including physics, chemistry, biology, maths, and computer
sciences.
The Project Contest
For the first time, TUBITAK MAM PRI and TUBITAK Science and
Society Department opened a project called on polar sciences for
high-school students between the dates of 19th January and 15th
March 2021. Subfields of the contest include life sciences,
geosciences, physical sciences and social sciences & humanities.
The submissions of students will be evaluated by a panel consisting
of polar science experts in Turkey. The finalist projects will be
exhibited and the winners will be announced in the TEKNOFEST
2021, which is the biggest technology festival of Turkey, to be held
in September 2021. The winners will be awarded by cash-prize, as
well as a chance for an internship at the TUBITAK MAM PRI.
As dissemination activities, advertisements were published and
presentations were given to many schools and science & art centres
in information days. A total of 6000 attendees including the
students and teachers from 30 cities participated in these online
training seminars.
763 applications were submitted from 65 different cities, and the
distribution of the projects according to the themes was as follows:
Life Sciences: 302 projects
Geosciences: 37 projects
Physical Sciences: 223 projects
Social Sciences & Humanities: 201 projects
Conclusion
The intense participation from the students showed that this contest
is a step in the right direction for fostering the young generation in
polar sciences. Considering the organizational experience, interest
and feedback of the contestants, the contest will be developed in
the upcoming years.
