Summary of the intersessional discussion on inspection reports
under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the
Environment Protocol
Summary of the intersessional discussion on inspection reports
under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the
Environment Protocol
Information Paper submitted by Norway and Spain
Summary
ATCPs, Observers’ and Experts’ intersessional review of the reports
from the inspections carried out by Australia and the United Stated
in 2019-2020 Antarctic season underscored the value of inspections
to enhance compliance with the environmental protection standards
and to improve logistical aspects of Parties’ Antarctic activities. The
amount of work, resources, logistics and effort that went into
preparing and undertaking these inspections was also highly valued.
The participants noted the importance to keep updated the
information in COMNAP database to ensure easy and safe
communications and the use of the Electronic Information Exchange
System (EIES) to keep an updated record of activities, installations
and equipment present in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
CEP Members’ and Observers’ intersessional review of the reports
from the inspections carried out by Australia and the United States
in the 2019-20 Antarctic season concluded that the two inspections
had shown that there generally speaking is a high commitment to
the environmental aspects of station operations at most stations, in
accordance with the goals, provisions and standards of the Protocol.
Members and Observers commented on the importance of the
inspection instrument, noting the importance of maintaining
transparency and exchanging information regarding all activities in
Antarctica. The desirability of an active use of the EIES was noted
in this context. They also encouraged inspected Parties to pay
attention to the recommendations made in the reports to allow
improvements of the environmental aspects of their activities.
Introduction
During the austral summer 2019/2020, Australia and the United
Stated conducted inspection activities under Article VII of the
Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environment Protocol. After
the cancellation of the XLIII ATCM in Finland 2020, it was decided
to open two forums, with separate threads for ACTM and CEP
respectively, devoted to discussion and consultation among Parties
on the inspection reports. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat opened
the forums in June 2020, one to Consultative Parties, Non-
Consultative Parties, Observers and Experts the other to CEP
Members and Observers. The inspecting Parties, Australia and the
United States, posted their respective inspection reports in early
August 2020. This paper include the summaries of the intersessional
discussions on these inspection reports.
Summary of ATCM forum
Comments from three Parties were received, Argentina, Chile and
South Africa. All participants thanked Australia and the United
States for their very clear and thorough reports presented and
underscored the value of inspections to enhance compliance with
the environmental protection standards and to improve logistical
aspects of Parties’ Antarctic activities. The amount of work,
resources, logistics and effort that went into preparing and
undertaking these inspections was also highly valued.
In relation to the inspected Parties, participants highlighted the
cooperative spirit of all stations visited and their strong
commitment to realizing their activities under the Antarctic Treaty’s
norms and compliance with the Protocol. Participants also
encouraged inspected Parties to pay attention to the
recommendations made in the reports to allow improvements of the
logistical and environmental aspects of their activities.
Specifically on the inspection reports, participants noted the
importance:
To keep updated the stations’ contact information in all databases
of the System -particularly COMNAP’s, to ensure easy and safe
communications.
That progress on all activities -including any type of construction or
improvement- be consistent with CEE´s and advice provided by the
CEP.
Participants also stressed the need to encourage:
An adequate communication of systems and protocols between
nearby stations, as a way to enhance cooperation and assist in cases
of contingencies or emergencies.
An improved use of the Electronic Information Exchange System
(EIES) to keep an updated record of activities, installations and
equipment present in the Antarctic Treaty Area and to provide
timely information’s to the ATS and CEP concerning new
construction or substantive repairs according to the Protocol.
The sharing of Parties’ good practices and challenges in the
operationalization of the use of new technologies, and in the
management of unused facilities.
In addition, participants have recognized:
The logistical collaboration with the inspection teams from third
Parties which allowed both for a reduction of the impact of
deployment in the field, as well as for a sensible cost reduction.
The high standards of compliance of the inspected facilities: in
particular improved water treatment facilities, increased use of
renewable energy sources, modernization of waste treatment
facilities, automation technologies and general prioritization of
science.
The efforts of the Parties inspected to consider innovative and more
efficient approaches for the new constructions and operations in
Antarctica, and the common challenge to address environmental
issues associated with older stations to reduce negative impacts on
the Antarctic environment.
The information’s share in reports concerning the management of
hazardous material and waste of facilities visited.
Finally, participants pointed out that they:
May wish to collectively consider some kind of coordination
procedure between Parties that inform they will be conducting
inspections, so as to avoid repetition of inspections of the same
stations in any one season, and
Share some concerns about the management of potentially
hazardous waste in some facilities as describe in the reports.
The inspecting Parties thanked all comments received to their
reports on the Antarctic Treaty inspections conducted in early 2020.
Summary of CEP forum
Five Members (Belarus, Chile, France, India, Republic of Korea and
South Africa) and one Observer (ASOC) have provided comments
on the environmental aspects of the reports.
Two of the inspected Parties (Republic of Korea and Belarus)
responded and acknowledged the comments posted during the
review, and one of these (Republic of Korea) provided detailed
responses to specific comments and questions raised. These
responses are available on the CEP Discussion Forum for Members
to review and consider.
Both the inspecting Parties noted Members’ and Observers’
insightful comments on the environmental aspects of their report
and were pleased to receive positive remarks on their respective
inspection reports.
Participating Members and Observers thanked Australia and the
United States for their very clear and thorough reports presented
and underscored the value of inspections to enhance compliance
with the environmental protection standards. They also encouraged
inspected Parties to pay attention to the recommendations made in
the reports to allow improvements of the environmental aspects of
their activities.
Themes and observations of a general nature regarding
environmental aspects of the inspections that came across during
the discussion are highlighted in the paragraph below. The many
detailed comments that were made on specifics relating to the
various stations remain available on the CEP Discussion Forum as
reference and for consideration for both the inspected Parties, as
well as other Parties.
An overarching conclusion the participants acknowledged was that
the two inspections had shown that there generally speaking is a
high commitment to the environmental aspects of station operations
at most stations, in accordance with the goals, provisions and
standards of the Protocol. Specifically, the participants commented
on the following encouraging observations drawn from the
inspection reports:
Participants commented positively on the inspection observations
that there seems to be a match between operations and mitigations
measures at the newer stations and the environmental impact
assessments prepared for the installations, eg. the Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluations (CEE).
Participants noted with appreciation the level of scientific
engagement and collaboration in research between stations located
in the same region. Jang Bogo and Mario Zucchelli station were
particularly highlighted in this regard. Participants nevertheless
underlined the desire to see even further increased cooperation,
specifically also with regard to data sharing and publications.
The high focus on and use of renewable energy at many of the
stations was commended, and Parties were encouraged to share
their good practices and challenges in the operationalization of the
use of these new technologies.
The well advanced waste management practices at most of the
stations was noted positively, although sharing concerns about
some aspects of waste handling, in particular potentially hazardous
waste, at some of the stations.
The participants noted the numerous good examples of innovative
and safe handling and storage of fuel, but noted that additional
efforts would be required at some of the stations to decrease risks of
spills further.
The clever use of seawater at several of the stations was
highlighted, although at the same time noting the lack of
information regarding amount of and handling of by-products
(brine) in most of these cases.
Participants supported the efforts relating to management
underpinning the proposed new ASPA at Inexpressible Island, and
commending the cooperation between China, Italy and the Republic
of Korea in this regard.
Several participants commented on the ongoing environmental
monitoring as well as regular reporting to the ATCM concerning the
runway under construction near Mario Zucchelli Station, and
encouraged Italy to continue to keep the ATCM informed on
progress.
While the general gist of comments were positive and highlighting
encouraging environmental sensitive management and operations at
the stations, a few issues emerged as a common concern by those
who participated in the review. Specifically, they pointed to the
following challenges and issues:
While recognizing that good practices were in place, participants
underscored the importance of stations being vigilant and careful in
operating greenhouse facilities, noting
that using soil (non-sterile) and seeds is a huge invasive species risk
which must be handled accordingly.
Several participants commented on the status of the CEE process for
the new station at Inexpressible Island, noting that the final CEE
should be completed and submitted as soon as possible.
Recognizing that Parties have a common challenge in addressing
environmental issues associated with older stations such as the
inspected Molodezhnaya, participants nevertheless underscored that
removal, remediation, repair or re-use of the station to reduce the
risk of further environmental impacts should be regarded as a
priority, even if it represent a very considerable logistic and
environmental management challenge. Participants encouraged the
exchange of information about good practices for the management
of unused facilities.
Finally, participants commented on the importance of the
inspection instrument, noting the importance of maintaining
transparency and exchanging information regarding all activities in
Antarctica. The desirability of an active use of the EIES was noted
in this context.
