ASOC Report to the ATCM
ASOC report to the ATCM
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be attending the XLIII Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the past two years.
ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington, DC, USA, and its website is
https://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 23 member groups representing a
wide range of ATS countries. We are pleased to report that three
new groups have joined since the 2019 ATCM: Blue Marine
Foundation, Global Choices, and World Parks Inc.
Intersessional activities
Since the XLII ATCM in Prague in 2019, much has changed in the
Antarctic world. While the 2019 CCAMLR meeting was held in
person, the 2020 ATCM meeting was cancelled, and CCAMLR was
held virtually for the first time in its history. This necessitated
significant changes to ASOC’s work. Although our international
team is used to connecting virtually, not having periodic occasions
to meet in person has dramatically changed our work.
Online engagement
For example, last year, during the time period that the ATCM would
have been held, we prepared a variety of social media content
under the theme “ATCM Week” to share with the public. This
included interviews with ATCM experts, infographics, and
animations on climate change in the Antarctic. The animations,
which were in Spanish and English, were produced by the Chilean
Antarctic Institute (INACH), who graciously partnered with ASOC
so that we could share them on social media simultaneously and
reach a wider audience.
ASOC also hosted two well-attended webinars on Antarctic issues,
What’s holding back protection of the Antarctic Ocean? and The
future of Antarctic Peninsula protection. The webinars included
panellists with a variety of backgrounds in policy, science, industry
and nature photography who provided a diverse range of
perspectives on how to protect the Antarctic environment. Many
audience members subsequently provided feedback expressing their
appreciation for the interesting and at times provocative
discussions.
ASOC presented at the virtual SCAR meeting and the virtual Polar
Law Symposium. ASOC also participated in the virtual CCAMLR
meeting in October of 2020. During the meeting, as a substitute for
the usual reception that we sponsor, we invited delegates to virtual
film festival featuring several short films on Antarctica.
In April 2021, The Pew Charitable Trusts and the Wilson Center’s
Polar Institute convened an online expert working group of
Antarctic scientists from a range of disciplines to explore how
changes in the Southern Ocean impact global climate regulation,
marine ecosystems, and human communities, and to explore the
short-term management and government actions needed to address
climate risks.
ASOC plans to have a public virtual event later in the year to
celebrate the 30th Anniversary of the Protocol.
Support for policy-relevant science
WWF supported the Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking
Data (RAATD) project led by SCAR, with support from the Centre
de Synthèse et d'Analyse sur la Biodiversité, France. RAATD is an
impressive demonstration of the spirit of international cooperation
of Antarctic science, bringing together 4060 individual
animal tracks from 17 predator species including humpback whales,
emperor penguins, southern elephant seals and wandering albatross
collected by more than 70 scientists across 12 national Antarctic
programmes. While this work is expected to be helpful in the design
of marine protected areas (MPAs) it can also be useful for
understanding which coastal and terrestrial areas habitats are
critical to Antarctic species, and therefore inform ATCM action as
well.
Greenpeace undertook an expedition with two of its vessels,
facilitating research on declining chinstrap populations in relatively
remote colonies, recording a decline of up to 70% in some areas. It
also exposed the underlying issues with regulation of transhipment
activities, observing a number of transhipments around the South
Orkney Islands and releasing a report, Fishy Business, detailing the
many problems it has encountered in this area.
Engagement with other organizations
ASOC continues to engage in the virtual meetings of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) through ASOC members
with Consultative Status at the IMO, with a focus on the
development of safety measures for non-SOLAS vessels, in particular
fishing vessels and private yachts operating in polar waters.
Guidelines for fishing vessels over 24m in length (i.e. all Southern
Ocean fishing vessels) and for private yachts of 300 gross tonnage
and above and not engaged in commercial trade have recently been
adopted. These Guidelines are of importance to ship operations
south of 60oS since over 50% of vessels qualify as non-SOLAS
vessels and it will be important that ATPs and ATCPs encourage the
application of the IMO guidelines to fishing vessels and private
yachts sailing south of 60oS. ASOC continues to engage in the IMO’s
work to introduce mandatory navigation and voyage planning
provisions for these same vessels, and also in other aspects of IMO’s
work that will have relevance to vessel operations in the Southern
Ocean including addressing marine plastic litter, underwater noise
and ships’ climate (CO2 and black carbon) emissions.
Greenpeace, Pew and WWF have worked with the Association of
Responsible Krill Operators (ARK) and a number of independent
scientists to review the voluntary restricted zones agreed by the
krill industry in 2018, including agreeing an expansion to an area
closed year-round around Hope Bay.
Concluding remarks
The pandemic has undoubtedly made the work of the ATCM more
difficult. However, along with the 30th anniversary of the Protocol,
the pandemic gives us a reason to reflect on our current relationship
with the natural world. The signing of the Protocol was a watershed
moment for environmental protection. The world is now reckoning
with new, urgent threats to the entire planet. ASOC believes the
ATCM and the Protocol have a vital role to play in responding to
these threats. One message we have been pleased to receive during
our enhanced online engagement with the public is that Antarctic
continues to inspire people all over the world. Even if they have not
visited in person, they are fascinated by the region and its
incredible species and want it to remain intact. Likewise, it has
been rewarding to see the dedication and commitment of
colleagues, including our fellow Observers and Experts, who have
found creative ways to continue doing work related to the ATCM
and CEP despite the limitations of the pandemic.
ASOC is looking forward celebrating the anniversary of the Protocol
this year, and urges ATCPs, and the ATS as a whole, to not only
reflect on the Protocol’s successes, but recommit to its
implementation. If we are to address the challenges and threats to
the health of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, the ATCM and
CCAMLR must increase their ambition and adopt new
comprehensive protection measures such as MPAs and ASPAs. We
have no doubt that it is possible to ensure that the next thirty years
are even more successful than the first thirty, but only with
sufficient political will.
In closing, ASOC would also like to express our deepest sympathies
to the family of Adrian Dahood-Fritz, who passed away in a tragic
accident in September of 2019. A brilliant scientist as well as a
dedicated ATCM rapporteur, Adrian was well known to many of us
within ASOC and we will greatly miss her passion for Antarctica.
