A Memorandum of Understanding between the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey, Marmara Research
Center, Polar Research Institute and the State Institution National
Antarctic Scientific Centre of Ukraine
A Memorandum of Understanding between the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Turkey, Marmara Research
Center, Polar Research Institute and the State Institution National
Antarctic Scientific Centre of Ukraine
Information Paper submitted by Turkey and Ukraine
Summary
This paper gives information about the signing of a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) between the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), Marmara Research Center
(MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI) and the State Institution
National Antarctic Scientific Centre of Ukraine (SI NASC) within the
context of international scientific cooperation in Antarctic research.
Introduction
The signing process of the MoU between the TUBITAK MAM PRI
and SI NASC has been completed on behalf of the Parties on
29.12.2020 by the signatures of Burcu ÖZSOY, Director of the
TUBITAK MAM PRI and Evgen DYKYI, Director of the SI NASC.
In the context of the development of scientific cooperation in
Antarctic research, the TUBITAK MAM PRI and SI NASC within the
framework of this MoU express a mutual interest in studies related
to Antarctica and emphasize their commitment to strengthen,
promote and develop cooperation in Antarctic research on the basis
of mutual benefit.
The areas of cooperation under this MoU include logistic support,
joint studies in the field of natural sciences, protection of the
Antarctic environment and exchange of information on the
domestic laws and regulations on Antarctica.
The cooperation between the Participants will be carried out
through visits of the representatives of competent authorities,
exchange of scientists and scholars, joint planning and
implementation of research projects, scientific experiments and
expeditions to Antarctica, exchange of scientific information and
research results as may be agreed and joint organizations of
symposiums, training and safety courses and scientific seminars.
It is notable that both Participants have already had an excellent
example of mutual fruitful cooperation. In accordance with
previously reached agreements, there was organized the joint
Ukrainian-Turkish Antarctic expedition to Vernadsky station in
2016. This expedition has brought important experience for both
Parties. For Ukraine, it was not just an exchange of scientists but
hosting at the station a full team of 13 Turkish scientists from
various institutions involved in Antarctic research. The mentioned
experience was also great for the Turkish side. Turkey started
organizing annual national expeditions under the auspices of the
Presidency of the Republic of Turkey in the following years.
The TUBITAK MAM PRI would like to thank the SI NASC for this
opportunity. Such cooperation is extremely important for both
Parties in their aspiration to strengthen international scientific
cooperation in Antarctic research.
