Preparation of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the
proposed construction and operation of an aerodrome near
Australia’s Davis research station
(the Davis Aerodrome Project)
Preparation of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the
proposed construction and operation of an aerodrome near
Australia’s Davis research station (the Davis Aerodrome Project)
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) The Australian Antarctic
Division of the Australian Government Department of Agriculture,
Water and the Environment is responsible for leading, coordinating
and delivering the Australian Antarctic Program. is undertaking
planning activities for a proposal to construct and operate a new
aerodrome near Davis research station in the Vestfold Hills, East
Antarctica (the Davis Aerodrome Project). The Davis Aerodrome
Project would involve the construction of a 2.7 kilometre paved
runway to support intercontinental flights to and from Hobart,
Australia. The aerodrome would also support a range of intra-
continental aviation activity.
The planning activities include progressing the environmental
impact assessments and approvals that would be required for the
Davis Aerodrome Project to proceed. The proposal will be subject to
the highest level of environmental scrutiny, including through the
preparation and circulation of a Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) in accordance with the requirements of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Australia would be pleased to discuss the Davis Aerodrome Project
and provide further information, including through planned online
consultation sessions.
Background
The 2016 Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan
includes a commitment to investigate yearround air access between
Australia and Antarctica See ATCM XXXIX/IP111 Australian
Antarctic Strategy and Action Plan (Australia). In May 2018, the
Australian Government announced its intention to construct a
paved runway near Davis research station in the Vestfold Hills,
East Antarctica, subject to environmental and other approvals See
ATCM XLII/IP089 Modernisation of Australia’s Antarctic Program
(Australia).
Australian Antarctic Program (AAP) activities include scientific
research and the operation of associated research stations and
transport logistics. The AAP is highly collaborative and Australia
works closely with other national Antarctic programs to run joint
scientific and logistic operations.
The AAP and other national Antarctic programs have increasingly
used aviation capabilities to support their own and joint scientific
and logistics operations. In 2007, Australia introduced
intercontinental flights between Hobart, Australia, and the 3.5
kilometre ice runway at Wilkins Aerodrome, near Casey research
station. This was the first intercontinental aviation link to East
Antarctica and has proven an effective logistics pathway for the
AAP and other national Antarctic programs operating in the area.
The Davis Aerodrome Project would provide a step up in the
aviation capability available to the AAP and other national
Antarctic programs that Australia works closely with in East
Antarctica. It would provide yearround access via a six hour flight
from Hobart, creating new logistic support pathways and scientific
opportunities for the AAP and other national Antarctic programs.
Importantly, the ability to move people and supplies at any time of
the year would also improve the emergency response capability for
the area.
As with current arrangements at Wilkins Aerodrome, Australia
would offer some available capacity on chartered aircraft for
passengers and cargo to support ongoing collaborative
arrangements with other national Antarctic programs.
About the Project
The Davis Aerodrome Project would involve construction of the first
paved all-weather runway in Antarctica. Planning activities,
including site investigations, have identified a preferred site (see
Figure 1) and include the development of preliminary aerodrome
designs. The proposal currently involves:
Constructing a 2.7 kilometre long runway to support large aircraft
making year-round flights between Hobart and Davis research
station. It is currently envisaged that the runway would be
constructed from approximately 12,000 ten-tonne pre-cast concrete
pavers. However, the final design and construction methodology
would be determined through a procurement process.
Constructing a 4.6 kilometre road between Davis research station
and the aerodrome site, and a new wharf to facilitate ship-to-shore
movement of goods and materials.
Constructing aerodrome infrastructure, including an arrival and
departure hall, fuel farm, landing lights and tower, heliport hangar
and an apron large enough to accommodate the type of aircraft
required to safely fly between Hobart and the aerodrome as well as
smaller aircraft used for intra-continental flights.
Initial expansion and enabling works at Davis research station so
that it can support a construction workforce of around 250 people
at its peak.
Logistics and supply chains, including shipping and managing
equipment, materials and crew. Current estimates suggest
approximately 70 return voyages using ice-class vessels would be
required to transport the goods and materials.
If the proposal proceeds it is anticipated that the aerodrome would
be operational from around 2040.
Figure 1. Indicative site plan for proposed aerodrome and
associated infrastructure. The proposed aerodrome site is
approximately 4.5 km north-east of Davis research station in the
Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica.
Environmental impact assessment
Australia is committed to best practice environmental stewardship
in Antarctica. As a fundamental consideration in planning for the
Davis Aerodrome Project, Australia is committed to understanding
and addressing the environmental impacts of the proposal to the
highest standards.
The Davis Aerodrome Project is subject to environmental impact
assessment under Australian legislation that implements the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the
Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 (ATEP Act).
Under the ATEP Act it has been determined that a Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) will need to be prepared.
The proposal will also be assessed against the requirements of
Australian national environmental legislation, the Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act).
A range of Antarctic environment subject matter experts are
engaged to provide advice and input into the development of the
Davis Aerodrome Project CEE.
The draft CEE will be circulated to Parties and the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP) for comment, in accordance with
the requirements of Annex I to the Environmental Protocol.
Further information
Australia is planning a series of online consultation sessions to
provide further information about the Davis Aerodrome Project and
will separately circulate details to CEP Members and Observers.
More details about the Davis Aerodrome Project are available on
the Australian Antarctic Division website www.antarctica.gov.au.
