Risks of COVID-19 to Antarctic Wildlife
Risks of COVID-19 to Antarctic Wildlife
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
In 2020, the Antarctic Wildlife Health Monitoring Working Group
of the SCAR Expert Group on Birds and Marine Mammals (EG-
BAMM) assessed the risk of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak to Antarctic
wildlife. Based on the scientific literature about the structure and
function of SARS-CoV-2 as well as its stability in different
environmental conditions, and taking into consideration
information available on other viruses in Antarctic wildlife, a risk
assessment was conducted to examine whether SARS-CoV-2 could
survive in the Antarctic environment and be transmitted from
humans to wildlife (and vice-versa) and if so, whether Antarctic
wildlife could be susceptible to the virus.
The findings from this study were published in the journal Science
of the Total Environment1 and followed up by two publications in
the outreach platform The Conversation2,3. This Information Paper
highlights the vulnerability of Antarctic wildlife to novel viruses,
our limited knowledge and understanding of infectious diseases in
Antarctic wildlife, and the potential risks posed by human activity
on the Antarctic continent.
Background
Human activity and human-wildlife interactions in Antarctica are
on the rise5,6, increasing the risk of introducing novel infectious
diseases to the Antarctic continent and to Antarctic wildlife. Both
direct (activities within or close proximity to wildlife and wildlife
colonies (<10m)) and indirect (fisheries, animals near stations)
human-wildlife interactions pose a significant risk for the
introduction and transmission of pathogens to wildlife. Currently,
information on pathogens of Antarctic wildlife and their
susceptibility to different microbes and viruses is limited, with little
research being conducted on the presence of pathogens and their
impacts on wildlife.
In late 2019, a novel disease, COVID-19, emerged – most probably –
from the Hubei Province of China and began to spread rapidly
throughout the world, with the World Health Organization
declaring a pandemic in early 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic is
caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), which is a novel species of coronavirus closely
related to other coronaviruses found in bats and pangolins. The
virus is suspected to have originated in a yet-to-be determined
animal and spread to humans via an unknown intermediate host.
Recent research has shown that the viruses have the potential for
cross-species transmission from humans to wildlife and vice versa,
with animals such as felids, canids and mustelids and other
mammals known to have been recently infected with the virus.
However, little is known about the susceptibility of wildlife to the
virus. In early 2020, Damas et al.4 predicted the risk to wildlife of
SARS-CoV-2 based on a comparative and structural analysis of the
ACE2 receptor, which is the main receptor used by the virus to
infect its hosts. This raises the question, is Antarctic wildlife
susceptible to the virus? To address this, the Antarctic Wildlife
Health Monitoring Working Group of the SCAR Expert Group on
Birds and Marine Mammals (EG-BAMM) conducted a risk
assessment on the risk of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak to Antarctic
wildlife in 2020. Their findings were synthesized in an article
whose key findings are presented below1.
Key Findings
Given the relative stability of SARS-CoV-2 at low temperatures and
its ability to remain viable on a variety of materials, this study
found that the Antarctic continent provided a suitable environment
for the survival and transmission of the virus to wildlife.
Based on the predictive modelling by Damas et al.4 in early 2020, it
is predicted that Antarctic wildlife species such as pinnipeds and
seabirds will have a low susceptibility to the virus, whilst cetaceans
are
considered to be highly susceptible, but the actual risk of
transmission to cetaceans is lower in comparison to pinnipeds and
seabirds due to their lower probability of contact with humans.
However, it appears that the ACE2 receptor is not the only factor in
determining a species’ susceptibility to the virus as species such as
minks that were also predicted to have a low susceptibility to the
virus have recently contracted the virus from humans on farms7. As
such, further research is required to understand the risks to
Antarctic wildlife.
Barbosa et al. 1 also identified a number of key potential
transmission routes of the virus to wildlife. Contact with wildlife via
direct handling for research purposes, human-wildlife interactions
via tourist activities and transmission via migratory species were
deemed to pose the greatest risk for transmitting the virus (Fig. 1).
Indirect routes, such as via faecal transmission from raw sewage,
contaminated equipment and interactions between fisheries and
wildlife, are also important to consider.
Figure 1. Potential transmission routes of virus to wildlife in
Antarctica1. Species and human activities shown in the map do not
refer to actual locations (Barbosa et al 2021).
The study also found that the areas that posed the greatest risk of
introduction and transmission of the virus are areas where human
activities and numbers of research stations are the highest including
the Antarctic Peninsula, South Shetland Islands and Victoria Land
(Figure 2).
Figure 2. Map of Antarctica displaying Antarctic Research stations
and key tourist landing sites8.
Conclusions
Human-wildlife interactions in Antarctica are on the rise, increasing
the risk of introducing novel infectious disease to the Antarctic
continent and to Antarctic wildlife. The recent COVID-19 pandemic
highlights the need for further research into the microbial ecology
and pathogens of Antarctic wildlife and assessment of current
biosecurity measures to understand how novel pathogens can
spread from humans to wildlife. Additional mitigation measures
may also be required to minimise the risk of SARS-CoV-2 and other
infectious pathogens being introduced to Antarctic fauna (see
Barbosa et al. 2021), recognising that biosecurity measures and
regulations aimed at limiting animal disturbance are already in
place, in addition to COVID-19 prevention guidance and mitigation
protocols developed by COMNAP and national Antarctic
programmes, that will significantly reduce transmission pathways
(see WP047).
Although the work by Damas et al.4 highlights that most bird and
mammal species in the Antarctic are not susceptible to the virus,
further research and general monitoring of pathogen presence in
Antarctic wildlife is needed. To address the knowledge gaps in
wildlife health and disease, the Antarctic Wildlife Health
Monitoring Group has established a disease surveillance network to
coordinate research and surveillance programs on the impacts of
current and emerging infectious diseases on Antarctic wildlife. The
aim of the network is to:
Coordinate the collection and analysis of data and biological
samples for ongoing disease surveillance in Antarctic and Southern
Ocean wildlife.
Using historical collections of biological samples:
Examine changes in the spatial and temporal variations in
presence/absence of pathogens/infectious diseases;
Examine the influence of human activity and climate change on the
prevalence of pathogens/infectious agents in the Southern Ocean
region.
Assist in the investigation of “Unusual mass mortality events” and
suspected disease outbreaks.
Identify routes of introduction and transmission to assist in
biosecurity and management of Antarctica.
References cited in the text
1. Barbosa et al 2021. Risk Assessment of SARS-CoV-2 in Antarctic
Wildlife. Science of the Total Environment 755 :143352
2. Barbosa 2020. La Antártida: la última frontera para la pandemia
3. Powers and Dewar 2021. COVID has reached Antarctica.
Scientists are extremely concerned for its wildlife.
4. Damas et al 2020. Broad host range of SARS-CoV-2 predicted by
comparative and structural analysis of ACE2 in vertebrates. PNAS
117(36): 22311-22322
5. IAATO. 2020. IAATO Antarctic visitor figures 2019–2020.
https://iaato.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/IAATO-on-
Antarcticvisitor-figures-2019-20-FINAL.pdf
6. Tin T, Fleming ZL, Hughes KA, Ainley DG, Convey, P., Morenoa
CA, Pfeiffer S, Scott J, Snape I. (2009). Impacts of local human
activities on the Antarctic environment. Antarctic Science 21:3-33.
7. Oude Munnink et al 2021. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 on mink
farms between humans and mink and back to humans. Science 371:
172-177
8. Hughes and Convey 2020. Implications of the COVID-19
pandemic for Antarctica. Antarctic Science 32(6): 426-439
