On the activities of the Republic of Belarus to implement the
environmental principles of the Madrid Protocol of 1991 in
2019-2021
English version provided by the author
On the activities of the Republic of Belarus to implement the
environmental principles of the Madrid Protocol of 1991 in
2019-2021
Information document submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
This document provides information on the next steps taken by the
Republic of Belarus in 2019-2021 to implement the provisions of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
the final Comprehensive Environmental Assessment of the
construction and operation of the Belarusian Antarctic Station, as
well as the recommendations of the Australian Antarctic Division's
inspection team observers.
Background information
In May 2015, at ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria), the
CEP XVIII Information Document No. IP39 presented by the
Republic of Belarus Construction and operation of the Belarusian
Antarctic Station on Vechernyaya Mountain, Enderby Land - Final
Comprehensive Environmental Assessment (hereinafter - CEA) was
approved by Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty without
comment.
In December 2015, with the transport and logistics assistance of the
Russian Federation, the Republic of Belarus began to create a year-
round infrastructure of the Belarusian Antarctic Research Station
Vechernyaya Mountain (hereinafter referred to as BARS
Vechernyaya Mountain) in East Antarctica, at the point with
coordinates S670040/ E0460009/.
In January 2020, observers from the Australian Antarctic Division
(hereinafter - AAD) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of
Australia carried out an inspection of BARS Vechernyaya Mountain.
Observers of the AAD inspection team were given free access to all
parts, installations and equipment of BARS Vechernyaya Mountain
in accordance with Article VII (3) of the Antarctic Treaty, as well as
to all records kept on BARS Vechernyaya Mountain, which are
required in accordance with the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The inspection team found the
station's modular and efficient design to be a good example of a
modern facility. The inspection report notes that “The members of
the inspection team are extremely impressed with the high level of
design and construction of the station, its small area and minimal
landscape changes, the desire for efficient energy and water use,
and the focus on integrated scientific research.” The inspection
team of AAD highly praised for the rational use of existing buildings
and the clearance work on the site of the former field base of the
Soviet Antarctic Expedition Vechernyaya Mountain in cooperation
with the Russian Federation, and also noted that “the construction
and operation of the station, as well as the measures taken to
mitigate the impacts, identified in the environmental assessment
process strictly correspond to the final version of the
Comprehensive Environmental Assessment (CEA) prepared by
Belarus”. The inspection team concluded that the station is being
used with close attention to the 1991 Madrid Protocol and general
environmental performance.
The inspection report noted that some of the environmental systems
specified in the CEA had not yet been installed and commissioned.
In the opinion of the inspection team observers, the introduction of
this environmental equipment in accordance with the construction
schedule set forth in the CEA will contribute to ensuring the use of
best practices and full compliance with the relevant provisions of
the 1991 Madrid Protocol.
Results of environmental protection activities in 2019-2021
During the 2020-2021 season, the first stage of the wintering
complex of the BARS Vechernyaya Mountain, including modern
residential, laboratory, service, technological, medical, storage,
environmental and support facilities, as well as satellite, VHF and
KV communication systems, Internet and TV broadcasting
Figure 1 - General view of the station
Figure 1 - General view of the station
(see Fig. 1) was completed. Construction and material and technical
equipment of the BARS Vechernyaya Mountain facilities is carried
out in strict compliance with the final CEA, with the expectation of
its further year-round operation. A limited number of station
personnel (11-15 people), introduction of alternative energy sources
and modern equipment for wastewater treatment, recycling and
waste management, guarantee a minimal impact on the Antarctic
environment and allow preserving the pristine natural environment
in the station area. As of today, the infrastructure of the first stage
of the BARS Vechernyaya Mountain is fully prepared for the pilot
wintering with a staff of 11 people.
Within the framework of implementation of the provisions of the
1991 Madrid Protocol, the final CEA and the recommendations of
the AAD inspection team observers, the Republic of Belarus carries
out consistent activities to ensure the maximum possible protection
of the Antarctic environment, including:
- the national legislation on the implementation of environmental
activities in Antarctica is being improved and strengthened;
- stage-by-stage equipping of the infrastructure of BARS
Vechernyaya Mountain with modern environmental objects,
systems and equipment is being carried out;
- measures are being taken to reduce the number of sources of
waste generation;
- together with the Russian Federation, systematic work continues
on the disposal of waste from Soviet Antarctic expeditions outside
the scope of the Antarctic Treaty;
- on an ongoing basis, a program for monitoring key parameters of
the Antarctic environment in the area of operation of BARS
Vechernyaya Mountain is being implemented, aimed at assessing
the accuracy of forecasts of the impact of economic activities on the
environment and identifying unforeseen consequences.
In the period 2019-2021 the Republic of Belarus in these areas of
environmental protection activities in Antarctica carried out the
following work:
- approved in 2019 by the Resolution of the Government of the
Republic of Belarus “On Approval of Recommendation 10 Annex V
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Area Protection and Management”. Annex V entered into force for
the Republic of Belarus on November 14, 2019;
- approved in 2020 by a decree of the Government of the Republic
of Belarus the regulation “On the procedure for issuing a permit to
carry out activities in the Antarctic Treaty area”. This regulation
entered into force in the Republic of Belarus on December 28, 2019;
- under consideration by the Ministries and departments of the
Republic of Belarus there is a draft Decree of the Government of the
Republic of Belarus “On approval of Measure 1 Appendix VI to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Liability arising from environmental emergencies”;
- modern environmental protection equipment was delivered to
BARS Vechernyaya Mountain and put into operation, including: a
press for compacting solid waste of group 4 (see Fig. 2); incinerator
(waste incineration) installation (see Fig. 3); storage transportation
tank on a ski chassis for removal and disposal of domestic
wastewater into the sea area (see Fig. 4); two two-layer isotainer
fuel storage facilities with a volume of 26 cubic meters. each (see
Fig. 5).
Figure 2 - Group 4 solid waste compaction press
Figure 3 - Incinerator IU-32
Figure 4 - Transportation tank on ski chassis for domestic
wastewater disposal
Figure 5 - Isotainer double-layer fuel tanks
- 11.6 tons of non-incinerated solid waste of groups 2 and 4 have
been removed from the BARS Vechernyaya Mountain area outside
the Antarctic Treaty. Not burnt waste collected by the Belarus
experts is packed into empty drums from mineral oil, is located in
special transport packings
Figure 6 - Transport stacking with waste groups 2 and 4
Figure 6 - Transport stacking with waste groups 2 and 4
(see Fig. 6) and are annually removed outside the scope of the
Antarctic Treaty on board the Russian ships “Academician Fedorov”
and “Academician Treshnikov”, for subsequent disposal on the
territory of the Russian Federation.
Prospects for the development of the Belarusian Antarctic
infrastructure in 2021 - 2025
In the period 2021-2025 the research of the Republic of Belarus in
the Antarctic will be carried out in accordance with the subprogram
“Development of the activities of the Belarusian Antarctic station”
of the State program “Scientific and innovative activities of the
National Academy of Sciences of Belarus” for 2021–2025.
From 2021 to 2025, the second phase of BARS Vechernyaya
Mountain will gradually include up to 10 units of modular
infrastructure of scientific, residential, industrial and environmental
purposes, including the construction of a sewage treatment plant for
domestic sewage with the diversion pipeline directly into the sea or
into a deep glacial mine.
Final information
The National Antarctic Program of the Republic of Belarus expresses
its deep gratitude to the observers of the AAD inspection group for
valuable recommendations, close and effective cooperation, high
professionalism and objective evaluation of our country's activity in
the Antarctic.
Following the spirit and the letter of the Antarctic Treaty and the
environmental principles of the 1991 Madrid Protocol, the Republic
of Belarus remains committed to establishing an environmentally
safe research station near Vechernyaya Mountain on Enderby Land
in East Antarctica, to developing and strengthening international
cooperation in the Antarctic.
In order to ensure the maximum possible protection of the Antarctic
environment, our country will consistently continue to implement a
set of measures to reduce emissions of pollutants, wastewater
discharges, reduce sources of waste generation, prevent fuel leaks,
remove waste from Soviet Antarctic expeditions outside the
Antarctic Treaty, and continuously monitor key parameters of the
Antarctic environment.
