Non-native species Trichocera maculipennis (Diptera) eradication
from Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station, Western Shore of
Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands – update
2020/2021
Non-native species Trichocera maculipennis (Diptera) eradication
from Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station, Western Shore of
Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands update
2020/2021
An Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
The paper presents the recent status and eradication strategies of
the non-native species Trichocera maculipennis (Diptera) from
Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station, Western Shore of Admiralty Bay,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
Background
Until recently, the Antarctic terrestrial environment has been little
impacted by non-native species in comparison to other regions of
the Earth. This environment is characterised by the simplicity of the
food network, which only encompasses a few species. Antarctic land
animals (those that spend their entire lives on land) present on King
George Island are predominantly micro-invertebrates. As a result of
its simplicity, this environment is likely to have free niches that can
be easily occupied by alien and invasive species (Hughes & Convey
2012). Increased human activity contributed to the introduction of
alien species in the Antarctic region (Hughes et al., 2019). Non-
native species are characterised by having possible negative effects
on the native environment, and therefore constant monitoring and
eradication of identified invasive species is necessary (Mack et al.,
2000). The first report documenting the presence of the boreal
trichocerid fly (Trichocera maculipennis) took place at the
Uruguayan Base Científica Antártica Artigas in 2006 (Volonterio et
al., 2013). Subsequently, there have been reports of the fly recorded
within or in the surroundings of the following stations on King
George Island: Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero, Frei, Fildes, and King
Sejong. This species has established itself in natural areas, as well as
within buildings such as sewage treatment plants, scientific research
stations, military bases, and hydroponic installations (Hughes et al.,
2005, Volonterio et al., 2013).
T. maculipennis is a species that is primarily known from the
northern hemisphere, inhabiting the Boreal Zone (also found in
Europe in caves or mines), as well as the sub-Arctic and Arctic
Zones - Greenland, sub-Arctic islands, and Scandinavia (Petrašiūnas
& Weber, 2013). In the Boreal Zone, these insects reproduce twice a
year, whereas in the Arctic Zone they reproduce only once a year,
during the summer season. T. maculipennis has four larval stages,
where pupation usually lasts only a few hours, and adults can even
emerge through the snow layer (Hågvar & Krzemińska, 2008). It is
believed that they were brought to Antarctica with the supplies for
science stations or with tourists. T. maculipennis flies are perfectly
adapted to low temperatures, which allows them to spread in high
latitudes. They mainly occur in the vicinity of human aggregates,
preying on dead organic matter, including sewage systems
(Carlsson, 1962). Adults are active at low temperatures, although
no longer fly at temperatures below -10°C. The development of eggs
and the pupation of larvae is possible in the temperature range
-1.5°C to 18.0°C, and larvae are able to survive when frozen in ice
(Dahl, 1969, 1970; Platcher, 1983). Its larvae have been detected in
nutrient rich substrates, such as decomposing plant matter,
excrement, or as pests in stored vegetables (Volonterio et al., 2013).
The CEP Non-native Species Manual recommends, as a key guiding
principle, that ‘to be effective, responses to introductions should be
undertaken as a priority, to prevent an increase in the species’
distribution range and to make eradication simpler, cost effective
and more likely to succeed’. Therefore, we believe that the
successful management of non-native species, including those
within station buildings, should be a priority.
This work aims to report non-native T. maculipennis fly found at
the Arctowski Station, and to present actions taken to remove them
and protect the station against the influx of new individuals. In
accordance
with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native species manual,
measures to eradicate T. maculipennis from the Arctowski Station
were taken.
Non-native fly T. maculipennis at Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station
The non-native fly T. maculipennis was accidentally introduced at
the Polish Antarctic Arctowski Station, with alive larvae and adult
individuals initially recorded in large numbers in the sewage system
in October 2017 (Potocka & Krzemieńska, 2018). Only a few adult
individuals were noticed outside the facility, at a distance of less
than 50 cm from the septic tank (Potocka et al., 2020). Routine
inspections in previous years had not revealed their presence
(Przepiórka, 2016, unpublished data). However, since their
discovery, their presence has been recorded on a regular basis.
Imago individuals of T. maculipensis are recorded at Arctowski
Station throughout the year. Live individuals, numbering up to a
dozen flies, can be found in the main building of the station, most
often in the kitchen or pantry. The second permanent location
where flies can be found is a cold store with food, where the
temperature is kept at 4°C. The third location, that has already been
mentioned above, is the septic tank. After the initiation of several
control measures, the number of recorded alive individuals dropped
significantly, with less than 10 individuals being observed during
the summer season 2019/2020. In the current 2020/2021 season,
no flies to date have been found in the Arctowski Station septic tank
nor in the buildings. This result can be considered a success,
evidencing the effectiveness of the measures taken to eradicate the
flies. The total number of individuals found has decreased
significantly since 2017. However, further actions are necessary to
maintain this state.
Eradication of T. maculipennis from Arctowski Polish Antarctic
Station
Since their first discovery, systematic monitoring and control
measures have been carried out at the Arctowski Station to
eradicate the invasive species. As the septic tank is considered to be
the main breading location, it is regularly emptied. Opening of the
septic tank lid is accompanied by alcohol spraying to immobilize
any individuals, which if present, are collected before the tank is
emptied. Subsequently, the tank is cleaned using fresh water, then
washed with a solution of hydrochloric acid at a concentration of
approximately 2-3%. The internal walls of the protective box, lid,
and available parts of the tank, are sprayed with an insecticide
containing lambda-cyhalothrin, e.g. Oxyfly or Solfac. Spraying is
carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Food
stored at the station is regularly reviewed, with the storage rooms
being cleaned frequently and any developmental stages of the flies
present are removed. In places where flies are found, adhesive traps
are installed to identify population trends throughout the year.
Traps are regularly checked and changed. In addition, there are
ferrone traps at the Arctowski Station, in support of the Uruguayan
Monitoring Plan to Manage the Non-Native Flies in King George
Island, South Shetland Islands. The use of UV lamps in the rooms
was abandoned because of the presence of fresh food, which began
to sprout after exposure to the light. Molecular analyses of collected
specimens were performed to assess population origin and structure
(Potocka et al., 2020). Extra measures are taken during each new
food transport to the station, with imported food being carefully
screened to avoid the influx of new individuals of invasive species.
The eradication of the invasive T. maculipennis from the Arctowski
Polish Antarctic Station on King George Island, is necessary to
maintain species stability in the natural Antarctic environment, as
well as being required by the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
The eradication procedure will have no more than minor or
temporary impact on the environment. The applied means are used
only within the sewage system, and chemical substances having an
active period of up to 12 weeks, which subsequently decomposed
into non-hazardous substances. Selected insecticides have a local
effect, and will not affect other components of nature, except for
intended treatment of the invasive species. The eradication
procedure is carried out by trained personnel to avoid possible
emergency situations. The application of a procedure consisting of
several methods allows the elimination all life stages of the invasive
insects - washing and disinfecting agents eliminate eggs and insect
larvae, whereas contact insecticides affect adults and larvae. As the
controlling of non-native insect species colonizing the sewage
systems is extremely difficult, only a comprehensive eradication
plan, with several different methods targeting different life stages, is
likely to be effective. As the existing measures that have been
undertaken give satisfactory results, it is planned to continue them
in the coming years.
References
Carlsson G.1962. Studies on Scandinavian Black Flies. Opusc Ent
Suppl 21:1–179.
Dahl C. 1969. The influence of light, humidity and temperature on
Trichoceridae (Diptera). Oikos 20:409_430 DOI 10.2307/3543206.
Hågvar S. & Krzemińska E. 2008. Contribution to the winter
phenology of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in snow-covered southern
Norway. Stud Dipt. 14:271-283.
Hughes K. A. & Convey P. 2012. Determining the native/non-native
status of newly discovered terrestrial and freshwater species in
Antarctica - current knowledge, methodology and management
action. J Environ Manage. 93:52-66.
Hughes K.A., Chwedorzewska K.J., Pertierra L.R., Shaw J. D. 2019 -
Status of known non-native species introductions and impacts.
Antarctic Environments Portal Information Summary Version 2.0.
https://www.environments.aq/information-summaries/status-of-
known-non-native-species-introductions-and-impacts-updated/.
Hughes K. A., Walsh S., Convey P., Richards, S., Bergstrom D.M.
2005. Alien fly populations established at two Antarctic research
stations. Polar Biol. 28: 568-570.
Mack R.N., Simberloff D., Lonsdale W.M., Evans H., Clout M.,
Bazzaz F.A. 2000. Biotic invasions: causes, epidemiology, global
consequences, and control. Ecol. Applic. 10: 689-710.
Petrašiūnas A.V. & Weber D. 2013. Winter crane flies (Insecta,
Diptera, Trichoceridae) from caves of the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg. Ferrantia 69: 276-283.
Plachter H. 1983. Cave-dwelling flies in Central Europe: adaptation
to environments, especially to low temperatures (Diptera,
Nematocera: Trichoceridae et Sciaridae). Oecologia 58: 367-372
DOI 10.1007/BF00385237.
Potocka M. & Krzemińska E. 2018. Trichocera maculipennis
(Diptera)—an invasive species in Maritime Antarctica. PeerJ 6:
e5408 https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.5408.
Potocka M., Krzemińska E., Gromadka R. et al.2020. Molecular
identification of Trichocera maculipennis, an invasive fly species in
the Maritime Antarctic. Mol Biol Rep. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11033-020-05566-5
Przepiórka E. 2016, unpublished data.
Volonterio O., de León R.P., Convey P., Krzeminska E. 2013 - First
record of Trichoceridae (Diptera) in the maritime Antarctic. Polar
Biol.36: 1125-1131.
