Update and CEE Compliance Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction
and Coastal Stabilisation Project
Update and CEE Compliance Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction
and Coastal Stabilisation Project
An information paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
Rothera Wharf reconstruction and coastal stabilisation project was
prepared by British Antarctic Survey (BAS), circulated to Parties in
September 2018, and the activity permitted by the UK competent
authority.
The dismantling and construction activities that took place during
the first (2018/19) season were documented in IP 029 submitted to
CEP XXII. The second season construction activities ran from
November 2019 to May 2020. Minor activities (snagging works)
took place during a third season, from December 2020 to March
2021. This third season was originally unplanned but was required
as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic shortening the 2019/20
construction season.
This paper updates the CEP on progress with the Rothera Wharf
reconstruction and coastal stabilization, confirming this project is
largely complete with the wharf now operational. It notes a small
number of items were taken out of scope and some monitoring
deferred, and explains how compliance with the CEE was ensured.
The paper concludes that this construction project has been
successful, compliance with the CEE has been good, the CEE was
effective in predicting the likely environmental impacts, and the
mitigation measures described have been effective. The project was
rated ‘excellent’ on the Civil Engineering Environmental Quality
(CEEQUAL) sustainability appraisal tool.
CEE handling and permitting
Following the presentation of the Draft CEE at the CEP XXI, the
final CEE for the Rothera Wharf project was prepared taking into
account feedback from Parties and the ICG review process. It was
circulated to Parties in September 2018, and is available on the BAS
website: https://www.bas.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/
Final-CEE-Rothera-Wharf-Reconstruction-Coastal-
Stabilisation-05.09.18.pdf
As the UK competent authority, the UK Foreign & Commonwealth
Office (FCO, now the Foreign Commonwealth and Development
Office (FCDO)) gave BAS the authorisation to proceed in September
2018. This authorisation stipulated that “the CEE, including all
mitigation measures, must be followed during the course of the
construction works. Any substantive deviation from the plans set
out in the CEE must be reported to the permitting authority for
consideration before the changes take place”.
Description of activities during 2018/19 season
The activities that took place during the 2018/19 season were as
described in IP 029 submitted to CEP XXII.
Description of activities during 2019/20 season
The arrival of the construction team (approximately 50) personnel
to Rothera was staggered over November and December 2019 to
enable snow clearance and the dewinterisation of plant. Start-up of
the fitter's workshop also enabled all plant, equipment and
materials to be serviced.
The team re-established the temporary boating facility in South
Cove to allow marine science operations to continue safely away
from the construction works. Once boating operations had
transitioned back to the temporary jetty then the existing boat shed
was converted back to a mess facility for the construction crew.
The remaining four rear frames were assembled in the assembly
yard before being moved to the wharf and lowered into position.
The final rear frame was in position at the wharf by the end of
December 2019. Once positioned, the drilling team drilled and
grouted the final rear frame anchors as well as grouting the
remaining mid-wall foundations. Once complete, the rear frames
were backfilled to allow the front frames to be installed.
The two assembly jigs were raised and used to assemble the taller
front frames which provide the internal structure of the new wharf.
Once assembled, they were moved to the wharf using the
construction crane and lowered into position within the wharf.
Once installed, tension anchors were drilled and grouted within
each frame leg to anchor the front frame into the rock. The last
front frame was fixed into position by the end of February 2020.
The deeper bathymetry discovered towards the ice cliffs meant that
the east side wall required extending. The west wall extension
structure was no longer required as the cove revetment works were
taking place and so this structure was used to extend the east side
wall. Modifications to the steelwork were carried out using surplus
materials on site and quality approved using field weld test
equipment. The modified structure was then assembled at the
wharf.
The sheet pile retaining wall was prefabricated in sections. Once
frames were anchored into the rock then each prefabricated section
was transported to the wharf, lifted into position and fixed to the
frame. Sheet piles along the side walls were also fixed to the side
wall frames. Once complete, the front half of the wharf could then
be backfilled.
Following issue of permits 07/2018 and 12/2019-20, a maximum of
105,000 tonnes of rock could be extracted from the temporary
quarry. The team carried out an additional two main blasts this
season, bringing the total quantity of extracted rock to 104,768
tonnes. It is noted that 80,366 tonnes were extracted from the
temporary quarry during 2018/19 and 24,402 tonnes this season.
The total quantity of explosives consumed came to just over 16
tonnes.
The foundations for five of the six mooring bollards were installed.
Steel frames for the two mooring bollards along the front wall were
connected to the front frames. The two concrete blocks were lifted
into position and anchors drilled and grouted into the rock. The
eastern mooring point was not installed.
The pre-fabricated steel crane foundations were installed and
backfilled for the davit crane on either side of the wharf. Service
ducts were buried. These facilitate electric cables that provide
backup power to the crane. The hydraulic power unit and davit
crane were offloaded but were not installed and commissioned
during this season. The pontoon, gangway and supporting frame for
the retrieval mechanism were installed along the west face of the
wharf. The pontoon was not yet been commissioned. Lifesaving
equipment and ladders were also installed along the quay edge.
Runway coastal stabilisation works took place between January and
February 2020. Repairs were carried out to revetments at both
runway thresholds. The revetted slope around the cove was also
stabilised to prevent future erosion. The material for this work was
sourced predominantly from the remaining rock extracted from the
temporary quarry, as detailed above. Additionally, suitable rock
from the existing slopes were reused to limit the amount of rock
extracted.
The re-screening of material for the runway resurfacing was not
carried out this season. The 0-30mm has been stockpiled within the
temporary quarry.
The Covid-19 pandemic resulted in the construction season being
three weeks shorter than originally planned. This impacted the
crane commissioning and other minor works which were deferred
to later seasons.
Description of activities during 2020/21 season
The construction team numbered 23, including a geotechnical
engineer. There was also a senior site supervision engineer from
Ramboll (our Technical Advisors). They quarantined in the UK for 2
weeks prior travelling to Rothera, arriving at the end of December.
The team was mobilised predominantly to progress the Rothera
Modernisation groundworks, however they were also able to
complete the relatively small amount of outstanding works on the
Rothera Wharf project. Because of the Covid-19 restrictions the
team numbers were kept deliberately small and the season length
was constrained to 11 weeks.
The team commissioned the crane and corrected defects on the
Wharf by fitting a piece of capping beam and some bollard plates.
The original plan was to install and commission a pontoon and
gangway, however these were taken out of scope of the project as
the team could not find a configuration to work that provide any
enhanced benefit over the ladder access to small boats.
The eastern mooring point (described in Section 3.3 of the CEE) has
not been installed as it has not been confirmed as being essential for
operations. The final decision on whether it is required will be
made taking into account the views of the RRS Sir David
Attenborough Master once the ship comes into service and has
moored at Rothera. Given the time that will have lapsed between
the original CEE and potential installation of this mooring point, it
will be subject to a separate EIA should it be required.
Compliance with the CEE findings and impact prediction
To ensure compliance with the CEE (and therefore Permit
requirements), environmental responsibilities were allocated to key
project staff (as set out in the CEE), environmental requirements
were written into operating procedures, and a strong link with clear
reporting requirements maintained between the construction team
and BAS Environment Office.
A BAS Environmental Manager was on site during February 2020
whilst the groundworks had commenced on site. She observed that
procedures on site were compliant and validated this by conducting
a compliance audit with the BAS site team. The audit checked that
the procedures and plans (included as Appendices A, B, D, E and F
of the CEE) were being adhered to and that no unpredicted
environmental impacts were occurring.
Covid-19 restrictions prevented staff from BAS Environment Office
visiting the site and auditing construction works during the
2020/2021 season, so this audit role was fulfilled by a Project
Engineer who had been briefed by, and followed an audit checklist
prepared by, BAS Environment Office.
The audit process confirmed that compliance with the CEE was
generally evident and that good environmental practice was being
observed, although some improvement actions were noted for
follow-up by a subsequent audit/inspection.
To ensure that any deviation from the planned works outlined in
the CEE were captured, a ‘Register of Project Variations’ was kept.
This recorded events such as unexpected ground conditions
resulting in minor design alterations, changes in the locations
proposed for storing equipment/containers, retention of scrap metal
from the old wharf on site, any new activities required and any
environmental incidents that occurred.
In the event of a deviation, the register was submitted to the BAS
Environment Office to assess the significance of the event. Each
event was communicated to the FCDO and, where appropriate, the
agreement to undertake the variance sought. Thirty activities were
recorded on the ‘Register of Project Variations’ and none have
materially affected the environmental impact of the project.
A review of the mitigation measures that were described in the CEE
has taken place and it has confirmed that they were generally found
to be effective.
Some mitigations described in the CEE were not followed through
the procurement and preconstruction stages of the project. In
particular, the quarrying screening equipment did not feature
covers nor dust skirts. Similarly, the D7 drill rig operated a different
dust mitigation to that in the CEE. This led to project variations
being notified after plant and equipment had been mobilised to site.
The impacts from a controlled detonation of surplus explosives was
not identified in the CEE, requiring a Preliminary Environmental
Assessment to be prepared and agreed with FCDO prior to the
detonation taking place.
All environmental incidents associated with the project were
reported on the BAS Incident Reporting System and subsequently
investigated by BAS Environment Office. Twenty environmental
incidents occurred during the construction period, including for
example, minor oil spills and the importation of non-native species
on incoming cargo. Most of these incidents had already been
identified as potential risks in the CEE and mitigation measures and
response strategies were implemented accordingly.
An Environmental Monitoring Plan was agreed and presented in the
CEE. Short-term monitoring undertaken throughout the
construction period included:
a) Neutralisation of cement contaminated water
b) Wet well seawater turbidity
c) Wildlife displacement
d) Noise from quarrying and construction activities
e) Vibration from quarrying and construction activities
f) Marine noise from construction activities
g) Airborne dust
Where thresholds were exceeded, these were highlighted at the time
of the event and were reported to the Rothera Station Leader and
Environment Office.
The longer-term monitoring undertaken by BAS personnel,
including skua-breeding success on Rothera Point and marine
benthic invertebrate communities in the vicinity of the wharf, were
due to be reported on at the end of the project. However, the
second phase of the benthic invertebrate monitoring, scheduled for
the 2020/21 season, was delayed because of the Covid-19 pandemic
and is planned for the 2021/22 season.
Taking into account compliance with the CEE, the results of
monitoring, environmental incidents that occurred and effectiveness
of the mitigation measures adopted, the impacts associated with
this project were generally consistent with those predicted in the
CEE.
The CEE referred to the BAS policy of applying the CEEQUAL
sustainability assessment tool. A CEEQUAL Whole Project Award
was applied for, meaning that the entire scope of the project from
conception through to construction was subject to assessment. The
evidence collection phase has been completed and the evidence
assessed by an independent CEEQUAL verifier who has awarded the
project an ‘Excellent’ rating.
Conclusions
Rothera Wharf has successfully been rebuilt and is in use. The
runway coastal stabilisation works are complete.
Compliance with the CEE has been good. Nevertheless, some
opportunities for improvement were highlighted in the audit reports
and some variance events have occurred.
Some variance from that described in the CEE are inevitable given
the refinement of the project design since submitting the CEE, and
the uncertainties inherent in a complex construction project.
The variances have been recorded on a Register of Project
Variations and the variances have been discussed with the UK
competent authority (and their approval sought, where required)
before the activity commenced.
Some elements of the project have not been completed to date, the
most significant is the provision of the eastern mooring bollard
which has not been confirmed as operationally essential. A decision
on whether this will be required will be made once the RRS Sir
David Attenborough comes into service. The pontoon and gangway
have been removed from the scope of the project.
The Project Team, Environment Office and the UK competent
authority agreed it was helpful to have established how variances
would be managed and communicated before they occurred.
Undertaking compliance audits have been invaluable in checking
that the CEE was being adhered to.
The Environmental Monitoring Plan described in the CEE has been
followed.
Based on the findings of the audits and monitoring undertaken to
date, the CEE was effective in predicting the likely environmental
impacts, and the mitigation measures described have largely been
effective.
Further monitoring is planned to assess the impact on the benthic
environment and to confirm it is as predicted by the CEE.
The project used the CEEQUAL sustainability assessment tool
alongside the EIA process. The project has been assessed by
independent CEEQUAL assessors and an ‘excellent’ rating awarded.
Rothera Wharf reconstruction and coastal stabilisation project –
selected photographs
Rock quarrying site – post completion
