Observing the Changing Southern Ocean and its Global Connections
Observing the Changing Southern Ocean and its Global Connections
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
Despite the critical role of the Southern Ocean in the Earth’s climate
system, observations of its properties have generally been sorely
lacking due to challenges associated with conducting research in
this remote and extreme environment. The Southern Ocean Carbon
and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM) project was
launched in 2014 with a vision to enable a transformative shift in
scientific and public understanding of the role of the Southern
Ocean in the world’s ocean and climate system. Since its initiation,
the project, which involves U.S. scientists at eleven institutions and
a number of international partners, has deployed over 130 robotic
profiling floats equipped with chemical and biological sensors.
These floats move up and down the water column collecting data.
Once the floats resurface, these data are transmitted via satellite to
the investigators and are publicly available.
The SOCCOM profiling float array has transformed the Southern
Ocean from a poorly observed region into, perhaps, the best
observed ocean for cycles of plankton biomass, carbon, oxygen, and
nitrate. This work has laid the basis for a multi-decadal assessment
of natural and anthropogenic climate effects on the Southern Ocean
environment. Enhancing this system would include the systematic
addition of bio-optical sensors to SOCCOM floats, as well as
including regular deployment of floats which would collect long
term data in Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)
established by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). Currently, there are two MPAs
in the CCAMLR area (the South Orkney Islands southern shelf MPA
and the Ross Sea region MPA) and three additional MPAs are in
review by CCAMLR (one in East Antarctica, one in the Weddell Sea
and one in the Western Antarctic Peninsula region).
Background
The open waters of the Southern Ocean have a profound influence
that extends from the marginal seas of Antarctica to the global
climate system. Near the continent, upwelling of the Circumpolar
Deep Water (CDW), driven by an increase in winds, is melting ice
shelves and stratifying the ocean. These processes have impacts on
nutrient supply, phytoplankton biomass, and, ultimately, on upper
trophic level organisms such as fish, seabirds and marine mammals.
The influence of the open waters of the Southern Ocean extends
globally. The Southern Ocean is the primary gateway through
which the intermediate, deep, and bottom waters of the ocean
interact with the sea surface and the atmosphere. As a result, the
majority of the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic carbon and heat
occur within its domain. The Southern Ocean also has a profound
influence on nutrient resupply from the abyss to the surface,
regulating nutrient availability throughout the world ocean. Waters
of the Southern Ocean are also particularly susceptible to ocean
acidification, a phenomenon which is hypothesized have profound
ecosystem impacts in the near future. Understanding the
connections between the Southern Ocean and the rest of the globe
is one of the primary research foci identified by the Scientific
Committee for Antarctic Research.
Despite the importance of the Southern Ocean to global systems, it
has been poorly observed due to its remote location and fierce
weather conditions. However, two recent advances have
transformed observation capabilities. The first is the development of
new biogeochemical sensors mounted onto autonomous profiling
floats used in the ocean-wide Argo system (https://argo.ucsd.edu).
These sensors allow sampling of ocean biogeochemistry, including
the indicators of ocean acidification, in 3-dimensional space with a
data provided to investigators every five to ten days. Second, the
climate modeling community now has the computational resources
and the physical understanding required to develop climate models
that can represent crucial mesoscale processes in the Southern
Ocean. Advancements in biogeochemical sampling, combined with
this
new generation of models, provides investigators with tools that can
vastly improve our understanding of Southern Ocean processes.
The SOCCOM project was designed to utilize both of these
advancements and it is dramatically altering our understanding of
Southern Ocean biogeochemistry (https://soccom.princeton.edu).
Over 130 floats are operating in all three basins of the Southern
Ocean. This includes routine operations under seasonal ice cover.
Observations from the floats are uploaded to the Argo data system,
made freely available in near-real time, and are being assimilated
into the multi-basin biogeochemical state estimate developed as
part of the SOCCOM project. These observations have become the
dominant source of fundamental biogeochemical data, not just in
the Southern Ocean, but globally (Table 1). These new observations
and tools have allowed investigators to describe seasonal variability
and major chemical fluxes throughout the Southern Ocean resulting
in a fundamentally new understanding of the physical factors that
underlie biogeochemical processes.
Profiling float operations extend into waters near the continent that
are deeper than 2000 m and, in some cases, even shallower. A
significant number of the profiling floats in the SOCCOM array are
operating in current, or proposed, Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)
in the Southern Ocean (Figure 1). These floats provide the only
real-time biogeochemical observations in the MPAs, which are
designed to protect and conserve the marine living resources in the
waters surrounding Antarctica.  Biogeochemical floats operating in,
or near, MPAs have been used by SOCCOM scientists in a variety of
studies that are closely related to MPA ecosystem dynamics.
Specifically, the SOCCOM project supports the recommendation in
Resolution 5 (2017) which calls for identifying opportunities to
conduct and support relevant research and monitoring activities
that support the objectives and the forthcoming Research and
Monitoring Plan of the Ross Sea Region MPA, in particular through
international collaborations. The profiling float data are also being
used widely by scientists from a variety of nations and the
observations have become a major resource for their study of the
Southern Ocean. A summary of publications arising from the
SOCCOM project can be found at https://soccom.princeton.edu/
content/soccom-publications.
Recent examples of research projects include:
Effects of meltwater on long term oxygen, pH and nitrate changes)
Effects of sea ice variability on blooms in the Weddell Sea
Formation of super-cooled sea water from sea ice and ice shelves
Seasonal modulation of phytoplankton biomass
Effects of variable physics on phytoplankton bloom formation
Polynya formation in the Weddell Sea
Assessment of seasonal cycles in carbonate chemistry and
projections of future acidification
Net community production in Southern Ocean waters
Future SOCCOM Program Goals
Continue operation of the SOCCOM array in the open waters of the
Southern Ocean.
Ensure SOCCOM floats are fitted with bio-optical sensors to
enhance observations of biological processes.
Assimilate data into operational models to enable predictions of
future trends in ecosystem properties, including current and
potential future MPAs.
Enhance observations in current and projected Southern Ocean
MPAs with additional floats, including enhanced international
planning.
Explore routine operation of floats in MPA waters between 2000
and 500 m depth
Table 1. Number of SOCCOM floats profiles and ship-based profiles
for oxygen, nitrate, and pH per year, which illustrates the greatly
increased (~10X) sampling available from floats. Source for ship
data is the US National Oceanographic Data Center. Source for
SOCCOM data is the Argo Global Data Assembly Center.
Number of Profiles to >900 m per year
Property
SOCCOM floats
2014-2021
Ships South of 30S
2010-2017
Ships North of 30S 2010-2017
Oxygen
18,592
1,764
3,032
Nitrate
15,185
1,651
2,840
pH
8,505
1,054
1,976
Figure 1 SOCCOM float trajectories (blue lines) and last position
(black dots).
Figure 1 SOCCOM float trajectories (blue lines) and last position
(black dots).
