High-precision Map of Antarctic Ice Sheet Bed Topography
High-precision Map of Antarctic Ice Sheet Bed Topography
Information paper submitted by the United States
Summary
An international team led by Mathieu Morlighem at the University
of California Irvine has released a high-precision map of the bed
topography of Antarctica (Morlighem et al., 2020). The new map
helps identify which regions of the continent are most vulnerable to
the impacts of climate change. It reveals broad subglacial ridges
that may stabilize the ice flowing across the Transantarctic
Mountains. But the map also shows bed geometry that increases the
risk of rapid ice retreat in the Thwaites and Pine Island Glacier
sector of West Antarctica. Portions of the bed under Recovery
Glacier and Support Force Glacier are hundreds of meters deeper
than previously thought, making those glaciers more susceptible to
retreat, and the map reveals the world’s deepest land canyon at
3,500m below sea level under Denman Glacier in East Antarctica.
This product, which is continually upgraded as new data becomes
available, constitutes a major advancement that underpins a wide
array of research activities.
Background
The new Antarctic bed topography product (Figure 1) was
constructed using ice-thickness data from 19 different research
institutes. These data encompass roughly 1.5 million line-kilometers
of radar soundings, some dating back to 1967. In addition, the team
used ice-shelf bathymetry measurements from airborne campaigns,
as well as seismic information.
Despite the many prior radar-sounding campaigns, more than half
of Antarctica is at least 5km from any radar line, and radars have
had difficulty resolving deeper bed features. Previous mapmakers
have applied interpolation techniques to fill in the areas between
the radar lines, but this has presented challenges for accuracy,
especially with fast-flowing glaciers. The new approach, called
BedMachine, relies on a physics-based method of mass conservation
to estimate what lies between the radar-sounding lines. The method
also integrates satellite-derived information on ice-flow velocity.
These data indicate how ice moves around the uneven contours of
the bed. By basing results on ice-surface velocity in addition to ice-
thickness data from radar soundings, the BedMachine methodology
is able to present a more accurate and higher-resolution depiction
of the bed topography.
Key Outcomes
The new description of bed topography redefines the high- and
lower-risk sectors for rapid sea-level rise from Antarctica. The
results reveal previously unknown basal features with implications
for glacier response to climate change. Most differences from
previous maps are at the smaller scale, yet these local differences
have a disproportionate impact on modelled glacier evolution. For
example, 62 percent of slopes are steeper in the new map because
the smoothing effects of interpolation are corrected. In addition, the
details of deep connections to the ocean are revealed, and these are
critical for correctly capturing ice-ocean interaction in models. In
the marine basin of Wilkes Land, East Antarctica, there are
retrograde slopes along Ninnis and Denman glaciers that show
vulnerability to marine ice-sheet instability. Conversely, there are
stabilizing slopes beneath Moscow University, Totten and Lambert
glacier systems even though the new methodology corrects bed
elevation by up to 1 km for the latter.
The new map is dynamic and is updated as new data are collected.
The authors note key areas where future collaborative work would
yield particularly valuable data to enhance the map and the ice-
sheet model projections of sea-level rise that depend on accurate
bed topography. For example, there remains a lack of ocean
bathymetry on the continental shelf and beneath ice shelves over a
large portion of coastal Antarctica.
International Collaboration
This is the result of international collaboration and cooperation.
Support for the work was provided by the U.S. National Science
Foundation, NASA, the Australian government’s Cooperative
Research Centres Programme and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China. The team participants (in order of listing from
the publication) are from University of California Irvine, NASA Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, Alfred Wegener Institute, University of
Texas Institute for Geophysics, British Antarctic Survey, Technical
University of Denmark, Northumbria University, Polar Research
Institute of China, The Ohio State University, Geological Survey
of Denmark and Greenland, Korea Polar Research Institute, Institute
for Marine and Atmospheric Research at Utrecht University,
Norwegian Polar Institute, Grenoble Alps University, NSF’s Center
for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets at University of Kansa, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, and the Australian Antarctic Division.
Figure 1 – Bed Topography of Antarctic from the BedMachine mass
conservation methodology (Morlighem et al., 2020)
Reference
Morlighem, M., Rignot, E., Binder, T., Blankenship, D., Drews, R.,
Eagles, G., Eisen, O., Fausto Ferraccioli, F., Forsberg, R., Fretwell,
P., Goel, V., Greenbaum, J., Gudmundsson, H., Guo, J., Helm, V.,
Hofstede, C., Howat, I., Humbert, A., Jokat , W., Karlsson, N., Lee,
W.S., Matsuoka, K., Millan, R., Mouginot, J., Paden, J., Pattyn, F.,
Roberts, J., Rosier, S., Ruppel, A., Seroussi, H., Smith, E., Steinhage,
D., Sun, B., van den Broeke, M., van Ommen, T., van Wessem, M.,
and Young, D. (2020). Deep glacial troughs and stabilizing ridges
unveiled beneath the margins of the Antarctic ice sheet. Nature
Geoscience 13, 132–137. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41561-019-0510-8
