Information provision of quantitative assessment of cumulative air
impacts in the framework of environmental impact assessment in
Antarctica
English version provided by the author
Information provision of quantitative assessment of cumulative air
impacts in the framework of environmental impact assessment in
Antarctica
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
The importance of collecting and archiving information on the
sources of pollutant emissions at Antarctic stations and in the areas
of operation of national Antarctic programs for use in assessing the
cumulative impact on the atmospheric air during impact assessment
is highlighted.
In accordance with the environmental principles of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Article 3),
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and
conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior
assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible
impacts on the Antarctic environment. Such judgments shall take
account of the cumulative impacts of the activity, both by itself and
in combination with other activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
However, no consensus has yet been reached on how to assess
cumulative impacts, despite multiple consideration of this issue
since 1996 (ATCM XX/IP085, 1996; ATCM XXI/IP061, 1997; ATCM
XXII/IP030, 1999; ATCM XXIV/IP052, 2001; ATCM XXVI/WP006,
2003; ATCM XXV/IP072, 2003; ATCM XXXI/WP034, 2008 etc.). A
summary of the history of consideration of various issues related to
cumulative impact assessment is provided in IP111 presented at
ATCM XXXVIII (2015). A brief summary of the discussion on
methods for assessing cumulative impacts is given in IP80 (ATCM
XXIX, 2006): “there are numerous methods available for analyzing
cumulative impacts. And no single approach can be regarded as
definitive." The greatest attention is paid, perhaps, to the discussion
of the assessment of the cumulative impact of Antarctic tourism
(ATCM XXIV/IP052, 2001; ATCM XXXI/WP034, 2008; ATCM
XXXII/IP015, 2009). Significant progress has been made on the
need to take into account the sites of past and current activities in
Antarctica, including geo-referenced and mapped scientific research
(ATCM XXXIII/WP023, 2010). At the same time, the methodology
for assessing the cumulative effect of activities leading to the
release of pollutants into the Antarctic environment with emissions
and wastewater has not been sufficiently developed. This also
applies to impact of diesel generator power plants emission. For
several decades, diesel generators have served and still serve as the
main sources of energy for scientific stations in Antarctica, and are
the main stationary sources of emissions of anthropogenic
pollutants into the air in Antarctica. It seems that the reconstruction
of rows of impacts of emission sources for the period of their
operation, taking into account the effects of overlapping dispersion
/ fallout halos, can be considered as an effective method for
assessing cumulative air impacts in a certain area. However, to
date, assessments of the impact on atmospheric air of activities in
Antarctica are very limited (ATCM XXXIX/IP3, 2016), and
assessments of impact over a more or less long period are sporadic.
In the 2019/2021 Intersessional Period, Information Paper 22 was
presented, which describes approaches to assessing trends in the
impact of emission sources on the atmospheric air in Antarctica.
The example of Vecherny Oasis, Enderby Land, which is
characterized by a long history of study and exploration, has been
used. An assessment of the environmental impact associated with
emissions of various pollutants from diesel generator sets into the
atmosphere over a 30-year period was carried out. For this purpose,
available information from different sources was collected and a
database has been compiled on diesel generators operating in the
Vecherny Oasis, including their type, power, location, years of
operation, time of operation, fuel consumption and other
characteristics. Modelling allowed, in particular, to describe
dynamics of areas of increased concentrations of air pollutants and
PM10 dry depositions. More detailed results are shown in
(Kakareka, Salivonchyk, 2020).
It seems that the proposed approach can be used to assess the
cumulative impacts of stationary emission sources (total for the
period of exposure and for all sources of exposure) and in other
Antarctic oases, including over a longer period. However, to obtain
sufficiently accurate estimates, detailed and complete information is
required characterizing both current and past sources of emissions,
which can only be achieved through the creation of databases and
archives of such information by national Antarctic programs with
the assistance of CEP / COMNAP / SCAR. Such databases and
archives may include information on fuel consumption, emissions,
waste generation, wastewater discharges, as an example (Australian
Antarctic Program, 2016); as well as parameters and modes of
operation such as currently used and used in the past, stationary
and mobile installations, which are sources of pollutants into the
environment. It is important to georeference the location of
stationary sources of emissions, including diesel generators, waste
incineration facilities, and account their changes over time.
These proposals are a development of previously made proposals
(e.g. ATCM XXVI/WP006, 2003; ATCM XXXIII/WP023, 2010) on
the need to collect information on visits to areas in order to have
comprehensive information on activities in areas of interest and to
help develop and maintaining a database or databases containing
information about visits to areas, as well as other important
information. This is a challenging task because, as noted in (ATCM
XXIX/IP80, 2006), collecting data to analyze cumulative impacts is
often the most difficult aspect; in Antarctica, limited data
availability is a particular problem, as is the ability to establish
monitoring or research programs to fill the gaps.
References
Antarctic Treaty Intersessional Period 2019/2021. IP 22. Towards
assessment of trends of air quality impact of diesel generator power
plants emission in Antarctica.
ATCM XXXIX/IP3, 2016. Application of air dispersion modeling for
impact assessment of construction/operation activities in
Antarctica. Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus.
Kakareka S. and Salivonchyk S. An assessment of the impacts of
diesel power plants on air quality in Antarctica // Advances in
Polar Science. March 2020 Vol. 31 No. 1: 74-87. doi: 10.13679/
j.advps.2019.0029.
Australian Antarctic Program’s Station Environment: Operation
indicators. Antarctic environment (2016). https://
soe.environment.gov.au/theme/antarctic-environment/topic/2016/
australian-antarctic-programs-station-environment-operation.
ATCM XXXVIII/IP111, 2015. Cumulative Impact Assessment.
Information paper submitted by ASOC.
ATCM XXXIII/WP023, 2010. Assessing cumulative environmental
impacts: identifying the distribution and concentration of national
operator activities in Antarctica. Information Paper submitted by
UK.
ATCM XXXII/IP015, 2009. Cumulative impacts from walking in the
Dry Valleys. Information Paper submitted by the United States.
ATCM XXXI/WP034, 2008. A Mechanism for Centralizing Tourism
and Non-governmental Activity Declarations and Authorization
Requests Suitable for Taking Cumulative Impacts into Account.
Information Paper submitted by France.
ATCM XXIX/IP80, 2006. Methodologies for Assessing Cumulative
Impacts: A Progress Report. Information Paper submitted by New
Zealand.
ATCM XXVI/WP006, 2003. Final Report from the Intersessional
Contact Group on Cumulative Environmental Impacts. Working
document submitted by the United States of America.
ATCM XXV/IP072, 2003. IAATO Site Specific Guidelines 2003 in
the Antarctic Peninsula Further Addressing Potential Cumulative
Impacts. Information Paper submitted by IAATO.
ATCM XXIV/IP052, 2001. Issues Relating to Cumulative
Environmental Impacts Of Tourist Activities. Information Paper
submitted by IAATO.
ATCM XXII/IP030, 1999. Cumulative Environmental Impacts in
Antarctica: Minimisation and Management. Information Paper
submitted by IUCN.
ATCM XXI/IP061, 1997. Cumulative environmental impacts in
Antarctica: minimisation and management. Information Paper
submitted by IUCN.
ATCM XX/IP085, 1996. IUCN International workshop on
cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica: minimisation and
management. Information Paper submitted by IUCN.
