Guidance on Short Overnight Stays: Consistency and Coordination
through Knowledge Sharing
Guidance on Short Overnight Stays
Information Paper submitted by the United States and Canada
Summary
We present the outcomes of a questionnaire regarding Short
Overnight Stays (SOSs) that was circulated among National
Competent Authorities (NCAs) that currently review the activity.
Nearly all operators conducting SOSs abide by the IAATO guidelines
for the activity. To date, the scope and environmental impacts of
SOSs remain limited, but some anticipate an expansion of the
activity. We suggest a virtual exchange of knowledge and best
practices as a means to coordinate and reach consistency of
approaches among NCAs reviewing and authorizing SOSs and other
non-governmental activities.
Background
As summarized in ATCM XLII WP67 Coastal Camping Coordination,
Treaty Parties, National Competent Authorities, and Observers have
been considering the implications of coastal camping activities for
nearly a decade. Over that same time, the terminology related to
“camping” has evolved. Here we consider Short Overnight Stays,
which refers to vessel-supported, overnight experiences offered by
non-governmental operators. Visitors spend the night ashore,
generally after the evening meal and before breakfast, accompanied
by expedition staff. Short Overnight Stays have become more
common in the past ten years and are included environmental
impact assessments reviewed by NCAs.
Further discussion of SOSs was undertaken following ATCM XLII
among the NCAs that currently review or authorize this activity. A
questionnaire (Attachment A) was completed by Australia, Canada,
the Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United
States regarding the scope of SOS activities that they review, and
their perspectives gained from the review process. The following
section summarizes key results from the questionnaire and presents
highlights from an analysis of the SOS data provided by IAATO.
State of Short Overnight Stays
To date, the six NCAs mentioned above regularly review SOS
activities that are mainly proposed by IAATO members. The rare
exceptions tend to be private luxury yachts with far fewer
participants. Even in such cases of non-IAATO members, the
expeditions are strongly encouraged to follow guidelines such as
those provided by IAATO. The SOS guidelines include clear
guidance on campsite selection; equipment, food, and waste;
participant education and supervision; and other best practices.
In the recent past, NCAs have reviewed SOSs of around a dozen
operators each year. This aligns with the IAATO data for the past
ten years. While smaller camping groups, often non-IAATO yachts,
have generally consisted of up to 15 people, SOSs conducted by
operators with larger vessels usually involve about 25-60
participants and occasionally up to 85. Most operators have been
consistent in their proposed numbers of participants year-to-year
and, as of 2020, most NCAs have not received requests for larger
groups.
IAATO’s SOS guidelines state that a minimum expedition staff to
passenger ratio of 1:20 must be maintained. Most NCAs require that
operators under their jurisdiction employ more conservative ratios
during SOSs, ranging from 1:10 to 1:15. Passengers are briefed on
the SOS activity before it commences, and experienced staff
supervisors are readily available while on shore overnight.
Regarding camp site selection, NCAs responses were split between
those that require operators to conduct SOSs from a list of
predetermined sites identified in an EIA or permit and other NCAs
that do not restrict operators to predetermined SOS sites. For the
latter example, NCAs still expect the operators to abide by site
selection guidelines (e.g., only on snow or bare rock, away from
concentrations of wildlife). Most NCAs are not currently seeing an
expansion of sites to different or novel locations, but some expect
that this may occur in the near future. IAATO data indicate that
while SOSs have occurred at twenty or more sites each year, for
most of the past ten years, SOSs have mainly occurred at five sites,
Leith Cove, Dorian Bay, Kerr Point, Georges Point, and Danco
Island. Over the same time period, IAATO data indicate that the
next most frequented SOS sites were Hovgaard Island, Neko
Harbour, Portal Point, Brown Station, and Paradise Harbour. While
40-120 SOS visits occurred at each of the top four sites over the
course of about 10 years, the latter five sites each had fewer than
30 SOS visits total for the same time period. The data indicate that
numbers of SOS participants at each site followed the same pattern
as the number of SOS visits.
Of the top ten sites SOS sites, there are currently Visitor Site
Guidelines (VSG) for four of them: Georges Point, Danco Island,
Neko Harbour, and Portal Point. The VSGs for Georges Point, Danco
Island, and Portal Point do not include any specific mention of
overnight stays, while the Neko Harbour VSG mentions “organized
overnight stays” as an exception to the established wildlife resting
period. While the majority of the 42 sites in Antarctica with VSGs
remain silent on the topic of overnight stays, there are six others in
addition to Neko Harbour that mention SOSs in the context of being
the exception to the wildlife resting period. Fifteen sites with SVGs
have established wildlife resting periods without exceptions and
make no specific mention of overnight stays. The NCAs surveyed do
not generally allow SOSs to occur at the sites where there are
wildlife resting periods.
Further, the six NCAs shared their perspectives on the topic of
including specific guidance on SOSs in all VSGs. Most agreed that
mentioning SOSs in all VSGs may inadvertently encourage
expansion of the activity and thus many expressed hesitation or
concern about consistent inclusion of SOS guidance in all VSGs.
Some NCAs suggested a more case-by-case approach, similar to
what is observed in the current set of VSGs, taking into
consideration the values to be protected at each site, especially the
presence of wildlife. One NCA suggested that it may be prudent to
develop site guidelines for certain sites that are most frequently
used for SOSs, if they do not already have VSGs in place.
Consistency through Sharing Knowledge and Best Practices
The outcomes of the discussions regarding “coastal camping” at
ATCM XLII included expressions of interest in the development of
guidelines for SOSs to help ensure consistency of approach among
NCAs reviewing and authorizing the activity. As a result of the
intersessional discussions including the questionnaire, we suggest
that it may be unnecessary at this time to develop formal guidelines
for SOSs and offer an alternative route to reach the same desired
consistency – the sharing of knowledge and experience.
Establishing a virtual information exchange regarding visitor
activities such as SOSs would provide an opportunity for
engagement and coordination amongst NCAs already reviewing a
visitor activity and become a resource for new and prospective
practitioners seeking information as they review activities proposed
by operators under their jurisdiction.
We envision that the existing online forums could be modified to
allow for activity-focused sharing of knowledge and best practices.
The basis of the exchange could be a questionnaire, similar to the
one used for SOSs, completed by experienced NCAs. Those with
experience considering specific activities could also share examples
or case studies, or simply direct interested parties to EIAs in the
online database that contain a given activity. IAATO may wish to
share guidance that they developed for their members. The
information on best practices would be available to Parties and
NCAs for consideration or incorporation during the review and
approval of EIAs, permits, and authorizations. This could be of
particular benefit to Parties/NCAs with limited resources and
considerable workloads.
This organic approach to the development of consistent practices
among NCAs would differ from an Intersessional Contact Group
(ICG) in that ICGs are usually driven by the terms of reference
toward a specific deliverable.
While the sharing of knowledge and practice would serve as an
alternative route to the desired consistency of approach and
practice for a given visitor activity, it would not preclude the
development of more formal
activity guidelines at a future time point, if a strong need becomes
apparent during the course of information exchanges.
Conclusion
While several NCAs review proposed SOSs through the EIAs from a
number of operators, the scope and impacts of this activity are still
quite limited. As such, it seems unnecessary to develop formal
guidelines for SOSs at this time. We suggest an alternative means to
reach consistency of practice and guidance regarding visitor
activities, starting with SOSs – the sharing and exchange of
knowledge and best practices through an online forum, similar in
concept to a community of practice1. The information would be
available to NCAs considering SOSs or other visitor activities during
the review and approval of compliance documents.
The results of intersessional discussions and questionnaire
completed by NCAs currently reviewing SOSs indicate that it may
also be beneficial to:
Revisit discussions that led to exceptions for overnight stays at sites
in which the VSGs indicate resting periods for wildlife and consider
whether additional guidance regarding overnight stays at such sites
would help to ensure wildlife protection.
Consider developing VSGs for any of the sites most frequently used
for SOSs that do not currently have established guidelines.
