Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 4) –
2019/2021 Management report
Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 4)
2019/2021 Management Report
Information Paper submitted by, Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain,
the United Kingdom and the United States, jointly with ASOC and
IAATO
Introduction
Deception Island (latitude 62°57’S, longitude 60°38’W), South
Shetland Islands, is a unique Antarctic island with important
natural, scientific, historic, educational and aesthetic values. An
area of 98.5 km2 encompassing Deception Island, Port Foster, and
several small outlying islands was formally adopted as Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). The
Management Plan had its last review by Measure 10 (2019). This
paper highlights the discussions held and actions that have occurred
during the intersessional period 2019/2021.
Management Group
The Management Group is composed of representatives from the
following Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties: Argentina, Chile,
Norway, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and the
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) are
advisory members. Argentina currently chairs the Management
Group.
Topics discussed during the intersessional period 2019/2021
included the planned ASPA 145 Management Plan Review, the
underwater environment in the caldera, the ASMA website and
other alternative means of publishing information about Deception
Island and the Visitor Brochure.
ASMA Management Plan Review
The Management Group identified the need to continue the
discussion during the intersessional period on how to best protect
the underwater environment in the caldera.
Spain reported on new research led by Portuguese scientists Duarte,
B., Gameiro, C., Matos, A. R., Figueiredo, A., Sousa Silva, M.,
Cordeiro, C., Caçador, I., Reis-SantoS, P. Fonseca, V.& Cabrita, M. T.
(2021). First screening of biocides, persistent organic pollutants,
pharmaceutical and personal care products in Antarctic
phytoplankton from Deception Island by FT-ICR-
MS. Chemosphere, 274, 129860., on qualitative identification of
pollutants in the area of the Deception Island caldera, which led to
the detection of different substances, especially of pharmacological
origin. The dynamics of the caldera water and the presence of these
compounds cause them
to accumulate in the plankton. In order to quantitatively establish
the status of the problem and the possible management measures to
be applied, long-term monitoring is needed.
ASPAs
Chile and Spain have worked on the revision of the management
plan for of ASPA No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South
Shetland Islands, whose current plan is Measure 3 (2005). Both
Parties worked on the revision of the ASPA limits and the relevance
of the incorporation of a new sub-site. Due to the extensive changes
proposed to be incorporated into the revised plan, Chile and Spain
submitted ATCM XLIII WP39 Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 145 Port Foster, Deception
Island, South Shetland Islands (ATCM XLIII), and recommend that
the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans be requested to
undertake a more detailed review of the revised plan. The United
Kingdom and Spain are currently working on the revision of the
ASPA No. 140 management plan, to be presented in 2022.
HSMs
The Management Group members who manage the HSMs on the
island, have contributed valuable information to complete the new
redesigned format for the List of Historic Sites and Monuments -
ATCM XLIII WP60 reformatting of the list of Historic Sites and
Monuments in line with Decision 1 (2019) - and information was
submitted for the new information fields established in Decision 1
(2019).
Station Facilities
During the 2020-2021 summer season, Spain opened Gabriel de
Castilla Station and continued with shore stabilisation works due to
coastal erosion difficulties. A report of this works was submitted to
ATIP 2019/2021 IP003 “Mitigation of erosion of the coastline at the
Spanish Antarctic Base Gabriel de Castilla”. Because of the COVID
pandemic, the Spanish Antarctic campaign has been shortened and
the monitoring has been very limited but, the results observed are
as expected. Although work has not yet been completed, it is in a
final stage.
Due to COVID-19 protocols, the Argentine National Program,
decided not to open its summer stations during the 2020/2021
season and only carry out supervisory landings at each location.
Due to weather conditions it was not possible to disembark at
Argentine Deception Station. During the previous season
(2019/2020) it was opened for a few days to carry out maintenance
work at the station and all the accumulated waste was evacuated.
Argentina and Spain expressed their intentions to open their
stations during the 2021/2022 season and offered to collaborate
with Chile to support its research projects on Deception Island
during this period.
Visitor Information
Regarding the visitor's brochure agreed by members, Argentina
noted that the brochure has been available at the two yacht clubs in
the city of Ushuaia - since the summer 2019/2020- for distribution
to those planning to undertake non-governmental activities within
the ASMA. Both clubs reported a satisfactory feedback on the
brochure. Due to the absence of tourist activity during the
2020/2021 season, as a result of the pandemic, printed copies are
still available for distribution during the upcoming season. Members
agreed that from summer 2021/2022, the digital brochure will also
be available at the port of Punta Arenas and Puerto Williams (Chile)
for distribution to yachts and also will be made available for IAATO
members.
Website
Due to some changes to the ASMA website, the Management Group
explored different alternatives in which assistance could be
requested from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Some of the
alternatives considered were:
To include a link in the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) website,
to access the Deception Island (DI) website. This could be done
immediately at the request of the ATCM.
Ask the ATS to host the Deception Island website, but remain as a
link to an external website (Deception Island Management Group
members develop the content independently).
To suggest that the CEP develop an "attractive" web section to
publish ASMAs information on the ATS website.
Also, since there is no unified criterion among the administrators of
all the ASMAs currently in force in terms of websites, the members
also agreed that they will consult the managers of the other ASMAs
on this matter.
ASMA members will continue rounds of discussion and analyse
other forms of communication currently in use to provide
information about the island.
Safety and the escape plan
The Management Group stressed the importance of analysing
alternatives to improve volcanic activity monitoring and carry on
providing advice on the escape plan based on the scientific
advances. The issue requires further discussion among the Parties
and will be further discussed in the forthcoming meetings.
Next actions
Members will continue to work on the issues identified and on any
other issue that arises either among the members or at the request
of the CEP.
In accordance with the agreed Group coordination rotation system,
the next two intersessional periods will be coordinated by Spain.
