Development of draft Antarctic Terrestrial and Underwater
Archaeology Best Practice guidelines
Development of draft Antarctic Terrestrial and Underwater
Archaeology Best Practice guidelines
IPHC Information Paper 2021
The International Polar Heritage Committee (IPHC) of The
International Council on Monuments and Sites, (ICOMOS) is an
international scientific committee, focused on the preservation and
protection of polar (Arctic and Antarctic) heritage. The IPHC Polar
Archaeology Working Group is developing, for the Parties’ future
consideration, draft Antarctic Terrestrial and Underwater
Archaeology Best Practice guidelines. These are being developed in
alignment with the Antarctic Treaty's principles of peace and
science, the Environmental Protocol's concepts of conservation and
remediation, and in accordance with current Measures, Decisions
and Resolutions.
The IPHC has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) stating that the
IPHC, ‘has been recognised by the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP) for its expertise and has provided advice to the
CEP intersessional contact group established to develop guidance
material for conservation approaches for the management of
Antarctic heritage objects (ATCM XLI WP 20 Report of the
intersessional contact group established to develop guidance
material for conservation approaches for the management of
Antarctic heritage objects)… its expertise in Antarctic human
heritage governance, management, archaeology and conservation
issues is available to inform SCAR in its advice to the Antarctic
Treaty System’. The IPHC membership has extensive academic and
professional expertise (ATCM XLII IP 74 A Memorandum of
Understanding between the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research and the International Polar Heritage Committee). It
includes members with Antarctic archaeological fieldwork
experience with joint membership in related international
archaeological organisations, who have been invited to comment on
the technical content of the draft guidelines as they are being
developed.
The draft Antarctic Terrestrial and Underwater Archaeology Best
Practice guidelines will offer professional expertise on how
Antarctic archaeological research should be planned, conducted and
the results presented. In addition to the historical information that
archaeological research can provide, archaeological fieldwork and
analysis with colleagues engaged in environmental science can also
establish human impact baseline datasets. This integrated research
can include utilizing material culture (the remains of the past) and
associated biological remains as a datum and examining the impact
of the material culture on the environment.
The importance of broad consultation to provide information and
insights is central to the group’s endeavours. The IPHC therefore
invites input from any interested Parties and other expert groups
which may have an interest in the development of these draft
guidelines. For further information please contact:
Dr B. Lintott Secretary-General ICOMOS IPHC IPHC@ICOMOS.org
ICOMOS IPHC Bureau c/o Scott Polar Research Institute University
of Cambridge Lensfield Road Cambridge CB2 1ER UNITED
KINGDOM
