ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
SECOND CONSULTATIVE MEETING    SEGUNDA REUNION CONSULTIVA
DEUXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   BTOPOE KОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЙ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

BUENOS AIRES

P.3
17 July 1962
Original: English

POINT 7 OF THE AGENDA

DRAFT CONVENTION ON THE CONSERVATION
OF WILD LIFE IN THE ANTARCTIC

ARTICLE I

The provisions of the present Convention shall apply to
the area south of 60 South Latitude, including all ice shelves,
but nothing in this Convention shall prejudice or in any way
affect the rights, or the exercise of the rights, of any State
under international law with regard to the high seas within that
area.

ARTICLE II

In this Convention "native animal" means any individual,
at any stage of the life cycle, of any species belonging to the
Class Mammalia excepting members of the Order Cetacea (whales)
indigenous to the Antarctic or occurring there by natural agencies
of dispersal. Similarly, "native bird" means any individual, at
any stage of the life cycle (including eggs), of any species of
the Class Aves indigenous to the antarctic or occurring there
by natural agencies of dispersal. "Plant" means any kind of
vegetation at any stage of the life cycle (including seeds).

ARTICLE III

Each Contracting Party shall prohibit the killing, wounding,
capturing or molesting of any native mammal or bird, as well as
all attempts to kill, wound, capture or molest them, except as
provided in Article IV of the present Convention.

ARTICLE IV

(1) Notwithstanding the provision of Article III of the
present Convention, and subject to the provision of subparagraph (2)
of this Article and of Articles VI and VII of the present Convention,
any appropriate authority may expressly permit the killing or
capturing of any native mammal or bird for the following purposes:

CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -                                  P.3

(a) to provic food for men or dogs,

(b) to provic scientific specinens, or to obtain
scientific information, or to provide specinens for
museuns, zoological gardens, or other educational
or cultural usus,

(c) to provide specinens for a private collection,

(d) to provide specinens or productr for conmercial
purposes.

(2) The permission grantec by the appropriate .uthority
in accordance with sub-parcgraph (1) of this .irticle must state
the species and number of native nammals or birds affected by it.

(3) In this .rticle, and in .irticle V, "appropriate Authority"
means the Government of the Contracting Party of which the person
concerned is a national or which has organized or is responsible for
the expedition or station of which that person is a nember, or any
body or person nominated by such Government for the purpose in
question.

ARTICLE V

Each Contracting Party shall prohibit the private possession,
or the buying or selling, or attempts to buy or sell, any native
mammal or bird or product derived therefrom, unless the possession
of or dealing in such mammals and birds has been authorized by the
appropriate Authority.

ARTICLE VI

Species of native naamal or bird which merit special protection
shall, with the agreement of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty whose representatives are entitled to participate in the
meetings provided for under Article IX of that Treaty, be designated
by them as "absolutely protected species", and once thus designated
each Contracting Party to the present Convention shall prohibit the
killing, capturing, wounding or molesting of such mammals and birds
except for purposes of scientific study or in an emergency.

ARTICLE VII

Areas which are of oustanding scientific interest shall,
with the agreement of the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty whose representatives are entitled to participate in the
meetings provided for under Article IX of that Treaty, be
designated by them as "absolute sanctuaries",
CONFIDENTIAL
-3 -

thus designated each Contracting Party to the present Convention
shall prohibit the killing, capturing, wounding or molesting of
any native mammal or bird except for scientific purposes or in an
emergency. Subject to the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic
Treaty, they shall furthermore prohibit the interference with such
areas by the structural alteration of the terrain, the construction
of installations, the overflying of aircraft or helicopters at low
altitudes, the passage of vehicles or parties on foot, or any other
activity likely to disturb or alter the habitat, other then for
purposes of scientific research or in an emergency.

ARTICLE VIII

Additional areas shall be designated by the Contracting
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty whose representatives are entitled
to participate in the meetings provided for under Article IX of
that Treaty, as "Nature Reserve" for the express purpose of safe-
guarding and perpetuating the natural communities of animals which
they contain. Recognising that some human interference within Nature
Reserves is unavoidable, each Contracting Party shall take the
necessary measures to ensure that wild life in these Reserves is
maintained as far as possible in its natural state.

ARTICLE IX

Each Contracting Party shall prohibit the importation into
the Antarctic of any species of animal or plants which does not
naturally occur there, apart from:

(a) sledge dogs,

(b) domestic stock or other animals to be kept under
controlled conditions for scientiflc research or for food.

(c) domestic plants to be kept under controlled conditions
for scientific research or for food.

Each Contracting Party shall also prevent any alien species thus
imported from ranging or spreading without restriction in any part
of the Antarctic.

ARTICLE X

The Contracting Parties may make such arrangements as they
considery necessary for:

(a) collecting records fo the numbers of each species of
native bird and mammal killed or captured annually in
the Antarctic;

CONFIDENTIAL
(b) obtaining information as-to the status of native birds 
and animals in the antarctic, and the extent to which 
any species needs protection;

(c) obtaining advice as to the permissible harvest of native 
birds or mammals for food, commercial exploitation, or 
other uses, in various regions;

(d) obtaining advice as to the species which should be 
designated "absolutely protected species" under Article 
VI above, the areas which should be designated "absolute 
sanctuaries" under Article VII above, and the areas which 
should be designated "natures reserves" under Article VIII 
above;

(e) preparing and circulating to organising authorities, 
expeditions, and stations, lists of absolutely protected 
species, lists of absolute sanctuaries and nature reserves, 
a brochure explaining the aims of these proposals, and 
other literature relevant to the conservation of wild life.

ARTICLE XI

Each of the Contracting Parties undertakes to exert appropriate 
efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the 
end that no one engages in any activity in the antarctic contrary 
to the principles or purposes of the present Convention.

ARTICLE XII

The present Convention may be modified or amended at any 
time by unanimous agreement of the Contracting Parties. Any such 
modification or amendment shall enter into force when the depository 
Government has received notice from all the Contracting Parties that 
they have ratified it.

ARTICLE XIII

(1) The present Convention shall be open to accession by any 
State which is a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.

(2) The present Convention shall be subject to ratification 
by each acceding State, in accordance with its constitutional 
processes. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Government of................hereby designated as the depository 
Government. That Government shall inform all acceding States of the 
date of each deposit of an instrument of ratification, the date of 
entry into force of the Convention and of any modification or 
amendment thereto.

CONFIDENTIAL
- 5 -                                  P.3

(3) Upon the deposit of an instrument of ratification by any 
acceding State, the present Convention shall enter into force for 
that State.

(4) The present Convention shall be registered by the depositary 
Government pursuant to article 102 of the Charter of the United Nation

ARTICLE XIV

The present Convention, done in the English, French, Russian 
and Spanish languages, each version being equally authentic, shall 
be deposited in the archives of the depositary Government, which 
shall transmit duly certified copies thereof to the Governments of 
all acceding States.

CONFIDENTIAL
ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
SECOND CONSULTATIVE MEETING      SEGUNDA REUNION CONSULTIVA
DEUXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE    BTOPOE KOHCYЛЬTAТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АHTAPKТИKE




BUENOS AIRES

                                  P.3/CORR. 1
                                  18 July 1962
                                  Spanish
                                  Original: English

C O R R I G E N D U M

The phrase "Presented by the Delegation of the
United Kingdom" should be added after the title.
