ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
SECOND CONSULTATIVE MEETING      SEGUNDA REUNION CONSULTIVA
DEUXIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE    BTOPOE KOHCYЛЬTAТИВHOE COBEЩAHИE
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ПОГОВОР ОБ АHTAPKТИKE


BUENOS AIRES


Memo Expl.7
17 July 1962
Original: English

ITEM 15 OF THE AGENDA

IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
FIRST ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Presented by Australia

Article IX.4 of the Antarctic Treaty states that measures in
furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty which are
recommended by Consultative meetings "shall become effective when
approved by all the Contracting Parties whose representatives were
entitled to participate in the meetings held to consider those
measures."

Although Article IX.5 of the Treaty provides that "any or all
of the rights established in the present Treaty may be exercised as
from the date of entry into force of the Treaty, whether or not any
measures facilitating the exercise of such rights have been proposed,
considered or approved by Consultative Meetings", it seems clear that
any implementation of the recommendations of Consultative meetings
would not constitute action under the Treaty unless approval had
been signified by each of the Contracting Parties entitled to do so.

Sixteen recommendations were adopted at the First Consultative
Meeting in Canberra on 24th July, 1961. At the date of preparation
of the present memorandum, approval of them by all the Contracting
Parties concerned has still not been notified.

In some countries, delay in notifying approval may be made
unavoidable by the constitutional processes required before Consult-
ative Meeting recommendations can be confirmed. There may be cases in
which the enactment of enabling legislation is a prerequisite of ap-
proval of a particular recommendation. Some delay arising from such
causes as these may be unavoidable. But delay in notifying approval,
however caused, contributes to delay in handling the problems which
the proposed measures are designed to meet, and could give rise to
criticism that the Treaty's procedures are so cumbrous that it is an
unsatisfactory instrument for effective international cooperation in
practical matters. Such criticism would be all the more damaging to

CONFIDENTIAL
- 2 -              Memo Expl.7

the Treaty's reputation if the delay in notifying approval of 
proposed measures were attributable to governments which were not 
themselves concerned in those measures of which, although entitled 
to do so, had not attended the Consultative Meeting at which they 
were recommended.

The Australian Government views with some concern the time 
taken to confirm the recommendations of the First Consultative Meet-
ing and the possibility that similar delays in respect of future 
meeting could result in a loss of impetus and the eventual decay of 
the Antarctic Treaty. It is, no doubt, open to those Contracting 
Parties wishing to give effect to a particular measure recommended 
by a Consultative Meeting to make arrangements to do so, whether 
individually or between themselves, in advance of that measure's 
having become effective in accordance with Article IX.4. But this 
would not constitute action under the Antarctic Treaty until such 
time as approval of the measure had been signified by all Contracting 
Parties concerned. Because the Australian Government believes that 
it is desirable for Contracting Parties to work through the Antarctic 
Treaty, rather than outside it, it considers speedy approval of 
recommendations desirable in order to make effective co-operative 
action under the Treaty possible.

The consideration of representatives at the Second Consultative 
Meeting is invited to possible means of overcoming this difficulty. 
Among the ideas which might be usefully canvassed are, for example:

    (i) an undertaking by Governments to act as promptly as they 
reasonably can, subject to any practical or constitutional 
requirements, in signifying their approval of recommenda-
tions;

   (ii) the signifying by Governments of approval of each recom-
mendation separately, instead of all recommendations to-
gether, in order not to allow possible difficulty over 
one proposal to delay the approval of others;

  (iii) a recommendation that Governments should agree to notify 
each other within three months of the ending of a Consult-
ative Meeting of the stage they have reached in consider-
ing any recommendations of that meeting which still await 
approval.

As a basis for discussion, the Australian Delegation at the 
Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will table 
the draft resolution which, in accordance with recommendation XVI 
of the First Consultative Meeting, is being circulated to other 
Contracting Parties within the required period of advance notice.

CONFIDENTIAL
