ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N012
English

UNITED KINGDOM OPENING SPEECH

Mr. Chairman,

I would also like to offer my congratulations
on your unanimous election.  I am sure that under your wise
guidance, this meeting will provide another example of inter-
national co-operation which will benefit us all.  Through
you, I offer the sincere thanks of my Delegation to the Govern-
ment of Chile for the generous welcome which they have given
to this meeting and to the other meetings that have been held
in this City during the past two months with the object of
furthering Antarctic co-operation.

It is very appropriate for my Delegation that
we should be meeting in Chile in 1966.  The Chilean rescue
of a British Antarctic expedition exactly 50 years ago gave
evidence that Antarctica calls forth the best motives from men
and nations alike.  An international conference is an unusual
place for an adventure story, but I am going to tell one all
the same.  In 1914 Sir Ernest Shackleton set out to sledge
across the Antarctic continent.  His ship, the "Endurance",
was beset in the pack ice of the Weddell Sea.  After drifting
with the ice for ten months, the "Endurance" was crushed and
sank in 1915.  The crew escaped to Elephant Island in the
South Shetland Islands, where they lived beneath two of their
upturned life-boats, while Shackleton sailed 800 miles to
South Georgia with a crew of five in the third boat, a craft
little more than six metres long.  Four attempts were made
to rescue the men on Elephant Island.  Shackleton's appeal
for help met an immediate and generous response in Chile,
where public subscriptions raised the funds for the third
relief expedition.  The Chilean Government then offered the
services of the "Yelcho", commanded by Piloto Luis Pardo of
the Chilean Navy, for a fourth attempt.  The successful
voyage of the "Yelcho" across the Drake Passage in 1916
will always remain an epic in the annals of Antarctic ad-
venture.  As the United States Navy's Sailing Directions
- 2 -                                  Document N°l2
                                            English

state, the winds in the Drake Passage"were often of hurricane 
intensity and with great velocities sometimes attaining to 
150 to 200 miles per hour. Winds of such violence are not 
known elsewhere". The entire crew of the "Endurance" were 
rescued, without the loss of a single man.  To mark this 
50th Anniversary, the British Broadcasting Corporation have 
broadcast a dramatisation of the voyage and the rescue, and 
drew attention to this as the first example of Anglo-Chilean 
co-operation in the Antarctic.  This is the kind of co-opera-
tion which now happily continues under the Antarctic Treaty.

The inauguration of the Instituto Antártico 
Chileno in 1964 was noted with great interest by our Antarc-
tic scientists, who are anxious to join with their Chilean 
colleagues in Antarctic research.  Arrangements for the ex-
change of information about scientific and technical matters 
have been established between the new Chiluan Institute and 
the Scott Polar Research Institute in England, and it is 
good to know that excellent relations exist between the mem-
bers of the Chilcan expeditions and the British Antarctic 
Survey.  Frequent visits are made between the ships and shore 
stations and on many occasions they have been able to help 
each other.

In seeking solutions to the problems which 
confront this Fourth Consultative Meeting, we cannot do 
better than remind ourselves of the manner in which the 
physical hardships and difficulties of the Antarctic are 
being met and conquered by the scientists and explorers of 
many nations - all working together in ever closer harmony. 
My Government believe that the Antarctic - and the Antarctic 
Treaty - provide us with an opportunity to take initiatives 
which could offer hopeful prospects for similar co-operative 
relationships in other and more troubled areas of the world.

My Government consider that the value of each 
simple criterion Meetings will be judged by a quite 
achieved on the practical measures which will advance inter-
national co-operation in the Antarctic Treaty Area?

At the last Consultative Meeting in Brussels, 
I refer particularly to the "Agreed Measures for the Conser-
vation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora", which were adopted at 
that meeting.  My Government hope to be able to approve them 
shortly and look forward to the time when they will take de-
finite effect. The Agreed Measures have met with wide approval
- 3 -                                  Document N°12
                                        English

in the United Kingdom and, I believe, elsewhere in the 
world.  During the past two years, world opinion has been 
increasingly alerted to the urgency of conservation problems. 
There are, unfortunately, far too many examples of environ-
ments and species which men has destroyed.  It is in this 
light that the United Kingdom Delegation approaches the Items 
on our Provisional Agenda which have to do with fauna and 
flora.  In particular, we hope that it will be possible at 
the meeting to draw up some internationally agreed arrange-
ments on pelagic sealing in the Antarctic before a regular 
industry develops.

Mr. Chairman, you are in the position of a 
founder member with regard to the Antarctic Treaty.  I speak 
for my Delegation when I say that we are pleased to be here 
as guests of the Chilean Government and that we confidently 
look forward to fruitful discussions under your experienced 
and distinguished chairmanship.
