ANTARCTIC TREATY              
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA       
ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            

SANTIAGO DE CHILE               

Document N° 11                  
English                                 

CHILE                           

ADDRESS DELIVERED BY            
MR. JULIO ESCUDERO GUZMAN, CHAIRMAN OF THE
FOURTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

I am greatly honoured by the distinction which you have      
just conferred upon me.  In accepting it with gratitude, I con-
sider it a tribute to my country, upon which destiny has given,
in the Antarctic, a definitely privileged position, and in      
science, a permanent commitment to fulfil.

Under two such great signs it is only natural that the      
Chilean has developed as one contemplating, questioning and     
traversing the immense continent that Ptolemy called "Terra In-
cognita", and the 16th Century mapmakers "Terra Australis".

It was with this feeling, inherent in the national charac-
ter that Chile accepted the invitation to the historic Conference
which led to the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Washington in 1959  
by all the powers taking part in this Meeting and so well repre-
sented here.

As signatories to this Agreement, we well remember the cor-
dial and enlightened discussions to which its formulation gave    
rise. It was, in fact, no easy task to express adequately a      
system of standards for situations and problems which were so    
new that no precedents existed for legal decisions.

Policy-making experts and specialists in law have studied    
and analysed the provisions of the Washington Treaty. The for-
mer have gone so far as to forecast that once space is finally   
opened up through science and technology and the first agree-
ments have to be drawn up within the context of Cosmic Law, it   
will no doubt be taken as a model.  The latter, interpreting it   
in the strictest terms, have stressed its noble purposes and     
principles in relation to scientific co-operation and a harmonious
international co-existence; it is attempted to attain these ob-
jectives through a system of relations in which mutual consulta-
tion serves to co-ordinate the will of all the parties.
- 2 -                         Document No 11

I consider that the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, by 
their very nature, determine its special character and scope.

Since any formula which meant "internationalizing the An-
tarctic" was rejected in the course of the discussions, the 
Conference was compelled to seek an organ which would serve as 
liaison or contact between the various parties; an organ where 
there would be no coercion, majority votes or compulsive reso-
lutions; in a word, an organ capable of moving and channelling 
the "Antarctic spirit"; and it was found that such an organ 
could only be a system of periodical consultations among the 
parties, either at regular intervals or whenever they might be 
necessary.

Such is the raison d'etre of the present meeting.

There has been some criticism of the consultation system,
at least in America, because of the tendency to adopt a great 
many resolutions which are sometimes vague or not easy to 
implement.  I do not think that this criticism can be made in 
relation to the recommendations our consultative meetings have 
adopted up to now. It is true that some few- have not yet entered into force, but this is attributable 
to the fact that when they were re-examined by the Governments,
they were considered to go beyond the provisions of the Treaty 
or their application required modifications or amendments in 
the legislation concerned.

On a previous occasion, a special request was made that the 
Consultive Meetings should avoid introducing, through their re-
commendations, items or subjects that do not correspond to the 
purposes and objectives of the Treaty, so as not to misapply it 
or create insoluble situations. We believe that there will al-
ways be general agreement on this point.

Without any doubt, knowledge of Antarctica has advanced 
beyond the primary stage. More is known about it scientifically 
than ten years ago, although there is still a long way to go.
The Agenda of this Meeting reflects our common concern in this 
respect.  Therefore, in my capacity as Chairman, I consider it 
only right, before starting our work, to pay  tribute to those 
who are engaged in study and research and the quest for scien-
tific truth in that distant area.

Thank you.
