ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document Nо 29
English

NEW ZEALAND

STATEMENT BY LEADER OF NEW ZEALAND DELEGATION
MR. J. SHEPHERD AT OPENING SESSION

Mr. Chairman, distinguished Delegates,

May I, on behalf of the New Zealand delegation offer you, Mr.
Chairman, warm congratulations on your unanimous election as
Chairman.  I am confident our discussions will prosper under your
wise and experienced guidance.

I wish also to join earlier speakers in expressing gratitude
for the courtesies shown and friendly help given to us since our
arrival and for the facilities the Government of Chile has provided
in these beautiful surroundings.

Mr. Chairman, New Zealand looks upon the working of the Antarc-
tic Treaty as a welcome,but all too rare example of international
cooperation and goodwill, which can be fostered when political dif-
ferences are set aside in the pursuit of common goals.  The Antarc-
tic Treaty is in many ways our extraordinary achievement and it is
our sincere hope that the good relations which exist between the
Treaty nations will serve as a starting point for friendly coopera-
tion in other spheres such as outer space to which the distinguished
delegate from Australia has already drawn attention.

The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora, which were worked out at the Third Consultative meetin? in
Brussels represent a very valuable step forward in this important
field.  New Zealand is concerned to see that the provisions of the
Agreed Measures are brought into practical effect, as soon and as
early as possible.  For this reason we introduced at the prepara-
tory meeting two of the Agenda items which will be considered in
the next few days.  We do not, Mr. Chairman, submit our draft recom-
mendations as final formulae. We shall be happy to see them amend-
ed to meet the views of our Treaty partners.  We wish only to ensure
that the topics themselves are discussed fully and frankly and that
action agreed will be rapidly put into effect.

Mr. Chairman, New Zealand's continuing activities in the An-
tarttic are on a large scale for a nation of our size, although
our own logistic resources are relatively small.  We have recent-
ly completed the reconnaissance, geological, topographical and
- 2 -                              Document № 29
                                       English

mapping surveys of the difficult mountainous area on the west
side of the Ross Sea - an area of approximately 50,000 square
miles or 130,000 square kilometers. This area, incidentally,
contains about one third of the total exposed rock in the whole
of Antarctica. More detailed surveys of significant areas dis-
closed in the initial survey can now begin. One interesting
aspect of this, from the conservation point of view, is that we
can now reduce the dog teams - very necessary in the difficult
terrain of the area in which we are operating - and thus reduce
the kills of fauna for dog food. For the more detailed surveys
of precise areas motor vehicles will be usable.

We are very grateful, Mr. Chairman, for the assistance which
is unstintingly made available to us by the United States espe-
cially and, in particular, in the air support it has provide for
our remote teams in the field.

Even more important, however, in the context of the Agreed
Measures, is the active consultation which takes place between
the United States and New Zealand expeditions on work involving
wild life. When outlines of programmes for field research are
submitted to the appropriate New Zealand authorities for approval
they contain our estimate of the number of wild life specimens
of fauna and flora for which permits will be sought. Then, the
approved New Zealand programme is notified to the United States
authorities and joint consultations are held in-both Washington
and Wellington-with the field operations personnel before they
leave for Antarctica. During the course of the summer season
there is a high degree of cooperation between personnel of the
two countries. In this way the total number of specimens taken
from any one area is kept within the limits imposed by sound
conservation principles.

This type of effective working relationship which is re-
flected also in the continuing programme for the exchange of
scientific personnel and information between the Treaty nations
is, in New Zealand view, the true fulfillment of the spirit of
the Treaty. There are still some sensitive areas in relation-
ships between Treaty members and some of the items on our agenda
will involve discussion of these problems. For our part, Mr.
Chairman, we have come prepared to discuss such issues in the
spirit of cooperation and understanding on which this unique
Treaty is based.
