ANTARCTIC TREATY                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING          CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE       ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

                  U. S. S. R.                      Document N°17
                                                   English

OPENING ADDRESS DELIVERED BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS

Mr. Chairman,

First of all, I would like to commend the efforts that the
Government of Chile has devoted to the preparation and organi-
zation of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and
to express our thanks to Mr. Gabriel Valdés, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, for the welcome he gave to all the participants in this
meeting.

On behalf of the Soviet delegation, I would like at the
same time to congratulate Mr. Julio Escudero on his unanimous
election as Chairman of this Meeting.

I will take this opportunity, again on behalf of the Soviet
delegation, to greet all the representatives of the participating
Governments in the Antarctic Treaty, who are present at the Fourth
Consultative Meeting.

Not long ago, at the ninth regular session of the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research held here in Santiago, the scien-
tists of many countries remarked on the ten years of successful
international collaboration in scientific research on the Antarc-
tic.  Particularly, it was pointed out with satisfaction that,
as a result of many Antarctic expeditions, fairly comprehensive
information had been obtained in relation to the geographical,
geophysical and geological characteristics of the Antarctic.

The Soviet personnel stationed in Antarctica, taking
advantage of its long experience in Antarctic research and
overcoming the precarious natural conditions, have established
a number of scientific bases in that area. The Soviet activities
included prolonged land expeditions, using both ski-mounted and
caterpillar track vehicles, in the "blank" areas, particularly
the geomagnetic South Pole, the geographic South Pole and the
relatively inaccessible Pole.
- 2 -
Document N°17
English

The Soviet scientists were thus able to carry out an
active programme of research in relation to Geography, Meteoro-
logy, Geophysics, Geology, Biology, Glaciology and other branches
of science.

At the present time, a comprehensive and complex study has
been completed by the Soviet Union on the nature of the South
Pole area - a Soviet atlas of the Antarctic. This atlas is in
use all over the world. It relates not only to the results of
the Soviet expeditions, but to research by other nations as
well. This atlas was on display at the recent Antarctic Exhibi-
tion which took place in Santiago.

The work of the Soviet expeditions is going ahead success-
fully. Their members have included scientists from many countries,
such as the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
United Kingdom, France, United States and Japan.

Such scientific collaboration is producing highly beneficial
results which are increasing year by year.

A considerable contribution to such international scientific
co-operation is made by the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty
regarding the utilization of the Sixth Continent for peaceful
purposes only and for extending the scientific knowledge of all
mankind.

Thanks to the joint efforts of the Governments signatories
to the Antarctic Treaty, this harsh, frozen territory has come
to be known as the only peaceful and quiet continent in the world.

This continent is of great interest to many countries of the
world for its historical and geographic characteristics.

The recommendations and practical measures adopted by the
Consultative Meetings of the Antarctic Treaty will represent a
significant contribution to future research in the sixth conti-
nent.

It is common knowledge that the characteristic feature of
all the consultative meetings, has been the mutual understanding
and the desire of all the participants in the earlier Consul-
tative Meetings to develop and strengthen the co-operation
aimed at achieving the principles of the Antarctic Treaty.
- 3 -                 Document N°17
                                  English

The working schedule of the present Consultative Meeting
makes it clear that during the course of the meeting the most
diverse problems concerned with promoting international colla-
boration in the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes only,
will be discussed. This is shown, in particular, by those items
relating to the ultimate increase in the exchange of information
among the Antarctic expeditions, the conservation of Antarctic
flora and fauna, and the improvement of measures for ensuring
telecommunications and the normal operations of the expeditions
and stations in this area.

The Soviet delegation hopes that this Meeting, like the
earlier ones, will, in a spirit of effective collaboration
recommend measures for the serious and conscientious applica-
tion of the noble purposes and principles of the Antarctic
Treaty.

The Soviet delegation, for its part, will spare no effort
in helping to bring about, at this Meeting, the constructive
co-operation that has characterized all the previous Consultative
Meetings.

Thank you very much.
