ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N° 21
English

SOUTH AFRICA

TEXT OF OPENING STATEMENT DELIVERED BY AMBASSADOR R.H. COATON
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY POWERS
Santiago, 3rd. November, 1966

Mr. Chairman:

The South African Delegation offers you its most sincere
congratulations on your unanimous election as Chairman.  We do
not doubt that this Fourth Consultative meeting under your dis-
tinguished chairmanship will prove in every way as fruitful and
rewarding as those which have proceded it.

We would also like to express our very special warm thanks
and gratitude to the Chilean Government for their generosity
and hospitality as host Government on the present occasion and
for the admirable conference facilities provided for the unfold-
ing of our deliberations.

Mr. Chairman, in his opening statement to the Second Consul-
tative Meeting at Buenos Aires the Leader of the South African
delegation at that time pointed out that the unsolved riddles of
the Antarctic, particularly those relating to weather conditions,
were of the greatest practical importance to regions bordering
on Antarctica.  We in South Africa have long regarded weather
phenomena South of the 60th parallel as of the utmost consequence
to our weather in more northern latitudes and for general re-
search purposes.  But there is a new urgency to this now, having
regard to the severe and grievous drought which has recently vi-
sited and laid waste large parts of Southern Africa and many
other areas fringing on Antarctica.  It is with renewed hope at
this time, therefore, that we look to the development of know-
ledge and understanding of the southern oceans and of the An-
tarctic continent in friendly concert with the other nations
of the Antarctic Treaty.

In the field of meteorological research, I mention just in
passing, my country has already contributed quite appreciably
- 2 -                 Document N° 21
                        English

to our common fund of knowledge - and is continuing to do so,
inter alia through its permanent meteorological stations at Marion and Gough Islands and SANAE in Queen Maud Land.  It
will also be recalled that South Africa accepted responsibility
during the International Geophysical Year for hemispheric wea-
ther analyses of the Southern hemisphere.  This project was fi-
nally completed at the end of 1965 and all the results have
now been published for international use.

We have indeed come a long way since the expeditions of
Amundsen, Scott, Shackleton and Byrd whose names became a
by-word for courage and whose indomitable spirit aroused the
world's admiration.  Their inspiration still lives, as witnes-
sed by the human toll Antarctica continues to exact - as it did
again so tragically this past austral summer.  If anything, how-
ever, their expeditions merely confirmed the average person's ima-
ge of Antarctica as a frozen continent shrouded in mystery.

Although we have as yet barely scratched the surface of An-
tarctica's ice and have far from unravelled all her mysteries,
impressive progress has nevertheless been made in probing many
of them in an orderly and systematic manner through the Antarc-
tic Treaty at these Consultative Meetings and in SCAR.

The Antarctic Treaty Powers have shown, moreover, that their
approach to questions affecting Antarctica is both realistic
and far sighted; they have, to their credit, kept their exchan-
ges frec from disruptive extraneous issues outside their terms
of reference and have set a splendid example to date in dedi-
cated international co-operation for a common purpose.  We trust
this spirit will continue indefinitely.  As a case in point it
is certainly a matter for con ratulation that we could agree
amongst ouiselves on tie preservation of Antarctic fauna and
flora.  South Africa, which can rightly claim to be in the fo-
refront of plant and wildlife conservation within her own bor-
ders and territorial waters, is no less concerned about the pre-
servation of Antarctic flora and fauna as a heritage for all
mankind.  In line with those sentinents, naturally, she has
lost no time in formally approving the Agreed Measures adopted
at cur Third Consultative Meeting at Brussels and is, in fact,
fully implementing them at the present time.

While South African participation in Antarctic scientific
activity must necessarily be on a relatively modest scale by
comparison with the achievements of the great powers, our very
lively interest in Antarctica and its environs continues to be
demonstrated by the work of our scientists in the area - our
biologists, geologists, glaciologists, meteorologists, etc.
Our Eight Antarctic relief expedition is about to be sent to
- 3 -                                   Document N° 21
                                                  English

our permanent base at SANAE and a new five year programme pro-
viding for maintenance of the base and continued Antarctic re-
search is about to be launched. South Africa remains ready
and willing at all times to co-operate, within her limits, in
any programme whose object is the furtherance of our knowledge
and understanding of Antarctica. Within this context it is fit-
ting that I express appreciation on behalf of those South Afri-
can observers and scientists who have visited the region as
guests of other Treaty Powers. The United States Government has
been particularly generous in that connection. We are also most
grateful to the Argentine Government for enabling Mr. Le Roux,
who is with us here at this Consultative Meeting, to proceed
with the next Argentine Antarctic expedition setting out during
the latter half of the current month. These exchanges undoubt-
edly serve to foster and encourage the very real sense of co-
operation and common achievement found among the parties to the
Treaty which is such a happy feature of its working.

Mr. Chairman, the combined effort of the twelve nations he-
re represented since this era of Antarctic collaboration commen-
ced is surely something tremendously encouraging and comforting
to us all. We would like to suggest by way of conlusion that
in order to bring home to the peoples of the world the import-
ant role the Treaty Powers are playing in opening up Antarctica,
the Fifth Consultative Meeting might well give consideration to
appropriate measures for commemorating the tenth anniversary of
the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in December, 1959. Various
possibilities present themselves, amongst others the feasibili-
ty of undertaking large scale and jointly organized transver-
ses of still unopened areas of Antarctica and of perhaps the
only area on the world's surface which remains largely unexplo-
red - viz Queen Maud land where SANAE is situated. Such a se-
ries of transverses would of course be complementary to the
transverses of this region presently being undertaken by the
United States of America.  The suggestion is a purely tentati-
ve one and there is plenty of time for other governments to
mull over it between now and our Fifth Meeting. We leave it
there.
