ANTARCTIC TREATY
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                              CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                      ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                                             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N° 37
English

UNITED STATES

ADDRESS BY THE HONORABLE RALPH A. DUNGAN
HEAD OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman and distinguished delegates:

I should like first to thank the Chilean Government for
its warm hospitality and for the superb arrangements made for
the Fourth Consultative Meeting under the Antarctic Treaty.

I should also like to express my delegation's congratu-
lations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your unanimous election to
preside over us during this meeting.

Like everyone else who has considered carefully the Treaty
and the measures adopted under it, I have developed a profound
admiration for the wisdom and foresight which prompted the Treaty,
and for the brilliant simplicity with which a number of diffi-
cult problems have been resolved under its terms. In many ways,
the Treaty reminds me of the Constitution of my own country.
For it does not attempt to anticipate and solve every problem
but it does provide a simple and effective framework in which
problems can be discussed as they arise.

The results of the three previous Consultative Meetings
give clear evidence of this.  Our Governments have been able
to arrive at agreements on a wide variety of scientific, tech-
nical and administrative questions.  We have meshed smoothly
and effectively with the work of the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research, and with the work of other international
scientific organizations interested in Antarctic science.  We
have given our combined attention to questions of logistics,
communications, and the exchange of scientific data.  We have
taken important steps to conserve the animal and plant life
to Antarctica. And we have resolved our differences in a spi-
rit of accommodation and of mutual understanding.
- 2 -                                   Document No 37
                                              English


In many ways, this atmosphere of constructive cooperation
may be the greatest of the Treaty's achievements. As President
Johnson observed to the Congress of the United States in 1964:


"Thus the Antarctic Treaty... serves not only as a pact
guaranteeing freedom of scientific inquiry in the Continent of
Antarctica but, more importantly, as an outstanding example of
practical cooperation between nations and a positive step to-
ward a peaceful world".


I have every confidence, Mr. Chairman, that the work of
this Fourth Consultative Meeting will enhance this tradition.
On our agenda are a number of items of importance not only to
us, but to the scientific community of the whole world. This
meeting will examine with new vigor the question of conserva-
tion to see what improvements can be made in the present ar-
rangements, and what new arrangements can be undertaken to car-
ry the work still further.  We shall study some of the legal
questions raised by the Treaty. We shall consider the possi-
bility of arranging technical and scientific meetings under
the Treaty on a less formal basis than that required by the
more general problems dealt with by a Consultative Meeting.
And we shall address curselves to the problems raised for
our stations by the influx of relatively large numbers of vi-
sitors.  All these questions are well worthy of the attention
of the distinguished representatives gathered here.


Our own dedication and good-will, together with our he-
ritage of successful constructive meetings, are ample guaran-
tees for the success of our meeting here.
