ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N°13
English

OPENING ADDRESS DELIVERED BY THE REPRESENTATIVE
OF BELGIUM AT THE FOURTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CON-
SULTATIVE MEETING

It is with special satisfaction that the Belgian delega-
tion properes to participate in the Fourth Consultative Meeting
in this beautiful country.

We can hardly forget the already long-standing ties which
have united Belgian work in Antarctic research with that of
Chili. The expedition led by Baron Adrien de Gerlache de
Gomery on the "Belgica", which became the first to winter
beyond the Arctic Circle, made a long stop at Punta Arenas
in December 1897 before facing the unknown continent. It
was likewise at Punta Arenas, after an absence of fifteen
months, at a time when radio still did not exist that the
seventeen survivors arrived, and there that they again made
contact with civilization.

Added to this now distant memory is the visit made less
than a year ago to the Chilcan Antarctic Bases, at the invita-
tion of the Chilean authorities, by Baron Gaston de Gerlache
de Gomery, son of the explorer, and himself founder of the
King Baudouin Base in late 1957. More than just a visit,
this had the attraction of a project of co-operation between
Chili and Belgium in scientific research in the Antarctic.

The project, under study by both Governments at the pre-
sent time, will certainly prove fruitful.

Naturally, these special reasons are a source of pleasure
to the Belgian delegation at the opening of the Santiago
Meeting. There are however other causes for satisfaction.

The first of these is to see the work of co-operation
undertaken in Washington seven years ago, pursued with en-
couraging regularity. It is comforting to see that a treaty
as recent as 1959, has been able, not only to be put into
effect, but develop year by year an effective co-operation
in a spirit of friendly understanding.
- 2 -
Document N°l3
English

The Belgian delegation feels that this spirit will be still further affirmed in Santiago and, for its part, de-
clares that it will do everything in its power to this end.

Glancing at the results attained since 1959, we can only congratulate ourselves. It is true that all of the
recommendations of the Third Consultative Meeting are not yet in operation. Belgium, in particular, has still not
approved the Agreed Measures for theConservation of An-
tarctic Fauna and Flora. It must be emphasized that there is no question of reservation in regard to this remarkable do-
cument, but of a simple delay caused by legislative require-
ments which the Belgian delegation will explain in the course
of the working meetings. Briefly, however, it is the very
importance of the "Agreed Measures" that has necessitated
a slower process of approval than usual.

The final satisfaction of the Belgian delegation is the
unanimous decision of the assembly to elect as Chairman,
Mr. Escudero, negotiator of and signatory to the Washington
Treaty. Our delegation offers you, Mr. Chairman, its heartiest
congratulations.
