ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

ARGENTINA                     Document N°16
                              English

OPENING ADDRESS DELIVERED BY THE REPRESENTATIVE
OF ARGENTINA, AT THE FOURTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr. Chairman,

Just over two years ago, Mr. Theo Lefevre, Prime Minister
of Belgium, in welcoming the delegates to the Third Consultative
Meeting held in that country, pointed out that the fundamental
principles of the Antarctic Treaty were the prohibition of any
measures of a military nature, including nuclear explosions,
and the freedom of scientific research in the Antarctic.

We wish to recall the efficient way in which Belgium
laid down the general lines for developing the discussions and
formulating the recommendations.

The Antarctic Treaty was a difficult achievement which,
in a convulsed world, has shown that it is possible to reach
agreement and understanding. Its articles, the results of la-
borious discussion, established -- as we have already mentioned --
a spirit and objectives. A careful study of the Antarctic
Treaty and of the conclusions of the earlier consultative
meetings show that they coincide in the most important points.

Today, the representatives of the States signatory to
the Antarctic Treaty are gathered together once more, to make
that spirit a reality, as established in 1959. And it is not
out of place in these circumstances, in thanking the Chilean
Government for its kind hospitality, to recall that in Brussels
the Chilean delegate indicated the way to do it, within clearly-
defined limits, and the need to avoid hasty action which might
give rise to later regrets.

If we are to achieve the objectives of the Antarctic
Treaty we must keep within the original character of the Treaty.
- 2 -
Document N°16
English

We have dwelt on those recent past developments in
order to learn from that experience. With reference to the
words of the former representative of ..rgentina regarding the
importance that my country attributes to these meetings,
both because part of Antarctica lies within our national
territory and because of the intensive and continuing acti-
vities it has carried out there for over sixty years, I can
now reaffirm them with satisfaction, as borne out by the
land expedition led by Colonel Jorge Leal to the South Pole.

It is in that spirit and imbued with that interest
that we are here. We have come to unite our ideas and our
expectations with those of the other delegations, and we
trust that the result will be a happy one, as it always
has been, setting an example of respect for the position
of the signatory States and providing a source of satis-
faction for all those who have participated.

We see a good omen in the election of our present
Chairman.  His knowledge of the subject, his legal back-
ground and his great tact, will undoubtedly contribute to
that result.
