ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

                        Document N°26
                        NORWAY
                        English

ADDRESS GIVEN BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF
NORWAY AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE
FOURTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE
MEETING

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

May I extend to you, Sir, on behalf of the Norwegian dele-
gation, my congratulations upon your unanimous election as chair-
man of the IV Consultative Meeting. I know that we shall all
benefit from your wisdom and impartiality, and from your long
experience in matters connected with Antarctica and Antarctic
Treaty affairs.

I should also like to take this opportunity to express our
feelings of gratitude towards the Government of Chile for the
hospitality with which we have been received, as well as for the
excellent arrangements which have been made in preparation of the
meeting. The long traditions which Chile herself has in the An-
tarctic regions, make it fitting indeed that the meeting this
time takes place in the capital of Santiago.

The Antarctic Treaty entered into force a little more than
5 years ago. It represented a new, indeed a unique, venture, in
the field of international law. The motives behind the treaty
were partly to be found in the success which was achieved during
the international geophysical year 1957/58, with regard to inter-
national scientific cooperation in Antarctica. But this was not
all: the objectives of the treaty were much more ambitious than
scientific cooperation alone. The demilitarization, the ban on
nuclear explosions of all kinds, the inspection system, and the
mutual understanding to set aside conflicting interests in these
vast regions, were all measures that make the Antarctic Treaty
stand apart, as an example of what can be achieved, given good-
will between countries.
- 2 -
Document N°26
English

In Norway we like tc think of ourselvos, somewhat immodest-
ly perhaps, as picneurs on the Antarctic continent. May I recall 
the venture of Roald Amundsen, in 1911, and the many expeditions 
that followed.

But expediticns, alas, are expensive undertakings. Norway's 
polar interests comprise bcth the Arctic and the Antarctic regions, 
and for various reascns we have had to concentrate cur resources - 
in money and perscnnel - on the Arctic end of the glcbe, over the 
last few years. The last Norwegian scientific expedition to the 
Antarctic continent tcok place in 1960. Since then, cur field 
activities have been limited to the participation of Norwegian 
scientists in other countries' expediticns. However, it is our 
sincere h?pe that we shall again be able to play a more active 
r?le in the field, and that experience gained in the Arctic might 
then prove to be cf value to the ccoperation with our partners 
in antarctica.

I think, Mr. Chairman, that ccoperation is the key-word 
for cur coming deliberaticns. I feel certain that under your 
wise guidance, this meeting will take place in the same construc-
tive atmosphere that has characterized the previous consultative 
reunions. It is in this spirit that we on cur part shall approach 
the problems which are beforc us.

Thank you.
