ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE   ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N°19
English

JAPAN

ADDRESS BY H.E. THE AMBASSADOR AUGUSTIN M. KANAYAMA, LEADER
OF JAPANESE DELEGATION TO THE FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

On behalf my delegation I would like to extend my cordial congratulations to Professor don Julio Escudero for your election to the Chairmanship of our meeting.

I am next to none who believes that this meeting will surely achieve successful results owing to your abundant experience, prominent efficiency and high statemanship.

1.- It is a great pleasure of my Government as well as of myself to find that international cooperation for Antarctic research has greatly been promoted by the member nations for the past five years after the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty in 1961.

First of all I wish to express my sincere thanks to the Government of Chile who has become the host of this meeting in Santiago. I am sure this is a proof of a spirit entertained by the Chilean Government toward accelerating international collaboration for Antarctica.

2.- As all the distinguished representatives here are aware, Japan has been undertaking Antarctic research since 1957 at the Syowa Base in the Bay of Lutsow-Holm.  Six Japanese Expedition Teams were sent to this base until 1962 when the Base has unfortunately to be closed.  My Government, however, decided October last year to reopen this base and a new Survey Boat titled "Fuji" embarked from Tokyo Port on November 20, 1965 with the aim of reopening this base for a new program.

As Members of the Seventh Expedition Team were on board and arrived successfully at Antarctica towards the end of last year.
- 2 -                 Document Nо 19
                                  English

3.- My Government appropiated about ¥ 4.800 million for the
Seventh Team, among which is included ¥ 3.000 million for the
construction of this boat. The "Fuji" is equiped with helicop-
ter and other many kinds of survey instruments. A miniature
model of this boat was displayed at the Exposition held here
in September and I hope many of your representatives had a
glance of it. This boat of 7.760 tons is constructed as an
icebraker and a cargoship. It is also an helicopter carrier
as well as a compact laboratory for meteorology, upper atmos-
pheric physics, oceanography and echology.

4.- On December last year, the "Fuji" anchored at Prince Olav
Coast via Fremantle Ireland of Australia.  In February this
year the crew paid visit to the USSR Base in Molodesknaya and
Belgium-Netherland Base in Roi Baudouin, where they exchanged
cordial friendship and amity with members of the soviet team
and belgium-netherland team.

    It is now being contemplated to send another "wintering
team" consisting of 24 members in the coming season.

5.- Turning to another subject of international cooperation
for Antarctica I wish to take pleasure of informing here that
my Government has decided to offer hostage for the 2nd Logys-
tic Symposium in Tokyo around June 1968.  The National Antarc-
tic Committee of the Scientific Council of Japan has invited
the tenth meeting of SCAR at nearly the same time.

    My Government is not prepared to hold the next Fifth
Session of Consultative Meeting and its Preparatory Meeting
in Tokyo but, by becoming a host for these two scientific sym-
posium, it would like to see that a number of scientists of
different nations would come to Tokyo so that they may have
a chance to see the Antarctic research activities in Japan
and exchange useful knowledge and information with our scien-
tists.

6.- The views of my Government with respect to various agen-
da items of this meeting will be delivered at the discussion
of each item.

    On any agenda item it is a hope of my delegation to see
to it that freedom of the scientific research and broad inter-
national cooperation in the Antarctic will eventually benefit
all of mankind.
- 3 -                         Document N° 19

7.-  Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I wish to conclude my speech in paying my high regard to the hospitality of the Government of 
Chile who accepted to be host of not only this Fourth Consultative Meeting, but also its Preparatory Meeting, Exposition 
and SCAR Meeting in this beautiful city of Santiago.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
