ANTARCTIC TREATY           
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING        TRATADO ANTARTICO
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE     CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document  N° 14
English

AUSTRALIA

ADDRESS GIVEN BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF
AUSTRALIA AT THE OPENING SESSION OF THE
FOURTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr. Chairman,

Nature has provided the Chilean people with a country
of great beauty and variety.  It has endowed them also with a ca-
pacity for courtesy and a genius for hospitality equalled by few
others.  Even in the short time we have been in Chile, we have
seen ample evidence of both.  We appreciate especially the measures
taken by the Chilean authorities to ensure the success of the pre-
sent meeting, and of the Preparatory Meeting which proceded it.  If
we all show the cooperative spirit demonstrated by our hosts, this
Meeting cannot fail to prove a success.

The Australian Delegation notes with satisfaction that
the level of scientific activity in Antarctica has been well main-
tained and in some respects increased since the last Consultative
Meeting held at Brussels.  In January of this year our Japanese
colleagues reopened their SYOWA station, with a resulting intensi-
fication in the overall Antarctic effort.  We welcome the re-entry
of Japan into this field, and we wish her well in her future An-
tarctic activities.  In this connection, we cannot refrain from
remarking on the importance of continuity in scientific research.
Just prior to the Brussels Meeting, Belgium - in cooperation with
the Netherlands - had reopened its station ROI BAUDOUIN.  Most
useful work has been accomplished during the past two seasons at
this royal station, and we hope that means will be found to maintain
it in the future.

The fact that for us, as for Chile, Antarctica is not
a remote antipodean area but an adjacent land mass in the Southern
Hemisphere, has ensured a continuing Australian interest there for
many years.  We hope that it will be possible for us at least to
maintain our present level of expenditure on scientific activities
in the years ahead.
- 2 -                          Document N° 14
                                English

The Australian Government continues, of course, to support wholeheartedly all the purposes for which the Antarctic Treaty was originally agreed, not only to establish a firm foundation for international cooperation in scientific investigation, but also to ensure that Antarctica shall (continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. It was a notable achievement to include in the Treaty the prohibition of nuclear explosions in Antarctica. We look forward to the time when the second part of that same Article may also come into effect, that is, to the time when we shall all be parties to a general international agreement concerning the use of nuclear energy and covering nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste material. The Antarctic Treaty, as you yourself have said, sir, in your opening remarks, may well provide models and guidelines in this and other novel fields such as outer space - once empty, but now full of space buses and satellites and other devices. The experience we have gained in cooperation in scientific research and the avoidance of duplication in expensive expeditions in Antarctica, may, we think, be helpful in coordinating the really remote and really expensive stations on the moon!

Mr. Chairman, we have now had some years' experience of the Antarctic Treaty relationship and know what is practicable under it. We can proceed now to develop further cooperative efforts of mutual benefit in fields covered by the Treaty. We should not rest on the level of general principles, but should seek to cooperate - always remaining of course within the terms of the Treaty - in overcoming the practical problems relating to the conduct of work in Antarctica. We have still to complete the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. We are only just beginning to tackle the problems raised by non-scientific expeditions - the effects of tourism.

In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the Australian Delegation desires to stress once again the importance which it places upon maintaining the effectiveness of the Treaty relationship as a whole. If we keep our eye on the Treaty principles and cooperate in practical matters with goodwill, the Santiago Session will undoubtedly mark a further stage in the already notable record of the Antarctic Treaty.
