ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N° 4
English

U.S. WORKING PAPER

SUBJECT: Status of Meetings of Experts

The Meeting of Experts on Telecommunications under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty raised questions for the Parties regarding the role of such meetings. There was agreement that such meetings should in no case be in a position to bind the governments. There was also agreement that all meetings must be held under the terms of Articles IX of the Treaty. However, there was no agreement on whether the Experts should report to the next Consultative Meeting, or make recommendations to governments directly. Also there was doubt expressed by some that recommendations from experts should have the same status as recommendations from a Consultative Meeting. No agreement could be reached on this subject at the Third Consultative Meeting in Brussels, and it was therefore referred to the Fourth Consultative Meeting.

The United States feels that Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty permits experts on such subjects as communications, logistics, and other technical aspects of Antarctic activities to consult together on questions of common interest. Such consultations could at times be useful and of benefit to international cooperation in Antarctica.

There is no requirement in the Treaty that such meetings must produce recommendations for the approval of Governments. Indeed, it seems likely that many of the subjects such experts would discuss are not suitable for discussion at Consultative Meetings, or for inclusion in the formal international agreements known as Approved Recommendations. They are usually too technical, too dependent on the changing conditions of the Antarctic environment, and too subject to the varying requirements of different national programs.

The United States, like most of the Consultative Parties, could not agree that Meetings of Experts have the power to bind governments. However, the U.S., in the interest of furthering practical cooperation in Antarctica, suggests that a Recommenda- tion along the following lines could be useful:
- 2 -                               Document N° 4
                                       English

RECOMMENDATION

Realizing that it is not always practical to conclude for-
mal agreements on detailed technical matters relating to Antarc-
tic activities;

Considering that cooperation under the Antarctic Treaty need
not bu confined to those matters requiring formal intergovernmen-
tal agreement but may also extend to informal working arrangements
between the various expeditions in Antarctica;

Considering further that such informal working arrangements
can further the spirit of cooperation under the Antarctic Treaty;

Taking into account the benefits that can result from such
informal cooperation, both as regards the safety of men and equip-
ment and increased efficiency of the various expeditions;

The Representatives recommend to their governments:

1. That Meetings of Experts be convened from time to time
as the need arises to discuss practical problems of program ac-
tivity in Antarctica. Such meetings may be attended by experts
from any Party entitled to participate in Consultative Meetings;

2. That such meetings be convened and the agenda established
by agreement between all those Parties entitled to participate
in Consultative Meetings under the Antarctic Treaty who wish to
participate in the Meetings of Experts;

3. That these Meetings of Experts would exchange views on
the subject of their meeting and would, whenever it is found
useful to do so, work out cooperative arrangements at the techni-
cal or operational level. Such arrangements shall not have the
status of Recommendations, and shall not, therefore, be binding
on Governments;

4. That it be understood that any such arrangement agreed
to and later put into practice may be modified by appropriate
consultations between those concerned;

5. That these attending the Meetings of Experts will report
the results of those Meetings to appropriate authorities in
their respective governments;

6. That whenever any Consultative Party judges that a subject
dealt with by a Meeting of Experts warrants formal agreement, the
Party concerned may propose an appropriate recommendation at a
subsequent Consultative Meeting.
