ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE                  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document No 18
English

CHILE

TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Preamble

To this date there have been various meetings to consider
the urgent need of the Governments signatory to the Antarctic
Treaty to make an official pronouncement in regard to Antarctic
telecommunications. These meetings have brought forth valuable
proposals for co-ordination and traffic schemes.

Thus Recommendations I-XI and II-III of the First and Se-
cond Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings respectively gave
rise to the Meeting in Washington from 24 to 28 June 1963, on
Telecommunications in the Antarctic Treaty Area, in which the
co-ordination of Antarctic radio-communication was considered.
These studies produced eleven Recommendations, which were rati-
fied by the Third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

At the Third Consultative Meeting, which took place in
Brussels from 2 to 13 June 1964, it was resolved (Recommendation
III-V) to leave analysis of the results of the Recommendations
on Telecommunications from the Washington Meeting for the Pre-
paratory Meeting of the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.

Lastly, the Preparatory Meeting of the Fourth Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Santiago from 5 to 9 Sep-
tember of this year, decided to leave to the Meeting itself the
final study of the Recommendations of the Washington Meeting.

Besides this, the Meeting held in Melbourne on 3 March this
year established the Antarctic Meteorological Group of WMO which,
among other matters, analysed the Recommendations on Telecommuni-
cations in the Antarctic Treaty Area made by the Washington Meet-
ing, suggesting certain modifications which would usefully in-
tegrate the Antarctic network of observations and meteorological
reports with the scheme proposed by WWW.
- 2 -                                 Document N° 18
                                                  English

From the foregoing it would seem in order, to take up con-
sideration of a series of recommendations on Antarctic Telecom-
munications on the basis of the technical material available
to us from the Washington and Melbourne Meetings and the experi-
ence gained by the signatory countries in the operation of their
own telecommunication systems.

Analysis of the Washington Recommendations and of the satis-
factory results already obtained by their partial fulfilment,
leads us to add to and improve these Recommendations with a view
to their effective and general implementation. In the same way,
analysis of the Melbourne Recommendations in the light of the
international advantages implicd for WWW, shows the value of mak-
ing the corresponding modifications in the Washington Recommenda-
tions.

In accordance then, with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty,
it is proposed that this Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting consider the adoption of the following resolutions on Te-
lecommunications in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

RECOMMENDATION 1

Co-ordinated Timetable for Urgent Traffic

The Representatives,
Considering:

a)  That meteorological information makes up a high proportion
of the total traffic transmitted by Antarctic stations;

b)  That such information loses much of its value for analysis
and forecast if it does not arrive at the analysing centres
within a few hours of the observations having been made;

c)  That forecasts for flying and for land operations are ur-
gently needed by many Antarctic stations;

d)  That the Southern Hemisphere Analysis Center (SHAC), si-
tuated in Melbourne, needs meteorological data collected in the
Antarctic Treaty Area, as well as in the rest of the Hemisphere;
and

e)  That both the Melbourne Meeting and the World Weather
Watch (WWW) recommend setting up three Regional Meteorological
Centres in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
- 3 -                         Document N° 18
                                  English

Recommend to their Governments:

1.   That all Antarctic stations adjust their radio timetables
to hours which allow meteorological information compiled to reach
the Regional Meteorological Centres (RMC) and SHAC as soon as
possible, but under no circumstances with a delay of more than
one hour and thirty minutes for the surface meteorological infor-
mation collected every six hours, and of not more than four hours
from the time at which observations are scheduled to begin, for
information obtained from the upper atmosphere;

2.   That the timetables so established are so arranged as to allow
other urgent transmissions to be made by the same means and during
the same hours;

3.   That the necessary adjustments be made in the regular links
according to the adjoined timetable, as soon as possible; and

4.   That other transmissions which the contracting parties may
arrange do not interfere with this timetable except in cases of
emergency where human life is endangered or in cases where the
station head, with full justification, may so decide.

ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION I

Scheme for a Provisional Timetable of Regular Links

21.00Z and 00.00Z,  { Daughter-stations to Main stations up to 01.00Z
Synoptic           { Main stations to RMC              " " 01.15Z
                   { RMC to SHAC                    " " 01.30Z

                   { Daughter-stations to Main stations up to 03.00Z
00.00Z, upper at-  { Main stations to RMC              " " 03.30Z
mosphere          { RMC to SHAC                    " " 04.00Z

                   { Daughter-stations to Main stations up to 07.00Z.
03.00Z and 06.00Z, { Main stations to RMC              " " 07.15Z
sinoptics          { RMC to SHAC.                   " " 07.30Z.
- 4 -                 Document Nｏ 18
                                  English

09.00Z and 12.00Z, sinoptics 
( Daughter-st tions to Main stations up to 13.00Z
  Main stations to RMC           " " 13.15Z.
  RMC to SHAC                    " " 13.30Z

12.00Z, upper 
atmosphere 
( Daughter-stations to Main stations up to 15.00Z
  Main stations to RMC           " " 15.30Z
  RMC to SHAC                    " " 16.00Z

15.00Z and 18.00Z, sinoptics 
( Daughter-stations to Main stations up to 19.00Z
  Main stations to RMC           " " 19.15Z
  RMC to SHAC                    " " 19.30Z

(+):  In addition, arrangements must be made between the appointed 
RMC stations and SHAC, in order to set a timetable of regular bilateral especially in relation to the interchange of 
processed information (regional and hemispheric analysis and 
forecasts).

RECOMMENDATION II

Links between RMC Stations     in the Antarctic
                                Treaty Area

The Representatives considering:

a) That the meteorological information gathered throughout 
Antarctica is required for analysis in SHAC and for forecasts at 
Mc Murdo, Mirny and Presidente Aguirre Cerda (PAC);

b) That radio transmission of meteorological data across 
the auroral zone offers a less reliable route than is required:

Recommend to their governments that they do all they can to 
find the best method for obtaining reliable links between RMC 
stations and between RMC and SHAC.
- 5 -                                          Document N° 18
                                                       English

RECOMMENDATION III

Provisional Channels for Meteorological Data
Gathered in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,

Considering:

a)  That it is necessary to establish certain new channels
in order to obtain the desired improvements in the transmission
of meteorological data;

b)  That there are, nevertheless, important limitations of
a practical nature dependent on the financial resources available
to some Antarctic stations; and

c)  That the Representatives have analysed these limitations
for each terminal of the new routing desired for radio circuits.

Recommend to their Governments that the normal channels for
transmitting meteorological data from the observation areas to
SHAC be the RMC stations.

(+)  The system of channelling for the observation areas in the
Antarctic Peninsula is set out in the attached Annex to this
Recommendation.

RECOMMENDATION IV

Organization of international links

The Representatives,

Considering,

a)  That it is advisable to keep the number of international
radio links in the Antarctic to the minimum necessary for the
amount of traffic required;

b)  That the capacity and quality of the RMC telecommuni-
cations systems is equal to that of the Regional Telecommuni-
cations Headquarters (RTH), and therefore the main points in
the international Antarctic network should be considered;
- 6 -                                   Document N° 18
                                         English

Recommend that the int?m?ticnal radio links in the Antarc-
tic be limited, as far as possible, to the routes indicated in
Recommendation III.

RECOMMENDATION V

Alternative routes for international traffic

The Representatives,

Considering the need to keep open a limited number of al-
ternative routes in case the route chosen for one of the main
links should, for any reason, fail.

Recommend to their Governments, that alternative routes be
studied and test transmissions be effected by those routes at
regular intervals.

RECOMMENDATION VI

Aerials

The Representatives,

Considering the need to co-ordinate the design of the aerial
systems at both ends of each international radio link in order to
create suitable circuit conditions,

Recommend to their Governments:

1. That each of those links be provided, if possible, with di-
rectional aerials, and

2. That in each of those links, by agreement among the parties
concerned, the transmitting and receiving aerials for each of
the main channels be compatible as regards polarization and angle
of transmission.

RECOMMENDATION VII

Modes of transmission

The Representatives,

Considering the need to co-ordinate the techniques used at
both ends of each international radio link if communication is
to be effective,
- 7 -                         Document N° 18
                                                   English

Recommend to their Governments:

1.  That all modes of transmission used by the main stations
be brought into line, as far as possible, with the recommenda-
tions of the International Telegraphy and Telephony Consultative
Committee (including, inter alia, the use of transmission speeds
of 50 bauds instead of 45 bauds), and of the International Ra-
diocommunications Consultative Committee;

2.  That the aim be to use, as soon as possible, 5-unit radio-
teletypes on the RMC channels.

3.  That consideration be given to the possibility of using
such systems as frequency modulation, which would be less suscep-
tible to interference than amplitude modulation.

RECOMMENDATION VIII

Search and rescue procedures

The Representatives,

Considering:

(a) That the stations requiring search and rescue services are
precisely those which cannot on their own provide the means of
rendering timely aid to any person who might need it;

(b) That the stations from which such assistance is requested
are very probably those which operate aircraft for long-dis-
tance flights in the Antarctic;

(c) That such aircraft are not normally in a position to take
off immediately on long transcontinental flights, and that it
takes time to prepare an operation of that nature; and

(d) That when the rescue aircraft reaches the area, presuma-
bly a search would have to be made for the persons requiring
assistance,

Recommend to their Governments that they adopt the follow-
ing uniform procedure for the operation of radio equipment used
in search and rescue operations in Antarctica:

(i) Communications regarding assistance should have absolute
priority over all other communications awaiting trans-
mission at the time;

(ii) The procedure for radio operations will be that laid
down for mobile services in Chapter VIII, Article 36,
- 8 -                          Document No 18
English

of the Radiocommunications Rules of Procedure, adop-
ted by the International Telecommunications Union at
Geneva in 1959;

(iii) In addition, after transmitting the original call for
help, the station or stations providing assistance
should keep in constant touch, throughout the search
and rescue operations, with the station requesting
assistance, until such time as the latter considers
that the operation has been concluded.

RECOMMENDATION IX

Radio electric aids for air navigation

The Representatives,

Considering:

(a) That international flights in Antarctica are becoming daily
more frequent;

(b) That for purposes of increasing the safety of aircraft
operating in this area it is essential for certain land stations
to have basic radionavigation equipment;

(c) That agreement should be reached regarding a system to
which the various countries can adhere in the next five years,
when they undertake the installation of land radio aids for air
navigation or when they envisage any change in the installa-
tions at their stations; and

(d) That the definitive system for the Antarctic should be for-
mulated with due regard for the system of channels existing at
the time, which should be requested from the International Ci-
vil Aviation Organization or any other international agency it
might suggest.

Recommend to their Governments:

1.  That, as soon as possible, an omnidirectional radio beacon
with sufficient power to serve air navigation be installed at
each station possessing landing facilities, and omnidirectional
medium-frequency radio beacons be installed at such stations
on the coast.

2.  That the details of tyres, frequency and power of the ra-
dio-electric aid mechanisms installed be the subject of the in-
formation exchanged yearly in accordance with the terms of
- 9 -                                         Document No 18
                                                   English

Recommendation I-VI, paragraph (8), of the First Antarctic Trea-
ty Consultative Meeting, in order that the parties wishing to
equir their aircraft so as to make use of the land radio aids
may do so.

RECOMMENDATION X

Time schedule for the beginning and end radio transmissions

The Representatives,

Considering:

(a) That it is not always possible to avoid interference between
radiotransmission and ionospheric observation services, owing to
the fact that, for logistic reasons, the installations are lo-
cated in small areas;

(b) That it is advisable to promote broad international under-
standing on this question, since ionospheric observations should
begin simultaneously at all stations, and the reports are trans-
mitted at the same time from the radiocommunication centres at
all bases;

(c) That excessive traffic is noted at H+00 minutes, and then
diminishes rapidly;

(d) That the recommendations of the international scientific
organizations, stipulate that radio-sonde data be transmitted
at H+00 minutes over the world communication network,

Recommend to their Governments that, save in emergencies,
radio transmissions on international channels by those Antarc-
tic stations which use radio-sondes end systematically at H-05
and begin systematically at H+05, whenever radio traffic is
between H-05 and H+05.
Document No 18
English

ANNEX TO RECOMMENDATION III

PROVISIONAL CHANNELS FOR METEOROLOGICAL DATA COLLECTED
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(System for the Antarctic Peninsula)

Daughter-stations                     Main stations                     RMC

Halley Bay       (UK)                                  ?                           
Deception Is.    (UK)                                    
Argentine Is.    (UK)                                    
Signy Is.        (UK)                  Decepción           McMurdo               
Adelaide         (UK)                                    
Stonington Is.   (UK)                                    

Decepción        (A)                                    
Matienzo         (A)                                    
Esperanza        (A)                Decepción           PAC           SHAC
Gral. Belgrano   (A)                                    
Almte. Brown     (A)                                    
Orcadas          (A)                                    

O'Higgins        (CH)                                   
Arturo Prat      (CH)                PAC                   Mirny
G. González V.   (CH)                                   
PAC              (CH)                                   

Palmer           (USA)               Palmer

Notes:
______________________________________________________
link within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
- - - - link with an area outside the Antarctic Treaty Area.
(?)  main station to be designated by the United Kingdom from
     among its daughter-stations.
