ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
FOURTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    CUARTA REUNION CONSULTIVA
QUATRIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE  ЧЕТВЕРТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ

SANTIAGO DE CHILE

Document N° 3
English

SUBMITTED BY NEW ZEALAND

PROPOSAL RELATING TO ARTICLE XII OF THE AGREED
MEASURES FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC FLORA
AND FAUNA (RECOMMENDATION III-VIII)

Representatives will recall that Article XII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna (Recommendation III-VIII) proposes inter alia that their Govern -
ments should arrange to discuss the establishment of a common
form in which they may regularly submit reports to other Govern-
ments of the steps taken and information collected relating to
the implementation of the Agreed Measures.

The material to be exchanged is defined in general terms as
follows:

(i) records (including records of permits) and statistics
concerning the numbers of each species of native mammal
and bird killed or captured each year in the Treaty Area;

(ii) information as to the status of native mammals and birds
in the Treaty Area, and the extent to which any species
needs protection;

(iii) the number of native mammals or birds which should be
permitted to be harvested for food, scientific study,
or other uses in the various regions.

The exchange of this information is, we think, of fundamen-
tal importance in ensuring that the protection of native Antarc-
tic fauna continues to be based on sound conservation principles
and, especially, in guiding Governments when they come to issue
permits in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the
Agreed Measures. It also seems essential that there should be
uniformity of details in the material that is circulated so that
it may be readily collated and interpreted by experts.
- 2 -                         Document No 3
                                   English

The information submitted about the status of Antarctic fau-
na seems directly relevant to decisions on the extent to which
any species needs protection and on the number of mammals and
birds which should be harvested for whatever purpose in the va-
rious regions. Clearly there would be many ecological factors
which would need to be taken into account in determining the
status of wildlife in the treaty Area and which would be used
by Governments in considering the other questions.

Representatives will recall that Recommendation III-VIII
invites the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to
continue its interest in the conservation of the living resources
of Antarctica and to prepare reports from time to time on this
subject. We believe that it could be helpful to Participating
Governments to have SCAR's opinion on the data that might be
meaningful in arriving at conclusions about the status of Antarc-
tic mammals and birds. Accordingly the New Zealand delegate to
the Ninth Meeting of SCAR will seek SCAR's views on this matter.
(We understand that at its Ninth Meeting SCAR will be discussing
what areas and species in Antarctica might be designated as "spe-
cially protected" for listing in Annexes A and B of the Agreed
Measures.  For this discussion, SCAR will, no doubt, need to
formulate the criteria by which the status of Antarctic wildlife
may be determined.)

With regard to the question of the exchange of records and
statistics about the numbers of native mammals and birds killed
or captured each year in the treaty Area, it would seem easier
to define the sort of information which should be furnished.  It
should no doubt include details about the age and sex of the spe-
cimens taken, the areas (giving geographical coordinates) whence
they were drawn and for what purpose.

Again, however, it seems to us desirable to have the guidance
of SCAR on the data which Participating Governments should submit
in this regard. The New Zealand delegate to the Ninth SCAR Meet-
ing will therefore also seek SCAR's views upon this question.

When SCAR's suggestions are known on those matters, New Zea-
land will put forward an appropriate draft recommendation for con-
sideration by the Participating Governments at the Fourth Consul-
tative Meeting.
