ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                              XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
THE EUROPEAN ICE-CORING PROGRAMME AT DÔME C

 
Agenda item 12              Submitted by France

XXI ATCM/IP24
May 1997
English
Original: French
                    24
THE EUROPEAN ICE-CORING PROGRAMME AT DÔME C

1.    Background

A cooperation program has been set up between the polar institutes of ten European 
countries (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, United Kingdom, 
Sweden, Switzerland) to carry out two deep ice-coring missions in the Antarctic: one at Dôme 
C, the other in the Dronning Maud Land area. The corresponding programme, called EPICA 
(European Programme for Ice Coring in Antarctica) has obtained financial support from the 
European Union, regardless of that already provided by the participating institutes.

The Institut Français pour la Recherche et la Technologie Polaires (IFRTP) was selected 
by the project's Steering Committee as Operations Center N°1, in charge of logistics and 
financial management of the ice-coring operations at Dôme C. These will become the first 
activities of the programme. This choice derives directly from the role played by the Institut in 
implementing the heavy logistics called for by the Concordia Project. Indeed, almost all of the 
gear needed for the experiments on the Dôme C site is shipped through the French station of 
Dumont d'Urville and reaches Dôme C by surface transportation (please refer to the 
corresponding information paper on the Concordia Project).

However, although the IFRTP is formally the only agency responsible for the EPICA 
programme logistics, in practice it is carried out in close collaboration with the Italian 
organization in charge of research in the Antarctic, to which the Institut is linked by virtue of the 
research activities at large undertaken at Dôme C. Actually, although the heavy logistics 
(shipment of equipment) is carried out by surface raids departing from Dumont d'Urville, the 
staff travelling to Dôme C or between Dôme C and the Terra Nova Bay and Dumont d'Urville 
coastal bases is flown in a Twin-Otter chartered by the Italians. Besides, all of the on-site 
logistics (construction of the ice-coring shelters, laboratories, life support, ...) are jointly 
organized by the French and the Italians.

It should be noted that the portion of the EPICA programme to be carried out at Dôme C 
is none else than the ice-coring programme stemming from the Comprehensive Impact Study 
presented by France and Italy at the IXX ATCM. The other countries' institutes simply joined 
the programme, which will accelerate the scientific operation and enhance the quality of results.

2.    1995/1996 activities

The core of the task undertaken by the EPICA programme during the 1995/1996 summer 
campaign is the following:

•    shipment of heavy equipment to the Dumont d'Urville base during the six 
roundtrips of the l'Astrolabe between Hobart and Dumont d'Urville;

•    work on the Cape Prud'homme site to prepare the landing area where the 
equipment is to be loaded onto the surface convoys. These tasks are carried out 
according to the description provided by the Comprehensive Impact Study;

•    organization of two surface raids to transport the goods to Dôme C and to prepare 
an intermediate storage area for fuel;
· · 
· · 
· · 
2

·     calculation, by means of air- or surface-shipped radars, of the basement rocks' 
altimetric profile underneath Dôme C. These measurements helped determine, 
after speaking to the scientists of the various institutes working on the EPICA 
programme, the optimal ice-coring site, located at 75°06.11' S and 123°23.71' E.

During one of the return journeys, we brought back a radio isotope generator (RTG) as 
requested by the US Antarctic Programme (USAP). That device was used to feed the automatic 
weather station (AWS) at Dôme C. This generator was brought back to a point distant 20 km 
from the coast nearCape Prud'homme where, after the Italians and French prepared a landing 
strip, a C130 plane belonging to the American Army landed to carry it away.

3.      1996/1997 activities

Just as in the previous year, six roundtrips of the l'Astrolabe between Hobart and Dumont 
d'Urville and three surface raids between Cape Prud'homme and Dôme C had been scheduled. 
Due to extremely harsh weather conditions (very late outburst of the ice pack, lengthy blizzards) 
only five roundtrips of the l'Astrolabe and two surface raids were able to take place.

Nevertheless, with a few exceptions, all of the equipment needed was shipped to Dôme C, 
thanks to the surface convoys. The Twin-Otter flights, for which the Italians were responsible, 
helped bring in the missing equipment and transfer the staff. The mounting camp was almost 
completed. The ice-coring tower was erected. A 130-meter deep hole was drilled, reamed and 
cased. This ice-coring campaign had been carefully planned in conjunction with a French 
laboratory, a Danish institute and a Swiss one.

Just like during the previous campaign, important logistical support was provided during 
this season to our American colleagues. It is known that last year, the failure of a stratospheric 
balloon had been the cause of the landing of a 2.5-Ton telescope on a point located 200 km east 
of the route between Dôme C and Cape Prud'homme. As requested by the USAP, we diverted 
the first raid off track on its return trip in order to recover the telescope and bring it back to 
Dumont d'Urville where the l'Astrolabe took it to Hobart. Also, at the request of the USAP, two 
automatic weather stations (AWS), located on the Dôme C-Cape Prud'homme route, 
approximately 200 and 100 km away from the coast, were shipped back to the US for repairs 
during the return trip of the second raid.

4.      Conclusion

The EPICA programme is one where the pooling of scientific equipment and logistics is 
exemplary. As it is implemented together with the construction of the future Concordia Station, 
it minimizes the necessary means, both in on-site equipment and staff, in order to complete the 
two projects.

Furthermore, the almost continuous on-site presence at Dôme C of technical staff and 
means of transportation during the southern summer, allowed our American colleagues to recover 
their radio-isotope generator, their faulty automatic weather stations (AWS) and their highly 
valuable telescope, without having to deploy considerable logistics.
. 
. 
. 
3 

The ATCM recommendations on the need to reinforce logistical and scientific cooperation 
in all areas of Antarctic operations have thus been widely implemented upon the carrying out of 
this programme.

 
●

 
●
