ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS (IAATO)


Agenda item 5b                  Submitted by IAATO

XXI ATCM/IP108
May, 1997
Original: English
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS (IAATO)

To the XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
May 19-30, 1997, Christchurch, New Zealand

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

(Agenda item 5b)

(Submitted by IAATO)
IAATO Report
Page 1

THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS
(IAATO) is pleased to present a report of its activities to the XXI ATCM, Christchurch,
New Zealand, 19 - 30 May 1997 in relation to Article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty.

IAATO focused its activities in several areas over the last year, including: (1) increasing
the level of cooperation and standardization among its members; (2) recruiting new
members to the Association; (3) and conducting effective environmental impact assessments
for member activities in the Antarctic. IAATO is dedicated to appropriate, safe and
environmentally sound private-sector travel to the Antarctic. Its members are further
committed to operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty, Environmental
Protocol, relevant national legislation and other international agreements.

1. Introduction

1.1 Founded by seven private tour operators in 1991, the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) has grown significantly in the past year to now
include 23 member and associate members in Australia, Canada, Chile, Germany,
Japan, The Netherlands, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States.
A current Membership Directory is included with this report (ATTACHMENT A).

1.2 The number of shipborne travelers to Antarctica on commercially organized expedi-
tions in 1996-97 austral summer (7,322) was about 30% less than in the previous
year (9,212), primarily because the single larger cruise vessel currently active in the
Antarctic (Marco Polo) did not operate in 1996-97. Land-based tourism (91) and
overflights (3,448) continued at approximately the same levels as 1995-1996. An
overview of the season and projection for the future is given in a XXI ATCM/IP75.

1.3 All 13 tour vessels operating in Antarctica during the 1996-97 austral summer were
operated by IAATO members.

1.4 IAATO held its annual meeting 10-12 July 1996 in Arlington, Virginia, USA. The
IAATO Executive Committee met in Arlington, Virginia on 13 July, 1996 and in
New York City on March 22, 1997.

1.5 IAATO members value the opportunity to participate at this Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting and other international venues. Formal and informal liaison
with national Antarctic programs as well as scientific and environmental
organizations is an important objective of IAATO and its members. IAATO is
particularly pleased at the constructive and ongoing dialogue with COMNAP.

Since the XX ATCM in Utrecht, April-May 1996, IAATO representatives hosted,
attended or participated in a number of meetings and workshops, as listed below:
1
IAATO Report
Page 2

IAATO Annual Meeting
10-12 July 1996, Arlington, Virginia

8th Annual Antarctic Tour Operators Meeting
11 July 1996, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia.

Conference on Arctic Guidelines
17-18 August 1996, World Wildlife Fund, Cambridge, U.K.

Conference on Polar Tourism: Environmental Implications and Management
SPRI, 18-21 August 1996, Cambridge, U.K.

COMNAP Annual Meeting
August 1996, Cambridge

Workshop on Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica
IUCN, 18-21 September 1996, Wash., D.C.

Workshop on Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment
IAATO, 27-29 September 1996,Warrenton, Virginia.

Workshop on How to Implement Guidelines for Arctic Tourism
7-10 March 1997, Longyearbyen, Svalbard.

Public, Private, Governmental: IAATO and the Protection of the Antarctic Environment, Antarctic Society lecture, 5 March 1997, Wash., D.C.

COMNAP - IAATO: Issues of Common Interest and Concern
21 March 1997, New York City.

2.  Field Coordination

IAATO compiled and distributed Vessel Call Data as part of its annual operational information exchange (ATTACHMENT B). An improved radio schedule was also instituted. Field communication is essential for the exchange of general information, coordination of visits to individual sites and to provide for effective emergency response. Several tour vessels have introduced e-mail on board as a means to facilitate communication among vessels and scientific stations.

3.  Environmental Impact Assessment
                                                                                    2
IAATO Report
Page 3

3.1     IAATO members have submitted a variety of information on the potential 
        environmental impact of their activities, including permit applications, Preliminary 
        Environmental Evaluations, Environmental Audits and Initial Environmental 
        Evaluations. A list of EIAs conducted by tour operators is included in XXI/IP74.

3.2     IAATO organized and hosted, "IAATO Workshop on Environmental Assessment, 
        Building the Frame" on 27-29 September 1996, at Airlie Center, Warrenton, 
        Virginia. Representatives from the U.S. National Science Foundation, U.S. 
        Environmental Protection Agency, IAATO members, and independent consultants 
        attended.

3.3     The workshop began work on an environmental impact assessment of commercially-
        organized shipborne Antarctic tourism to the Antarctic Peninsula and South 
        Shetland Islands by IAATO Members. The workshop concluded that the most 
        effective way of addressing potential environmental impacts, particularly cumulative 
        impacts, would be to conduct an EIA on overall activities in the Peninsula by 
        IAATO-member companies with substantially similar operations. Draft terms of 
        reference for this programmatic Environmental Impact Assessment are included in 
        XXI/IP74.

4.      Procedures to Prevent the Introduction of Alien Species

4.1     Following the concern expressed at the XX ATCM (Final Report, Items 17/19, 
        para 124), IAATO-members continue the practice of safeguarding against 
        introduction of alien species to Antarctica. Recognizing that tourists are a highly 
        mobile population in the Antarctic, visiting a number of sites within a short time, 
        increased measures have been instituted to safer operations.

4.2     Boot washing stations are standard on all tour vessels, where all visitors are 
        required to clean their boots before and after each landing. This measure is to 
        eliminate soil or seeds from footwear as a result of visits ashore, avoiding 
        accidental transfer of non-native organisms to the Antarctic or within sites within 
        the Antarctic Treaty area.

4.3     As a further step to avoid introduction of non-native species, tour vessels do not 
        discharge ballast water in Antarctica taken on north of the Antarctic convergence.

5.      Reporting of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

5.1     Following the XX ATCM (Final Report, item 9, para 15), IAATO members 
        adopted forms for Advance Notification and Post-Season Reporting for trial use

                                                                                                  3
IAATO Report
Page 4

during the 1996-1997 season. Comments to increase their utility in the field are being compiled.

5.2   IAATO welcomes the use of a single form, which facilitates studies of the scope, 
      frequency and intensity of tourist activities. In particular, IAATO looks forward to 
      working with New Zealand and the United States to institute a database version of 
      the form as proposed in XXI ATCM/IP7.

5.3   A draft standard list of sites visited by commercially-organized Antarctic tourists is 
      appended to this report for comment. This list is intended as a tool to improve the 
      evaluation of the scope, frequency and intensity of visitation by eliminating the 
      use of duplicate place names.

6.    Site Assessment, Landing Criteria, and Standard List of Landing Sites

6.1   IAATO members renewed their support for appropriate studies that will contribute 
      to accurate site assessment and monitoring, including the Antarctic Site Inventory 
      project being conducted by Oceanites. IAATO looks forward to the prompt 
      publication of the valuable data collected so far on Antarctic visitor sites.

6.2   Members discussed the need to collect and make better use of systematic basic 
      descriptive information on specific sites and to immediately institute, in the absence 
      of more systematic data, additional measures to assess the environmental sensitivity 
      of specific sites. Following its Bylaws, IAATO continues to manage site visits so 
      that no more than 100 people are ashore at any one site at any one time. Expedition 
      leaders coordinate final tour schedules so that no two ships are in the same place at 
      the same time.

6.3   How landing sites are selected is a key mitigating factor in reducing potential 
      environmental impacts of brief visits ashore by Antarctic tourists. Such criteria for 
      selecting and managing site visits include frequency of past visitation, presence of 
      flying birds (especially nesting giant petrels), vegetation cover, and ongoing science 
      being conducted at the site. An outline of the site selection process is included in 
      XXI ATCM/IP74.

7.    Education and Training

7.1   While each individual tour operator conducts its own training programs and hires 
      according to its own standards, IAATO collects systematic information on the 
      qualifications and experience of the field staff employed by its members. According 
      to IAATO By-Laws, members are required to hire staff that as a whole have at least 
      75% previous Antarctic experience. The 175 staff members employed during the
      4
IAATO Report
Page 5

1996-97 Antarctic season by IAATO members had, on average, seven years of 
Antarctic experience (ranging from 1-35).

7.2  The Office of the Secretariat publishes IAATO News (EXCERPTS AS 
ATTACHMENT C), a regular newsletter containing reports on Antarctic tourism, 
the Antarctic Treaty System and other topics relevant to its members, field staff and 
passengers. It has also published its By-Laws, Membership Directory, Guidance for 
Visitors to the Antarctic and Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting 
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic (Recommendation 
XVIII-1). To receive copies of these publications or be added to IAATO mailing 
list, please contact the Secretariat.

7.3  To further its educational mission, an IAATO Web Site (http://www@iaato.com) is 
in development. The site is scheduled to go online July 1997.

8.   Implementation of Recommendation XVIII-1

8.1  IAATO members distributed copies of Recommendation XVIII-1 (which is available 
in English, French, Spanish, Russian, German, and Japanese) to all its passengers, 
staff and crew. The Recommendation is an integral part of conservation briefings

8.2  Slide Presentation: IAATO distributed a draft slide presentation at the XX ATCM 
(INF 101) in order to illustrate the visual material which is used on tour vessels as 
part of the briefing on Recommendation XVIII-1. A slide presentation was also 
given at the Annual Meeting of the National Science Foundation/Tour Operators in 
July 1996. After minor revision, the IAATO slide set was implemented for onboard 
briefings. Copies of the 42-slide set are available from the IAATO Secretariat.

8.3  Medical Emergency Contingency: IAATO distributed a Medical Emergency 
Contingency Plan at XX ATCM (INF 76). The plan was successfully instituted 
during the 1996-97 operating season with the Punta Arenas office of Adventure 
Network International acting as an emergency contact station for IAATO-member 
vessels.

8.4  Standard Inventory of Medical Supplies: A vital aspect of tourism in Antarctica is 
that of medical care and capabilities for clients/passengers, whether it be shipborne 
tourism or land-based. IAATO has contracted an outside consultant to review the 
medical equipment, physician qualifications and medical inventories of member 
companies and make recommendations for industry-wide standards.

8.5  Amended SOPEPs for Antarctic Operations: All IAATO-member companies have 
Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plans (SOPEP) in place that satisfy regulation 
26 of Annex I of MARPOL. An outside contractor has been hired to provide
                                                                                 5
amendments to these plans in light of operational considerations and requirements 
of the Environmental Protocol

8.6    Standard Emergency Equipment for Zodiac, Helicopter Operations: As a means of 
ensuring safety for tour operations involving zodiacs (inflated boats) and 
helicopters, standard operating procedures include safety kits for each zodiac, and 
an elaborate inventory of equipment for helicopter operations.

9.      1996-97 Scientific and Environmental Research Initiatives

IAATO member companies continued to provide logistic and scientific support to 
national Antarctic programs and Antarctic organizations in 1996-97. Members 
welcome the opportunity to assist and look forward to continuing collaboration with 
national Antarctic programs -- a cost effective and regular platform-of-opportunity 
for science and logistics. Antarctic travelers benefit from the exposure to science on 
board tour vessels, and most projects cause minimal disruption to tour schedules. 
An announcement of assistance is tabled as a separate paper at XXI ATCM

9.1    Russia
Maria Gavrilo, a Russian biologist from Russian Antarctic Expedition traveled on 
the Kapitan Khlebnikov on its circumnavigation cruise around Antarctica, a 66-day 
voyage from 24 November 1996 to 27 January 1997.

Support of research activities at Bellingshausen Station included transport of seven 
scientists, assistance with logistics, arrangements and transport of provisions and 
other cargo, and through liaising with Argentine immigration officials to expedite 
visas.

In cooperation with the volunteer international environmental works organization, 
the VIEW Foundation, the third season was conducted in a long-term clean-up 
project at Bellingshausen Station, involving clearing and retrograde of abandoned 
equipment and hazardous oil products.

9.2    Germany
Three scientists were transported to or from Antarctic Peninsula.
Six scientists and equipment were transported to Jubany Station.
Scientists were transported to and from Ardley Island.

9.3    Poland
Two scientists and samples were transported to/from Arctowski Station.
Eight scientists and equipment were transported to Arctowski Station.

9.4    Argentina
IAATO Report
Page 7

Cargo was transported to Brown Station for ongoing refurbishing program
(Governor of Tierra del Fuego transported to station to assist).

9.5   United Kingdom
Two scientists transported to and from Arctowski Station.
Scientist transported from Arctowski Station to Ushuaia.

9.6   United States
Four scientists transported to or from King George Island.
Scientist transported to Palmer Station.
Oceanites personnel transported to various sites for its monitoring program.

9.7   France
An icebreaker operating as a tour vessel, Kapitan Khlebnikov, assisted the resupply
vessel Astrolabe in reaching Dumont D'Urville Station.

9.8   Other Support
Tour vessels also supported a variety of other projects (while traveling to or from
Antarctica) , including transport of personnel and equipment to or from the South
Georgia Whaling Museum and the sub-Antarctic islands of New Zealand.

9.9   Other Initiatives
IAATO members and tour passengers continued to support the Humpback Whale
Catalog by providing fluke identification photos to Allied Whale, College of the
Atlantic, Bar Harbor, Maine. In addition, experienced biologist staff collected
census data, record whale sightings and provided other valuable information.

9.9   Financial Contributions
In addition to support for science programs, tour operators and passengers
continued their tradition of direct financial contributions to organizations active in
Antarctica, including the Scott Polar Research Institute, UK Antarctic Heritage
Trust, New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust, South Georgia Whaling Museum,
Humpback Whale Identification Project, and Whale and Dolphin Society. The
cumulative totals for the above amount to some US$21,030 and DM 3,253,40.
Attachment A

                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                
Attachment B

A member organization 
founded in 1991 to advocate, 
promote and practice safe and 
environmentally responsible 
private-sector travel to the 
Antarctic.

                                  VESSEL CALL DATA

                                  NOVEMBER 1996

Vessel                        Company                Call Sign     Telex         Fax           Phone

ANI Patriot Hills                                        
Base Camp                     Adventure Network                          (874) 683141498   (873) 683141497

ANI Pta Arenas HQ             Adventure Network                          (56) 61 226 167   (56) 61 247 735
                                                                                 Emergency Tel:   (56) 61 229 712

Bremen                        Hanseatic Tours        C6GC3         1103404       1103405       1103404
                                                         1103735       1103736       1103735

Hanseatic                     Hanseatic Tours        C6KA9         1103725       1103726       1103730
                                                         1103727       1103727       1103725

Explorer                      Explorer Shipping     ELJD8         1241223       1241224       1241223
                                                         E-mail: 62849546@eln.attmail.com (1st line msg: ATTN: EXPL)

World Discoverer              Society Expeditions    ELDU3         463630730     363650920     363650910

Kapitan Khlebnikov            Quark Expeditions      UTSU          327307516     327307514     327307513
                                                         427320014     1402733       1400676

Professor Khromov             Quark Expeditions      UWEC          N/A           327314910     327314912

Professor Molchanov           Quark Expeditions      UUQR          492621155     N/A           N/A

Akademik Shokalskiy           Southern Heritage      UUPB          492621363     N/A           N/A
                                                         E-mail: 492621363@c-link.net

Professor Multanovskiy        Marine Expeditions     UJFO

Akademik Sergei Vavilov       Marine Expeditions     UKOS          1401507       N/A           N/A

Akademik Ioffe                Marine Expeditions     UKLP          1400655       N/A           N/A

Alla Tarasova                 Marine Expeditions     UHJG          1403626       1403626       1403627

Akademik Shuleykin            Marine Expeditions     UBNZ          412659 RCSCU

EL RADIO SCHEDULE                         ANI RADIO SCHEDULE

PRIMARY:     4146 kHz                       PRIMARY:     15.026 MHz
(2400 UT DAILY CONTACT)                  (24 HOUR LISTENING WATCH)
SECONDARY:   6224 kHz                       SECONDARY:   11.228 MHz
TERTIARY:    8294 kHz                       TERTIARY:    8.992 MHz
Attachment C                                                      c/1

July 1996

IAATO NEWS

INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS
CREATING AMBASSADORS TO THE LAST GREAT CONTINENT


                                                                 Adventure Network International
                                                                 Explorer Shipping Corporation/
                                                                 Abercrombie & Kent International
                                                                 Hanseatic Tours GmbH
                                                                 Marine Expeditions
                                                                 Mountain Travel-Sobek
                                                                 Quark Expeditions
                                                                 Society Expeditions
                                                                 Southern Heritage Expeditions
                                                                 Travel Dynamics
                                                                 WildWings
                                                                 Zegrahm Expeditions
                                                                 GMMS Pty Ltd (Provisional)
                                                                 Orient Lines (Probationary)

A member organization founded in 1991
to advocate, promote and practice safe
and environmentally responsible private-
sector travel to the Antarctic.


MORE PEOPLE TRAVEL TO
ANTARCTICA IN 1995-96
THAN EVER BEFORE

A record 9,200 people traveled to
Antarctica aboard commercially-orga-
nized tour vessels this season — an
increase of 1,000 over last year. Travel-
ers sailed aboard 15 vessels on 113
departures, most from Ushuaia. All
were operated by IAATO members.

In addition, Adventure Network
International, celebrating its 10th sea-
son, brought 155 travelers and 20 staff
to the Antarctic. Besides its regular
climbing programs, ANI provided logis-
tical and emergency support for all pri-
vate expeditions and operated flights to
the South Pole. In cooperation with
Uruguay, ANI operated a satellite mete-
orological station at its base camp in
Pach[?]of Hills for the first time.

Now in its second season, Croydon
Travel of Victoria, Australia offered a
series of nine well-received overflights,
carrying 2,958 passengers. Each flight
from Melbourne lasted about 12 hours
with one or more orbits of scenic areas.
The flights aboard Qanatas Boeing 747
aircraft were conducted at a minimum
altitude of 10,000 feet and featured lec-
tures on the history, conservation and
environments of Antarctica.

Looking to the future, 100 voyages
are planned for the 1996-97 Antarctic
season by 13 IAATO-member vessels,
carrying approximately 6,500 passen-
gers. Nine of these vessels are Russian.
Neither the Marco Polo or the Vista-
mar are planning any Antarctic voy-
ages next year, which accounts for
most of the reduction in number. No
new vessels or operators are expected.

U.S. LIKELY TO IMPLEMENT
THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTOCOL — SOON

All were heartened to learn that the
U.S. House of Representatives has
passed H.R. 3060: Antarctic Environ-
mental Protection Act of 1996. With
widespread support from the adminis-
tration, scientific and environmental
communities, WWF president Kathryn
Fuller was among those that testified
on behalf of this important new piece
of legislation.

The bill calls for the Environmental
Protection Agency to promulgate regu-
lations within two years regarding envi-
ronmental impact assessment of
non-governmental activities, including
tourism. The NSF will continue its own
internal review of federal activities.

A senate version of the bill (S. 1645),
sponsored by Kerry and Hollings, is
expected to reach the Senate floor
shortly. The United States is one of just
four nations (along with Finland, Japan
and Russia) that had not yet ratified the
protocol as of the Antarctic Treaty
meeting in Utrecht in May, 1996. All
four must ratify before this ground-
breaking addition to environmental
protection comes into force.

WHAT ARE YOU DOING ON
DECEMBER 31, 1999?

Internet news groups and the travel
press have already been deluged with
requests for information on end-of-the-
millennium trips. Several IAATO mem-
bers, including Zegrahm Expeditions of
Seattle, have announced voyages to
Antarctica. What better place to cele-
brate? It's the height of the summer
season — and fittingly remote from the
daily experience of most of us.

Ten Most Visited
Antarctic Sites, 1995-96

   Whalers Bay
   Half Moon Island
   Cuverville Island
   Brown Station
   Port Lockroy
   Petermann Island
   Hannah Point
   Pendulum Cove
   Paulet Island
   Waterboat Point


                                                                 Darrel Schoeling
                                                                 Office of the Secretariat
                                                                 111 East 14 Street, Suite 110
                                                                 New York, NY 10003
                                                                 Tel: 212 460 8715
                                                                 Fax: 212 529 8684
                                                                 E-mail: IAATO@aol.com
c/2 

YACHT OPERATOR TO
ATTEND ANTARCTIC TOUR
OPERATORS MEETING

Well-known Antarctic yachtsman
Sally Poncet has confirmed that she
will attend the eight annual tour oper-
ators meeting in Arlington, Virginia,
July 11 1996. Author of the popular
Cruising Guide to Antarctica, Poncet
will be able to provide an expert per-
spective on this segment of Antarctic
tourism.

Thus far, IAATO membership has
not included the operators of yachts
- even though many of these vessels
return each season with paying pas-
sengers. In.Fue.Tur. in Ushuaia has
be instrumental in outreach to this
com[?]unity.

In past years, the annual meeting
sponsored by the NSF has drawn gov-
ernment representatives, tour opera-
tors, conservation organizations and
the media as well as representatives
from other national Antarctic pro-
grams. Over 50 are expected to attend
this year, including John Hall from the
British Antarctic Survey and Pat
McLaren from the U.K. Antarctic Her-
itage Trust.

ENVIRONMENTALLY
FRIENDLY LUBRICANT
AVAILABLE FOR
OUTBOARD ENGINES

A recent Ph.D. thesis by Ron Cairn
at Newcastle University confirms that
Biolube 100, Synboard and Biolube
Grease manufactured by Castrol show
excellent biodegradability and no
adverse effect on the environment.
Antarctic lecturer and microbiologist
Brian Wqod reported these findings to
longtime IAATO-member Nigel
Sitwell. The IAATO Secretariat is
investigating with Castrol whether the
company would be interested in test-
ing this environmentally-friendly oil
under polar conditions. These prod-
ucts are available in Argentina
through Castrol Argentine in Buenos
Aires, an appropriate outlet for the
huge majority of Antarctic cruises.

OCEANITES CONTINUES
ANTARCTIC SITE
INVENTORY PROJECT

For the second season, IAATO
members provided transport to the
Antarctic Site Inventory Project team.
Principal Investigator Ron Naveen,
explained,"We are establishing a base-
line so that environmental impact
statements related to future activities
can be accurately prepared and evalu-
ated. During the 1995-96 season," con-
tinued Naveen, "the project conducted
114 surveys-at 44 visitor sites."

Over the two years of its initial
start-up grant from NSF and EPA, the
project established 299 locations for
censuses of penguin, flying bird and
seal populations. In addition, 38 of 47
key sites have been mapped, supple-
mented by oblique aerial photography
and on-site photos.

Naveen is hard a work putting
together an international group of
public and private funding sources for
this ongoing project.

Contact Naveen at Oceanites: 2378
Route 97, Cookeville MD 21723,
Tel/Fax 301 854 6262, E-mail Ocean-
ites@aol.com

PROJECT ANTARCTIC
CONSERVATION PUBLISHES
ITS MANAGEMENT
RECOMMENDATIONS

Published in October 1995, the man-
agement recommendations feature
detailed site descriptions and maps
along with some practical advise on
how to minimize impact.

The report covers Cuverville Island,
Hannah Point, Petermann Island, Hov-
gaard Island, Pleneau Islands, Port
Lockroy, Turret Point, Penguin Island
and Yankee Harbor.

A result of the work by the Project
Antarctica Team at Scott Polar Insti-
tute, the information is particularly
useful to new staff members.

VIRTUAL ANTARCTICA

Founding IAATO member Mt. Trav-
el-Sobek continued to explore novel
uses of the Internet this season, host-
ing "Virtual Antarctica" on the web.
Heavily reported in the print media,
the award-winning site featured video
images and live chats with crew and
passengers aboard the Livonia. It's
also a good source for general Antarc-
tic information. You can find the site
at http://www.terraquest.com/guide-
book/site.html. Look for the planned
CD-ROM version.


IHB REQUESTS DATA

The director of the International
Hydrographic Bureau has proposed
that tour vessels,contribute to naviga-
tional intelligence information as part
of IHB's ongoing work to improve
Antarctic charts and charting. In a
January 1996 letter to IAATO, director
Angrisano suggested "the cruises of
tour ships might be an excellent
opportunity to collect data and
improve charts." He went on to note
"many tour ships visit places where
vessels of national operators do not
go." Experienced captains have a
wealth of data.

Although
ALIEN SPECIES 
CONFIRMED IN EAST 
ANTARCTICA

During the 1995-96 season, The 
Japanese Antarctic Research Expedi-
tion confirmed the presence of an 
alien grass species, Poa trivialis, 25 
km south of Syowa Station in East 
Antarctica (69.00's, 39.35" E). A wide-
spread weedy species, the plant con-
sisted of a single 20-cm-wide tuft with 
tall flowering shoots. Given its size, 
it's likely to have survived several win-
ters. Accidentally introduced grasses 
have been found in the past on Decep-
tion and King George Islands.

IAATO members should continue to 
be vigilant about requiring passengers 
to wash their boots and inspect cloth-
ing before and after each landing.

MONTREAL ANTARCTIC 
SOCIETY PUBLISHES ITS 
FIRST NEWSLETTER

Founded in 1994, the organization is 
dedicated to providing Antarctic infor-
mation with a Canadian perspective. 
Those interested in receiving their 
quarterly newsletter, The Seventh 
Continent should write president Val 
Kuurol at 4633 Harvard, Montreal Que-
bec H4A 2X3.

The first newsletter is eight-pages 
with a hard-hitting editorial on tour 
itinerary changes, some travel infor-
mation, a comprehensive list of 
Antarctic-themed music and a number 
of useful contacts. It makes the claim 
that November is a poor time to visit 
the Antarctic. Many would disagree.

NPSC COMPLETES NEW 
TRAINING VIDEOS

The Office of Polar Programs has 
just completes a new series of Antarc-
tic videos, which will replace the cus-
tomary pre-season briefing for those 
traveling to the ice. Titles include 
Working in Antarctica (Palmer Sta-
tion, McMurdo and South Pole), 
Polar Duke, Nathaniel B. Palmer and 
the previously released Beautiful 
Antarctica and Managing Your 
Waste. Much of the information, enter-
tainingly presented, is relevant to tour 
operations. IAATO members have tra-
ditionally screened for passengers 
Beautiful Antarctica, a 10-minute 
video highlighting the obligations of 
the U.S. Antarctic Conservation Act.

Contact the Office of Polar Pro-
grams for more information about the 
video program.

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES

A number of new books on Antarctica will be published soon - including three guide books!

Antarctica, The Traveller's Guide

September 1996. Bernard Stonehouse, author of the wonderful North Pole, 
South Pole - and a grand old Antarctican - has written a practical, 
detailed guide to Antarctic travel. With a 16-page color insert, it's also 
illustrated throughout with black-and-white maps and photographs. (UK: 
Images Publishing, 256 pages, $15.99)

Below the Convergence, Voyages Toward Antarctica, 
1699-1839

October 1996. Alan Gurney has written the first of what we hope will a- 
series of engaging volumes on the history of Antarctic exploration. Those 
familiar with his dramatic lectures are eagerly looking forward to the book. 
Gurney is a master storyteller (and wonderful writer), who weaves 
remarkable tales of exploration. (USA: Norton, $27.50)

The World of the Penguin

November 1996. The latest volume of a series of authoritative, wonderfully 
illustrated books on wildlife. Expedition leader, author and photographer 
Jonathan Chester here presents 58 full color penguin photographs, 
augmented by a concise text on the biology and historical impressions of 
these much-loved birds. (USA: Sierra Club Books, 128 pages, $27.50)

Lonely Planet Travel Survival Kit: Antarctica

November 1996. It was inevitable. This Australian-based publisher turns 
south, wisely choosing environmental writer and Antarctic enthusiast Jeff 
Rubins to compile the volume - which is not so much a practical guide but 
an overview of the Antarctic. Reigning in several experts, David Walton 
contributes the section on Antarctic science and Maj de Poorter addresses 
environmental issues. It includes a guide to choosing a tour, details on the 
gateway cities and a full color guide to wildlife. (USA: Lonely Planet, 336 
pages, $15.95)

Antarctica the Beautiful

November 1996. Here's a handsomely produced, large-format overview of Antarctica by Mike 
Lewis, much more than the simple collection of photos that we expected. It's up-to-date, fact-
filled - and a good edition to any Antarctic library. Struik (South Africa) and New Holland 
(U.K.), 160 pages, £29.99

Scott's Last Expedition, The Journals (With a New introduction by Beryl Bainbridge)

December 1996. Author of the acclaimed
CONSERVATION WORK COMPLETED AT PORT LOCKROY

ANTARCTIC HISTORIC SITE AND MONUMENT NO. 61

"What a transformation the party of four men made in an incredibly short time at Port Lockroy," reported expe-
dition leader Tony Soper, "the walls and roof of the main building have been made good, the whole complex 
has had a coat of paint and the interi-
or has had a blast of fresh air. Even 
the gentoos looked proud of their 
patch." Some 40 M   of waste was 
removed from the site.

The same team continued aboard 
the RRS Bransfield to Charlotte Bay, 
where they dismantled the Reclus Hut 
for t?ansport to Stanley. As proposed, 
the      was handed over to the Falk-
lands Island Museum, where it will be 
put on display.

The five-week-long project at Port 
Lockroy was undertaken by the UK 
Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT) in 
cooperation with the British Antarctic 
Survey and the Foreign Office. One of 
the UKAHT's primary objectives is "to 
preserve select British scientific bases 
on the Antarctic peninsula for the 
enjoyment and education of interna-
tional visitors."

The Trust surveyed 16 unoccupied 
British bases in 1994, identifying the 
base as a high priority. Established on 
February 16, 1944, Base A was occu-
pied until January 16, 1962. The build-
ings had greatly deteriorated in the 
intervening years.

In ?ddition to the conservation 




work, a leaflet was prepared and dis-
plays installed. Limited access to the 
base will be provided to visitors. 
Soper had been in radio contact with 
the conservation team through the 
season and, on a February voyage 
aboard the Khromov, Ben Hodges 
invited the travelers to come and visit. 
Said Soper, "We were welcomed with 
open arms."

Pat McLaren of the UKAHT and 
North American representative Dan 
Weinstein are expected to attend the 
July Antarctic tour operator meeting, 
partly to discuss visits to Port Lock-
roy. Among the ideas for the future of 
Port Lockroy is to have a team occupy 
the buildings, an excellent opportuni-
ty to carry out monitoring work on the 
nearby heavily-visited rookeries.

Soper concluded, "This historic 
base has always been an exciting 
place to visit and now it will be an 
even more valuable and rewarding 
experience for future expedition 
groups. The choice between rehabili-
tation or dismantling unwanted bases 
will doubtless continue to be a hot 
potato, but the Port Lockroy experi-
ence shows what can be done in a 
short time by a determined working 
party."

Among those who became corpo-
rate sponsors of the UKAHT in 1995 
was Hanseatic Tours, IAATO, Marine 
Expeditions, Quark Expeditions, Ori-
ent Lines and Marine Expeditions. 
Several other operators sold UKAHT 
booklets aboard. Those in the U.S. 
who would like to contribute should 
contact Dan Weinstein at 3 Ridgley 
Terrace, Jamestown, NY 14701. Tel. 
716 665 6045, Fax 716 665 5119.

MARINE DEBRIS

A POTENTIAL THREAT 
TO 
ANTARCTIC 
MARINE ANIMALS

LINDBLAD COVE APPROVED

The U.S. Board on Geographic Names approved the Antarctic geographic name 
Lindblad Cove (63° 51'S, 59°27'W) at its March 28, 1996 meeting:

"Cove, 5km wide, between Almond Point and Auster Point in Charcot Bay, Trini-
ty Peninsula. Named by US-ACAN in commemoration of Lars-Eric Lindblad (1927-
1994), pioneer in ANtarctic tourism. A noted conservationist, Mr. Lindblad 
operated the first cruise to Antarctica in 1966, and was a leader in the concept of 
expedition tourism as a means of environmental awareness."

The IAATO Secretariat has 
received CCAMLR 
Placards in Russian for 
display on Antarctic Tour 
Vessels -nine of which 
carry Russian-speaking 
crew.
MEETINGS

Polar Tourism:
Environmental Implications and Management
AUGUST 19-21, 1996
SCOTT POLAR RESEARCH INSTITUTE, CAMBRIDGE, U.K.

This three-day workshop will focus on issues relevant to the management of polar tourism and is intended for researchers, administrators and tour operators. Among the topics to be addressed are key indicators of human disturbance, techniques for education and enhancement of the shore experience and data that should be collected about site visits. Those interested should respond to Bernard Stonehouse in Great Britain: Tel 1223 336515, Tax 1223 336549, E-mail bs111@cus.cam.ac.uk

IUCN Workshop
Cumulative Environmental Impacts
SEPTEMBER 19-21, 1996
IUCN, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Continuing its sponsorship of workshops on Antarctic environmental issues, the IUCN is organizing a meeting for The workshop focus on the identification, mitigation and management of potential cumulative environmental impacts in the Antarctic. About 25 participants are expected, including scientists, Antarctic managers and representatives from IAATO. Those with a particular interest in environmental assessment should contact the organizer Maj de Poorter in New Zealand: Tel 64.9 630 6317, Fax 64 9 630 7121, E-mail maj.depoorter@green2.greenpeace.org

Bärbel Krämer Participates in
Workshop on Arctic Tourism
JANUARY 1996
LONGYEARBYN, SPITSBERGEN, NORWAY

Among the international participants at the January 1996 seminar on Arctic Tourism Guidelines in Longyearbyen was IAATO Executive Committee Member Bärbel Krämer. Sponsored by the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Norwegian Polar Institute, the seminar concluded that guidelines for tourism in the Arctic should include a Code of Conduct, a contract for cooperation, participation by local communities and the involvement of international organizations. IAATO was mentioned as an example of cooperation among tour operators in the internationally responsible operations. Krämer discussed Arctic and Antarctic operations by Hanseatic Tours as well as giving a history of IAATO and its objectives.

Conference on Polar Medical Standards Held
AUGUST 1995
SCOTT POLAR RESEARCH INSTITUTE, CAMBRIDGE, U.K.

Under the auspices of Aid for International Medicine, John Levinson held a conference on polar medical standards at Scott Polar Institute in August 1995. A veteran physician on polar voyages, Levinson gathered representatives of government Antarctic medical services, private physicians and others for the lively discussions on how to improve medical care in remote polar regions. A book on the conference is planned.

Two-thirds of the talks focussed on how doctors can best prepare for the role of physician and what kind of challenges they can expect. Those interest in receiving information about the planned volume should contact Aid for International Medicine at PO Box 119, Rockland, Delaware 19732.

TOUR VESSELS: A RESOURCE FOR
ANTARCTIC SCIENCE

IAATO members provided transport to more than 100 scientists during the 1995-96 season, again demonstrating that tour vessels are a cost-effective and convenient platform of opportunity in the Antarctic. Among those transported, two station personnel were taken to port for medical attention. In addition, passengers and staff contributed to censuses and other projects, such as the ongoing work to supply humpback whale fluke identification photos to Allied Whale at College of the Atlantic in Bar Harbor, Maine.

Among IAATO's objectives is to support science in Antarctica through cooperation with national Antarctic programs, including logistical support and research. This support is offered at minimal cost. Tour passengers appreciate the presence of national Antarctic program personnel aboard, who share experiences and often volunteer to lecture on their work.With more than 100 departures on 13 different vessels, most from South America to the Peninsula, scientists have many options for transport and research. Also, itineraries are substantially similar year after year - a bonus in planning and in conducting repetitive work. Corollary to the larger number of small Antarctic tour vessels, is the increased opportunity for science. Much science can be conducted with minimal impact on tour itineraries.

In addition, a number of the vessels - especially the converted Russian research ships - have the expertise, cranes and cargo space to provide significant support in resupply efforts. In 1995-96, the materials and personnel to inaugurate the Ukrainian Antarctic program at the former Faraday station were transported by tour vessels.

IAATO invites proposals by Antarctic national programs, Antarctic organizations and certified individual researchers. Members can collaborate in a variety of ways, whether it is transport, science -conducted aboard or participation in research. IAATO also welcomes proposals that involve resident staff and passengers in work following standard protocols, including CCAMLR surveys of beached marine debris, surveys of pack-ice seals, observational data on breeding birds, recording locations and types of icebergs encountered along vessel itineraries, and collecting data at individual landing sites.

Of special importance to IAATO is the support of
