ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE         
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE         
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTATIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         


                         NORWEGIAN ANTARCTIC RESEARCH EXPEDITION
                         (NARE) 1996/97


                         Agenda item 12              Submitted by Norway

                         XXI ATCM/IP96
                         May, 1997
                         Original: English
NORWEGIAN ANTARCTIC RESEARCH EXPEDITION (NARE) 1996/97

NARE 96/97 was organised by the Norwegian Polar Institute (NP). Ninty-eight scientists 
and logistic personnel were transported to Antarctica onboard the Norwegian research vessel 
M/V "Polar Queen" during the austral summer of 96/97. The majority of the participating 
scientists were from Norway. However, the expedition had a strong international profile 
through the participation of scientists from Germany, South Africa, Sweden, the Netherlands, 
United Kingdom and United States of America.

The M/V "Polar Queen" started out from Bergen, Norway, on the 10 November 1996, and 
departed from Cape Town on 4 December 1996. After a short stop at Bouvetøya where five 
biologist were set ashore, the expedition reached Dronning Maud Land (DML) and started 
unloading personnel and equipment at the ice shelf edge in 20 December. On this first cruise 
the expedition vessel also carried an inspection team lead by the Royal Norwegian Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. The inspection team inspected four Antarctic stations, namely the German 
Neumayer Station, South-African SANEA IV Base, Indian Maitri Station and the Russian 
Novolazarevskaya Station.

The terrestrial scientific programme consisted of projects within the fields of geology, 
geodesy, ornithology, glaciology and climatic research, carried out by seven different field 
parties. The main objective of the geological group was to map an area of poor coverage 
between 6 and 8 degrees East to join up with mapping previously done by Germany and 
India. The geological team also made investigations to obtain a better understanding of the 
crust formation and geological history of the area. The geodesy group measured new 
geodetic reference points using differential Global Positioning System (GPS) in areas 
between 3 and 6 degrees West and 6 and 12 degrees East. This group also made 
measurements for rectifying satellite maps and assisted the glaciologists in their work. A 
group of six ornithologists continued the on-going work in Svarthamaren, the world's largest 
inland colony of Antarctic Petrel. Their main tasks were to study breeding success, 
variability of the pupulation, and the feeding patterns at sea by the use of satellite 
transmitters. Four different projects aimed to study present and future climate in Dronning 
Maud Land through glaciological investigations of mass balance, accumulation, 
contaminants, meteorology and ice dynamics. This work was carried out on the 
Jutulstraumen ice stream and at the polar plateau. The group working on the polar plateau 
was part of the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA), and consisted of ten 
persons from Norway, the Netherlands and Sweden. The group carried out a 1100 km 
traverse into the interior of Dronning Maud Land, reaching 75 degrees South and 15 degrees 
East at an elevation of 3,500 meters. Here, the yearly accumulation rate is about 35 mm 
water equivalent with a average yearly temperature of about minus 54°C. The land parties 
concluded their work and boarded the M/V "Polar Queen" on 17 February. A separate group 
of four archaeologists continued a program of mapping and surveying abandoned whaling 
stations at South Georgia. During the 1996/97 season the group worked at Leith Harbour.

In parallel with scientific work, three Hägglunds 206 tracked vehicles were used to pull 
equipment between the ice shelf edge and the Norwegian Troll Station, a one way distance of 
about 300 km. The Hägglunds made three round trips and the transportation phase was 
completed on 11 January 1997.
The M/V "Polar Queen" left Cape Town on her second cruise 3 January 1997, stopped at Bouvetøya for oceanographic work, and continued to Dronning Maud Land, which was reached on the 12 January. The ship then headed for the Filchner-Ronne ice shelf, but was stopped and subsequently stuck in very heavy pack ice northwest of the British Halley Station (74°S, 26°W) from 17 to 25  January. During this period numerous seal census surveys were flown with helicopter, and marine biological and oceanographic work were performed. On the 26 of January the ice temporarily loosened its pressure on the ship, which succeeded in making its way into open water off the Swedish Base Wasa (72°S, 16°W) where deep sea drilling was performed for 7 days and sea floor cores for paleoclimatic analysis were obtained. At the same time, seal, penguin and other marine biological studies were carried through. Subsequently, a comprehensive oceanographic program aimed at the understanding of the Antarctic coastal currents was carried out in the eastern Weddell Sea, where biological studies continued until the 15  February. At this time 14 seals, of which two were Ross-seals, had been instrumented with satellite transmitters, 15 Adelie penguins had been investigated, and numerous studies, including under-ice diving of marine algae had been done. After further oceanographic work, the Swedish and Norwegian land parties were embarked from 14 to 18  February, whereafter "Polar Queen", now with 61 scientists onboard, returned to Cape Town on the 28 , only interrupted by a 6 hours stop to retrieve three South-African and two Norwegian scientists engaged in co-operative monitoring research of fur seals and chinstrap and macaroni penguins at Bouvetøya. An environmental monitoring site (CEMP site) within CCAMLR has recently been established at Bouvetøya.

The M/V "Polar Queen" returned to Bergen on 27 March 1997.
