ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)






Agenda item 5b                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP72
May, 1997
Original: English
World Headquarters

Rue Mauvernier 28

CH-1196 Gland

Switzerland          REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)

Tel.: ++ 4122-999 00 01      Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
Fax.: ++ 4122-999 00 02
E-mail: mail@hq.iucn.ch      XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Telex:  419624 iucn ch
                            May 1997

IUCN, The World Conservation Union, is a unique partnership of States, government 
agencies and non-governmental organisations. Founded in 1948, it now has 880 
members, including 173 state and government agency members, from 133 countries'. In 
addition, over 8000 volunteer scientists and practitioners contribute to fulfilling IUCN's 
mission through six global Commissions.

The Union's mission is:

"to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the 
integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is 
equitable and ecologically sustainable."

IUCN provides a "neutral forum" for the discussion of issues by bringing both GOs and 
NGOs to the table to consider problems and devise strategies to facilitate conservation 
of nature throughout the world. The elements of IUCN's policy and programme are 
agreed by the triennial World Conservation Congress2 of members and their execution is 
coordinated by an international Secretariat. IUCN's six Commissions, bodies of 
volunteer experts from all over the world, make a major contribution to the 
development and execution of the programme. With its long experience and worldwide 
networks of experts, IUCN is in a unique position to offer advice to the Antarctic Treaty 
Parties on such issues as protected area designation and management, environmental 
monitoring, environmental legislation, and liability for environmental damage. Two of 
the IUCN Commissions, those on Protected Areas and on Environmental Law, are 
currently making significant contributions to IUCN's Antarctic programme.

IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for over 36 years. In 1991, 
six months before the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection was 
signed in Madrid, it published the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation. Many elements 
of this Strategy were incorporated in the Protocol and its annexes.

In 1992, two workshops were held in partnership with SCAR's Group of Specialists on 
Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC), on conservation management and 
research in the sub-Antarctic islands, and on protected area policy and management 
issues relevant for Antarctica.

                        Printed on Chlorine-free paper
In 1993 a workshop on Antarctic environmental education and training was held, again 
in partnership with GOSEAC. The Proceedings of all these workshops have now been 
published and are available, and the recommendations from these workshops have been 
endorsed by the Antarctic Treaty.

A fourth technical workshop was held in Washington DC in September 1996, entitled 
"Cumulative Environmental Impact in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management." The 
workshop built on the results from the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental 
monitoring, focusing on aspects relevant to cumulative impacts. The outcome should be 
useful in a practical way to the ATS in general, as Protocol implementation will require 
a much better understanding of this concept, and specifically to national, 
nongovernmental and commercial operators and to the Antarctic scientific community. 
Both summary and full reports of this workshop are being tabled at this ATCM.

Following the adoption of a new Resolution on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and 
the endorsement of IUCN's Antarctic programme for 1997-1999 by the World 
Conservation Congress (IUCN's General Assembly), held at Montreal in October 1996, 
IUCN's Antarctic Advisory Committee (AAC) was reconstituted, with the mandate to 
provide guidance on the programme and to contribute to its implementation. The AAC 
was first established in 1994 as a means of focussing IUCN's involvement with Antarctic 
conservation issues.

The AAC is made up of 12 members, appointed in their personal capacities by IUCN'S 
Director-General, for their expertise in matters relating to the conservation of 
Antarctica, the sub-Antarctic Islands and the Southern Ocean. AAC members have been 
chosen from a diverse professional background: academia, governmental conservation 
agencies, non-governmental organisations and private consultancies. The AAC is chaired 
by Ms. Beth Clark, based in the United States, with the support of vice-chair Mr. John 
Cooper (South Africa).

The blue "Background Document" of IUCN's AAC is being tabled at this ATCM. It 
includes IUCN's 1996 Resolution on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, IUCN's 
Antarctic programme 1997-1999, and the Recommendations from the first three 
SCAR/IUCN workshops.

The AAC's primary objectives are:
*     to develop and promulgate policy advice on Antarctic conservation, with 
particular emphasis on the ratification and implementation of the Protocol, 
including contributing to the development of a liability annex to the Protocol, and 
to the development of an effective environmental impact assessment process; and 
input to CCAMLR, especially its work on ecosystem management
*     strengthening the system of establishing and managing protected areas in the 
Antarctic and Subantarctic, and the development of an integrated strategy for 
conservation in the Subantarctic and cool temperate islands and their associated 
waters;
*     follow through on the recommendations from the SCAR/IUCN workshops, and 
the IUCN Workshop on Cumulative Impacts

2
*       Represent IUCN at relevant Antarctic and Subantarctic fora, including ATCM,
        CCAMLR, and SCAR;
*       depending on available resources, organising seminars, technical sessions or
        workshops relevant to Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation.

IUCN draws delegates attention to a questionnaire being circulated at this ATCM on
formal education courses offered by Parties. After the ATCM, we intend to circulate this
questionnaire to COMNAP, Antarctic Environmental Officers and SCAR. We will
compile the information received for tabling at ATCM XXII. IUCN has tabled a paper
on the UN List of Protected Areas, and draws delegates attention to the listed Antarctic
protected areas. We urge delegates to review this listing, and give comments to the
IUCN observer at this ATCM.

IUCN continues to place a high priority on helping the Antarctic Treaty System to
maintain and enhance its effectiveness in conserving and protecting the Antarctic region.
As always, IUCN puts its resources and expertise at the service of the ATCM towards
this end.

ANNEXES
1.      Antarctic resolution
2.      IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee Background Document

ENDNOTES:

1.      The following ATCPs are state members of IUCN:
        Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India,
        Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
        United Kingdom, USA

        The following ATCPs have government agencies which are members of IUCN:
        Chile, Japan, Korea, Rep. of, Uruguay

        The following NCPs are state members of IUCN:
        Canada, Denmark, Greece, Guatemala Switzerland, Turkey

        The following NCPs have government agencies which are members of IUCN:
        Austria, Bulgaria, Colombia, Hungary, Papua New Guinea, Romania

2.      Prior to 1996, the IUCN World Conservation Congress was called the IUCN General
        Assembly.

        3
World Headquarters
Rue Mauverney 28
CH-1196 Gland
Switzerland

Tel.: ++ 4122-999 00 01
Fax.: ++ 4122-999 00 02
E-mail: mail@hq.iucn.ch
Telex:  419 624 iucn ch

                                  IUCN RESOLUTION

1.110 Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

The World Conservation Congress of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) at its 1st Session in Montreal, Canada, 14-23 October 1996 adopted Resolution 1.110:

Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

RECALLING Recommendations 17.52, 17.53, 18.75 and 19.95, and Resolutions 15.40, 16.8, 18.74 and 19.96 of the 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th Sessions of the General Assembly of IUCN;

NOTING with concern that a number of these Recommendations and Resolutions have not been fully implemented;

RECOGNISING that Antarctica has many internationally significant values: it is a critically important ecosystem and plays an important role in influencing global climate and oceanic circulation; it is important for monitoring and other research which provide greater understanding of the natural environment and ecological processes, including those modified by human activity; it has great value as the world's largest remaining wilderness area; and it has significant intrinsic and inspirational values;

NOTING that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties in Madrid, Spain, in October 1991, commits Parties to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science, and, inter alia, prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources other than scientific research;

CONGRATULATING the governments of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brasil, Chile, China, Ecuador, France, Germany, India, Italy, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and Uruguay, who have ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

CONSCIOUS that all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties who signed the Protocol in Madrid must ratify it before it can take effect;

AWARE that conservation measures in the Subantarctic must be strengthened;

EMPHASISING the importance of the conservation of the ecosystems of the circum-Antarctic seas, and the need to ensure that any use of their living resources is sustainable;

REMEMBERING that IUCN has had a long involvement with Antarctic Conservation Activities, and during the 1994-1996 triennium established an Antarctic Advisory Committee which ensured that IUCN had an effective voice at various Antarctic fora, and held a workshop on cumulative impacts of human presence in Antarctica.

The World Conservation Congress at its 1st Session in Montreal, Canada, 14-23 October 1996:

1   CALLS UPON Japan and Russia to ratify urgently the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

Printed on Chlorine-free paper
2   URGES all States Party to the Antarctic Treaty:

      a)  to enact without delay the necessary national legislation to ensure domestic 
          implementation of the Provisions of the Protocol;

      b)  to ensure that their domestic law provides the necessary jurisdiction over their 
          nationals for acts committed in Antarctica contrary to the Antarctic Treaty and the 
          Environmental Protocol;

      c)  to establish the Committee for Environmental Protection at the forthcoming XXI 
          ATCM in Christchurch, New Zealand;

      d)  to make greater efforts towards the prompt completion, adoption and implementation 
          of a Liability Annex pursuant to Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental 
          Protection, and applying to all activities in Antarctica in the area covered by the 
          Protocol which might result in damage to the Antarctic environment;

      e)  to rescind the decision that experts cannot be invited and to invite IUCN to provide 
          expert advice and participate in the meetings of the group of legal experts which is 
          negotiating the Liability Annex to the Protocol;

      f)  to redouble their efforts to resolve urgently the remaining disagreements over the 
          location of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat since the current impasse is detrimental to 
          the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty, the Environmental Protocol and the 
          effective protection of the Antarctic environment;

      g)  to endorse in principle the conclusions and relevant recommendations of the IUCN 
          International Workshop on Cumulative Impacts at the Christchurch ATCM;

3   CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and all others active in Antarctica to pay 
      particular attention to:

      a)  minimising environmental impacts, including direct, indirect and cumulative impact;

      b)  establishing and safeguarding a comprehensive network of protected areas, including 
          adequate representation of the principal habitats and the biological diversity of the 
          Antarctic region;

      c)  preventing the deposition of wastes and facilitating the removal of wastes which have 
          already been deposited;

      d)  establishing and enforcing stringent regulations governing the conduct of all persons 
          visiting Antarctica, whether scientists, logistic and other support personnel or tourists;

4   URGES the Governments concerned to adopt all necessary measures to ensure the 
      conservation of Subantarctic island ecosystems, especially the production and implementation 
      of management plans, the eradication, where practicable, of alien species and the reduction of 
      the incidental mortality of seabirds using the islands, especially albatrosses, from long-line 
      fisheries;

5   CALLS UPON parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
      Resources to take all steps necessary to conserve the marine ecosystems and component 
2
species of the Southern Ocean;

6   REQUESTS the Council and the Director General, within available resources:

a)   to ensure that IUCN activities during the 1996-1999 triennium focus on maximising 
     the Union's contribution to more effective conservation efforts in the Antarctic and 
     Subantarctic, and in particular on topics which draw on the core competencies of 
     IUCN in relation to environmental law, protected areas and species conservation;

b)   to encourage ratification and implementation of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol 
     and the completion, ratification, and implementation of the annex on liability;

c)   to ensure effective contributions from IUCN to relevant Antarctic and Subantarctic 
     fora including inter alia the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;

d)   to ensure effective collaboration with IUCN members with expertise in this region;

e)   to strengthen and consolidate the Antarctic Advisory Committee of IUCN and provide 
     it with an adequate funding base and funded secretariat support;

7   RECOMMENDS THAT the Antarctic Advisory Committee should

a)   develop and promulgate policy advice on Antarctic conservation, with particular emphasis 
     on:

     (i)    ratification and implementation of the Protocol;

     (ii)   development and implementation of a Liability Annex to the Protocol;

     (iii)  input to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
            Resources, and especially its work on ecosystem management;

b)   contribute to public awareness, through seminars and technical sessions relevant to 
     Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation, including on biodiversity, and publications 
     relevant to Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation;

c)   follow through on recommendations from the three SCAR/IUCN workshops on 
     Antarctic conservation, policy and protection, and from the IUCN workshop on 
     Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica;

d)   develop effective collaborations with IUCN members with expertise in this region;

8   CALLS UPON IUCN MEMBERS to mobilise resources to enable this Recommendation 
     to be implemented.

Note: This Recommendation was adopted by consensus. The delegations of the State members Norway 
and United Kingdom indicated that had there been a vote they would have abstained. The delegation 
of the State member Germany indicated that it had not participated in discussion of the 
Recommendation nor would it have participated in any voting.

3
IUCN ANTARCTIC
ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Background Document

1997 - 1999 Triennium

IUCN
The World Conservation Union
Table of Contents

1. MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIR.......................................................1
2. IUCN AND ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION .......................................3
3. FINAL ANTARCTIC RESOLUTION..................................................5
4. IUCN TRIENNIAL PROGRAMME: 1997 - 1999 IN RELATION TO ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION .......................................................9
5. WORKSHOP RECOMMENDATIONS:  ACTION ITEMS FOR IUCN'S AAC, IN CONJUNCTION WITH OTHER BODIES OF IUCN AS APPROPRIATE...............................11
6. ANNEX A   ALL RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE 3 SCAR/IUCN WORKSHOPS......13
7. ANNEX B WORKSHOP ON CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION AND MANAGEMENT .......................................31

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document                                              i
ii
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document
MESSAGE FROM THE CHAIR

I first visited Antarctica in 1979 as part of the United States Antarctic Research Program. I 
didn't know it at the time, but those first few steps on the white continent changed my life 
forever. Antarctica grabs your imagination and your soul. It makes you feel inconsequential--
and it makes you realize how a world without boundaries would function.

Since that first trip, I have been working to ensure that Antarctica's wilderness, environmental 
and spiritual values are preserved for all time. Antarctica's future is intrinsically linked to an 
awareness by the world community of its global importance. Since 1960, IUCN has been 
bringing together key constituencies--scientists, government/policy makers, and NGOs--to 
develop strategies, policies and action plans on Antarctic conservation. IUCN is unique in 
being able to broker consensus among such diverse groups.

As chair of IUCN's Antarctic Advisory Committee, I look forward to the opportunity to 
coordinate IUCN's contribution to Antarctic conservation. And I look forward to working with a 
Committee whose members encompass the full range of Antarctic experience and expertise, 
with IUCN members, and with key Antarctic constituencies, in preserving 10% of our planet--
the region which many have called the Earth's last, great wilderness.

Beth Marks Clark
Chair, Antarctic Advisory Committee
Washington, D.C., USA
December

 
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee              1
Background Document
2
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document
IUCN AND ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION

Antarctica is the coldest, windiest, highest and driest continent, and is widely recognized as one of the world's last great wildernesses. The continent and surrounding ocean play an important role in influencing global climate and oceanic circulation. The mostly pristine nature of the region provides a unique platform for the study and monitoring of global warming, ozone depletion and global pollution. Antarctica's rich waters nourish millions of whales, seals, penguins and flighted seabirds, most of which breed and raise their young in close proximity to these waters.

Antarctica has great aesthetic and inspirational values-it is a magnificent wilderness with towering icebergs and bleak deserts of snow and ice, and remains largely unmodified by human activity.

IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation since at least 1960 when, at the 7th General Assembly, members urged that the proposed Antarctic Treaty should set side protected areas for the conservation of the unique polar fauna and their natural environment.

At subsequent General Assemblies, recommendations and resolutions were adopted which focused on a variety of conservation issues, including the conservation of marine resources, of flora and fauna, protected areas, waste disposal, and regulation of tourism, and called for the development of a comprehensive strategy for Antarctic conservation.

In 1991, this Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published, which provides a comprehensive discussion of Antarctic conservation problems and requirements. During this year, IUCN's efforts were also concentrated on contributing to the negotiations of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which was adopted by the Antarctic Treaty in October 1991.

Since the Protocol's signing, IUCN's efforts have focused on using its expertise to help implement the Protocol, as well as on contributing to the protection of Antarctica's marine resources through working with The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), and contributing to the development of a conservation strategy for the Subantarctic Islands.

In 1992, two workshops were held in conjunction with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR): on Subantarctic Island conservation, and on protected area management, and in 1993 a third workshop on environmental education and training was held, also in conjunction with SCAR. The recommendations from these workshops have been endorsed by the Antarctic Treaty.

The 19th General Assembly in 1994 established the Antarctic Advisory Committee (AAC) as a means of focusing IUCN's involvement with Antarctic conservation issues. Specifically, the AAC was to take advantage of IUCN's structure to work with nations to achieve ratification of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol, and to keep nations focused on the importance of protecting Antarctica's environment. IUCN is in a unique position to achieve this goal as its members are both governments and NGOs, and it can achieve consensus in a way which NGOs or countries acting alone would find very difficult. Since that time, the AAC has been focusing on the priority areas which were identified at the General Assembly. Specifically, the AAC has focused on:

- urging the ratification and implementation of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol;
- management of Antarctic and Subantarctic protected areas;
- development of an annex to the Protocol on liability for environmental damage;
- ecosystem management of Antarctica's marine living resources; and

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document                                                             3
- holding a workshop on the Minimization and Management of Cumulative Impacts in the Antarctic. This workshop was successfully concluded in September 1996, and the recommendations reviewed and endorsed by the 1996 IUCN World Conservation Congress.

During this triennium, members of the AAC have:

- represented IUCN at the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty System, including the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, CCAMLR, and SCAR,

- have commented on Subantarctic Island management plans, and

- have participated in workshops on the management of Antarctic tourism, on penguins, and on the cumulative impacts in the Antarctic.

Outside of the AAC, IUCN members have also been involved with Subantarctic Island management, primarily through studying these islands for their inclusion as World Heritage sites. The Commission on Environmental Law has contributed to the development of the liability annex to the Protocol.

In October 1996, IUCN's World Conservation Congress voted to extend the mandate of the AAC, and agreed an agenda of work for the 1996-99 triennium. Activities during the 1996-99 triennium will focus on maximizing the influence of the IUCN. Specifically, this will be achieved through effective input to key forums, such as meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, and by close collaboration with the core competencies of IUCN-environmental law, protected areas and species conservation.

The AAC looks forward to working with IUCN members, and key Antarctic constituencies, in preserving this important region of the Earth.

 
4                                                             IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                                Background Document
FINAL ANTARCTIC RESOLUTION

1.110 Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

RECALLING Recommendations 17.52, 17.53, 18.75 and 19.95, and Resolutions 15.40, 16.8,
18.74 and 19.96 of the 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th Session of the General Assembly of
IUCN;

NOTING with concern that a number of these Recommendations and Resolutions have not
been fully implemented;

RECOGNIZING that Antarctica has many internationally significant values; it is a critically
important ecosystem and plays an important role in influencing global climate and oceanic
circulation; it is important for monitoring and other research which provide greater
understanding of the natural environment and ecological processes, including those modified
by human activity; it has great value as the world's largest remaining wilderness area; and it
has significant intrinsic and inspirational values;

NOTING that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted by the
Antarctic Treaty Parties in Madrid, Spain, in October 1991, commits Parties to the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated
ecosystems, designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science and,
inter alia, prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources other than scientific research;

CONGRATULATING the Governments of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China,
Ecuador, France, Germany, India, Italy, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and Uruguay,
who have ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

CONSCIOUS that all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties who signed the Protocol in Madrid
must ratify it before it can take effect;

AWARE that conservation measures in the Subantarctic must be strengthened;

EMPHASIZING the importance of the conservation of the ecosystems of the circum-Antarctic
seas, and the need to ensure that any use of their living resources is sustainable;

REMEMBERING that IUCN has had a long involvement with Antarctic conservation activities,
and during the 1994-1996 triennium established an Antarctic Advisory Committee which
ensured that IUCN had an effective voice at various Antarctic fora, and held a workshop on
cumulative impacts of human presence in Antarctica;

The World Conservation Congress at its 1st Session in Montreal, Canada, 14-23 October
1996:

1. CALLS UPON Japan and Russia to ratify urgently the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

2. URGES all States Party to the Antarctic Treaty to:

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee                  5
Background Document
a) enact without delay the necessary national legislation to ensure domestic implementation of the provisions of the Protocol;

b) ensure that their domestic law provides the necessary jurisdiction over their nationals for acts committed in Antarctica contrary to the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol;

c) establish the Committee for Environmental Protection at the forthcoming XXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Christchurch, New Zealand;

d) make greater efforts towards the prompt completion, adoption and implementation of a Liability Annex pursuant to Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, and applying to all activities in the area covered by the Protocol which might result in damage to the Antarctic environment;

e) rescind the decision that experts cannot be invited and to invite IUCN to provide expert advice and participate in the meetings of the group of legal experts which is negotiating the Liability Annex to the Protocol;

f) redouble their efforts to resolve urgently the remaining disagreements over the location of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat since the current impasse is detrimental to the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty, the Environmental Protocol and the effective protection of the Antarctic environment;

g) endorse in principle the conclusions and relevant recommendations of the IUCN International Workshop on Cumulative Impacts at the Christchurch ATCM:

3. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and all others active in Antarctica to pay particular attention to:

a) minimizing environmental impacts, including direct, indirect and cumulative impacts;

b) establishing and safeguarding a comprehensive network of protected areas, including adequate representation of the principal habitats and the biological diversity of the Antarctic region;

c) preventing the deposition of wastes and facilitating the removal of wastes which have already been deposited;

d) establishing and enforcing stringent regulations governing the conduct of all persons visiting Antarctica, whether scientists, logistic and other support personnel or tourists;

4. URGES the Governments concerned to adopt all necessary measures to ensure the conservation of Subantarctic island ecosystems, especially the production and implementation of management plans, the eradication, where practicable, of alien species and the reduction of the incidental mortality of seabirds using the islands, especially albatrosses, from long-line fisheries;

5. CALLS UPON Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources to take all steps necessary to conserve the marine ecosystems and component species of the Southern Ocean;

6. REQUESTS the Director General, within available resources;

6                                                              IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                                   Background Document
6.  REQUESTS the Director General, within available resources;

a) to ensure that IUCN activities during the 1996–1999 triennium focus on maximizing 
the Union's contribution to more effective conservation efforts in the Antarctic and 
Subantarctic, and in particular on topics which draw on the core competencies of 
IUCN in relation to environmental law, protected areas and species conservation;

b) to encourage ratification and implementation of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol 
and the completion, ratification and implementation of the annex on liability;

c) to ensure effective contributions from IUCN to relevant Antarctic and Subantarctic fora 
including inter alia the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;

d) to ensure effective collaboration with IUCN members with expertise in this region;

e) to strengthen and consolidate the Antarctic Advisory Committee of IUCN and provide 
it with an adequate funding base and funded secretariat support;

7.  RECOMMENDS that the Antarctic Advisory Committee of IUCN should:

a) develop and promulgate policy advice on Antarctic conservation, with particular 
      emphasis on:

      i)      ratification and implementation of the Protocol;
      ii)     development and implementation of a Liability Annex to the Protocol;
      iii)    input to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
              Resources, and especially its work on ecosystem management;

b) contribute to public awareness, through seminars and technical sessions relevant to 
Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation, including on biodiversity, and publications 
relevant to Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation;

c) follow through on recommendations from the three Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR)/IUCN workshops on Antarctic conservation, policy and protection, 
and from the IUCN Workshop on Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica;

d) develop effective collaboration with IUCN members with expertise in this region;

8.  CALLS UPON IUCN members to mobilize resources to enable this Recommendation to 
be implemented.

Note. This Recommendation was adopted by consensus. The delegations of the State 
members Norway and United Kingdom indicated that had there been a vote they would have 
abstained. The delegation of the State member Germany indicated that it had not participated 
in discussion of the Recommendation nor would it have participated in any voting.

mmr\antarctic\Final Antarctic Resolutions.doc
25 April 1997

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document                                                             7
8                                                             IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                              Background Document
IUCN TRIENNIAL PROGRAMME:
1997 - 1999 IN RELATION TO ANTARCTIC CONSERVATION
(Amendments incorporated after revision by members of the IUCN AAC)

Introduction

Antarctica has many internationally significant values: it is a critically important ecosystem
which plays an important role in influencing global climate and oceanic circulation; it is
important for monitoring and other research which assist greater understanding of the world's
natural environment and ecological processes; and it has significant inspirational, intrinsic and
wilderness values.

The Subantarctic and southern cool temperate islands, which lie outside the Antarctic Treaty
area but within the influence of the Antarctic continent, have many important scientific,
conservation and wilderness values. They provide the breeding sites for many seabirds and
seals, and are excellent examples of oceanic island ecosystems which are largely unmodified
by human influence. They also support endemic plants and invertebrates of considerable
scientific interest.

IUCN has had a long involvement with Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation. Activities
during the 1993 - 1996 triennium focused on resolutions adopted at the 1994 IUCN General
Assembly. Specifically: IUCN established an Antarctic Advisory Committee (AAC), firstly under
the direction of Professor Bruce Davis and now under Ms Beth Marks; ensured that IUCN had
an effective voice at various Antarctic forums; and a workshop on the cumulative impacts of
human presence in Antarctica has been completed. A major focus for IUCN Antarctic efforts
has been to urge ratification and implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection,
as well as the development of a Liability Annex to the Protocol. Strong and effective links have
been fostered between the AAC and the voluntary networks of IUCN, particularly IUCN's World
Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) and the Commission on Environmental Law (CEL),
and relevant NGOs. IUCN continues to work with SCAR and is working through its
Government and NGO members on Antarctic matters. A major constraint during the triennium
has been the extremely limited funding made available to assist the operation of the AAC.

Activities during the 1996 - 1999 triennium will focus on the strengthening and consolidation of
the Antarctic Advisory Committee and maximising its contribution to more effective
conservation efforts in Antarctica. However, the viability of the IUCN Antarctic Programme is
questionable if no funding is made available to support the activities of the AAC.

Objectives

1.    Continue to develop an active, effective, fully functioning, and viable Antarctic Advisory
      Committee, with an adequate funding base, and funded secretariat support;

2.    To ensure an effective input from IUCN to relevant Antarctic and Subantarctic forums,
      including the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM); and

3.    To focus on particular areas relevant to Antarctic conservation, which draw on the core
      competencies of IUCN, particularly in relation to environmental law, protected areas and
      species conservation.

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee                  9
Background Document
Activities

1.  Continue to develop an active and effective Antarctic Advisory Committee, with an adequate funding base, and funded secretariat support;

2.  Represent IUCN at relevant Antarctic and Subantarctic fora, including, inter alia, the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, CCAMLR and SCAR;

3.  Develop and promulgate relevant policy advice on Antarctic conservation, drawing particularly on IUCN's expertise in relation to environmental law, protected areas, and ecosystem and species conservation, with particular emphasis on: ratification and implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection; development of a Liability Annex to the Protocol; the establishment and management of Antarctic protected areas; and input to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.

4.  Develop and provide relevant policy advice to the Committee on Environmental Protection upon its establishment when the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty enters into force, with emphasis on the elaboration of detailed proposals for the implementation of the Protocol.

5.  Organize seminars and technical sessions relevant to Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation, including preliminary work on biodiversity in Antarctica, with emphasis on defining the appropriate and inappropriate uses of Antarctic resources.

6.  In consultation with relevant governments and IUCN members, Commissions and Council, produce an integrated strategy for conservation in the Subantarctic and southern cool temperate islands.

7.  In consultation with SCAR and appropriate bodies within IUCN and the ATS, follow through on recommendations from the three SCAR/IUCN workshops (Progress in Conservation of the Subantarctic Islands; Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System; Opportunities for Antarctic Environmental Education and Training), and the workshop on Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica (see Annex B). As appropriate, urge the ATS to act upon the recommendations*.

8.  Depending on available resources, write and produce publications relevant to Antarctic and Subantarctic conservation, including reports for targeted meetings which support the recommendations of previous workshops.

9.  Seek funding for the AAC, in partnership with the IUCN Secretariat.

10
IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document
WORKSHOP RECOMMENDATIONS:
ACTION ITEMS FOR IUCN'S AAC, IN CONJUNCTION WITH OTHER
BODIES OF IUCN AS APPROPRIATE
(Note: Full recommendations are attached as Annex F)

A. DEVELOPING THE ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

REC. 6:  IUCN, in collaboration with the ATCPs, should develop an internationally agreed
Antarctic ecosystem classification system to evaluate ASPA and ASMA proposals. This system
should provide a more comprehensive selection of criteria for assessments, including those
features such as wilderness and aesthetic values, which are recognized to be of international
importance. Based on its experiences outside the Antarctic, IUCN could write a paper,
possibly for tabling at the Christchurch ATCM, on the use of aesthetic and wilderness values in
assessing protected areas.

REC. 7: IUCN should continue to collaborate with SCAR to provide advice on the scientific
and technical requirements for protected area management planning and design.

REC. 16: Drawing on its expertise outside the Antarctic, IUCN should provide guidance on
how the Protocol's conservation principles should be applied to the assessment and
management of tourism and other recreational activities within protected area management.

REC. 22: IUCN, in collaboration with the ATCPs, should consider opportunities for applying
international protected area designations to areas of exceptional and universal conservation
value in Antarctica, and in particular to explore the possibility of designating "Antarctic Heritage
Landscapes," analogous to World Heritage Sites under the World Heritage Convention.

B. PROGRESS IN CONSERVATION OF THE SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

REC. 1 (Interactions between marine and terrestrial ecosystems): IUCN should remind
CCAMLR of the need to avoid direct competition between seabirds and seals and commercial
fisheries. This may be achieved by the establishment of protected areas coextensive at least
with the foraging ranges of seals and penguins during the period when they have dependent
offspring.

REC. 5 (Legislation, institutions and management planning): SCAR and IUCN should
collaborate further to provide national island administrations with appropriate scientific and
technical advice for Subantarctic island protection, including assistance in preparation of
conservation and research policy and planning guidelines, handbooks, manuals, and
educational, training and publicity materials. IUCN should write to national island
administrations to offer their assistance.

RECS. 1/2 (International designation of protected areas): IUCN should review the
recommendations of the Working Group on Application of the World Heritage Convention to
Islands of the Southern Ocean and take action as appropriate.

C. OPPORTUNITIES FOR ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING

REC. 1.2.1 (Legal and policy issues/Subantarctic Region): IUCN should prepare a
comprehensive bibliographic listing of all Subantarctic island management plans and related
documents (entry permits, policy statements, eia procedures, etc.).

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
Background Document                                     11
RECS. 2.5/2.6 (Formal Education):  IUCN, in collaboration with SPRI or IASOS, should 
undertake a comprehensive survey and documentation of Antarctic environmental education 
courses, and extracurricular courses for the general public on awareness of the Antarctic 
environment (e.g. adult/community/ further education courses and training/refresher courses).
This survey should include details about courses that are offered, their content and duration as 
well as their approach. The range of needs at the post-school level and how they are met by 
present courses that are both short and long term, academic and practical, undergraduate and 
advanced, as well as those that offer training in the form of refresher courses, or in teacher 
training and through "training the trainers" at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels should 
be identified. The survey could also include the role of the media in public education and of 
national educational and scientific institutions that are concerned with explaining their own 
involvement in Antarctic research to the general public.

REC. 5.4 (Public Education): IUCN should collaborate with SCAR and ASOC in the production 
of materials, in all media, which fosters public interest in and awareness of Antarctica. Special 
attention should be given to popularisation of science and the workings of the ATS.

D. WORKSHOP ON CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN ANTARCTICA: 
MINIMISATION AND MANAGEMENT

REC. 5:  IUCN should consider how its expertise with the "Red List" can best be used to 
contribute to a review of the Specially Protected Species in Appendix A to Annex II of the 
Protocol (e.g., criteria for listing).

RECS. 8/11/20:  IUCN should consider whether its expertise with environmental impact 
assessment (including non-Antarctic), particularly environmental audits/reviews and 
monitoring, could be used to encourage and advise on the use of these tools in the Antarctic to 
assess cumulative impact and associated processes, particularly for ongoing activities. IUCN 
should contribute to any mechanisms developed to assess whether cumulative impact has 
been adequately addressed in EIAs, and in general to contribute to the development or 
application of methods and/or procedures for managing cumulative impacts.

 
12                                                                   IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                                                 Background Document
Annex A

ALL RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE 3 SCAR/IUCN WORKSHOPS


IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee                  13
Background Document
14                                                             IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                                  Background Document
SCAR                                                                                  IUCN
Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic
Protected Areas, Cambridge, UK
29 June - 2 July 1992
The World Conservation Union


                                                                 Conservation of Southern Polar Regions No. 1
                                                                 Developing the Antarctic Protected
                                                                 Area System
                                                                Edited by R.I. Lewis Smith,
                                                                D.W.H. Walton and P.R. Dingwall
Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System

1. Recommendations of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on 
Antarctic Protected Areas to the XVII Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, Venice, November 1992

The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty commits the Treaty Parties 
to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems, and it designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science. Annex 
V of the Protocol specifies the objectives and provides the measures for area protection and 
management and is the legal basis for major reform and development of the existing system of 
protected and managed areas in the Antarctic. The Protocol thus establishes both a new opportunity 
and a new need to review the extent, location, rationale and management regime of Antarctic 
protected areas. It is now important that the Protocol be carried forward to speedy and effective 
implementation.

SCAR and the World Conservation Union (IUCN), as the world's leading non-governmental 
bodies experienced in Antarctic science and conservation, joined forces to discuss the new 
provisions for special area protection and management under the Protocol and to offer advice to 
the Treaty Parties on their implementation. Accordingly, a Workshop was convened with experts 
from both organisations, and representatives of some Treaty national authorities. The agenda of 
the Workshop was not exhaustive and there are plans to continue this work in the future. The 
principal conclusions of the Workshop, in the form of recommendations and explanatory com-
mentary, are set out below.

These are commended to the Parties for their consideration and adoption, as is deemed 
appropriate.

Recommendation 1

That the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are urged to ratify the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, including its Annexes, as a matter 
of priority.

Recommendation 2

That in the period prior to ratification of the Protocol the Treaty Parties should, as soon 
as possible, agree the rules of procedure of the Committee for Environmental Protection, 
and within these terms give due weight to the importance of the work towards develop-
ment of the Protected Area System.

Annex V of the Protocol marks a revolutionary change in approach to establishment and 
management of areas for special protection and management in the Antarctic. Previous designation 
of protected areas has been sporadic, piecemeal and often uncoordinated, sometimes without any 
clearly specified underlying rationale. The resulting complicated set of protected area categories 
has caused some confusion and inconsistency in developing standards of management and 
incomplete implementation of protected area provisions.

The new Annex overcomes most major deficiencies. It provides, for the first time, rules and 
guidelines for comprehensive a   ystematic development of an Antarctic Protected Area System

Of the 42 known breeding sites of Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) around the Antarctic 
continent, two Specially Protected Areas, Taylor Rookery (SPA No. 1) and Dion Islands (SPA No. 
8) were designated specifically to protect their colonies, the only two known to occur on land.

Photo: D. Allan

2                                                  3                                                  i  c
Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System                  Recommendations

consistent with principles and practices that have proven successful elsewhere in the world. Among 
its innovative features are provision for two categories of area, allowing strict protection and 
multiple-use management; criteria for establishing a geographically extensive and ecologically 
representative series of areas to protect the widest possible range of natural and human conserva-
tion values; mandatory and uniform designation procedures; and requirements for universal 
application of a management planning process.

The work of the Committee for Environmental Protection together with advice from SCAR will 
be crucial to successful establishment and management of the Protected Area System. The 
Committee will be responsible for receiving proposed management plans for areas, taking advice 
on these plans, and conveying its advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings for 
approval, or otherwise, of plans. The Committee provides the forum for consideration of protected 
area requirements among all Parties, together with the best available scientific and technical advice 
from within and outside the Antarctic Treaty System. This gives opportunity for development of 
areas in a well-structured, professional and cohesive manner, while promoting integration of 
protected area objectives with those of other activities in the Antarctic. The functions of the 
Committee, set out in Article 12 of the Protocol, clearly recognize the responsibilities and tasks 
involved not only in designation of areas but also in their on-going management.

Recommendation 3

That, recalling ATCM Rec. VII-2 and Annex V, Article 3.2 which call for identification 
of protected areas, and the IUCN Strategy for Antarctic Conservation which recognises 
the importance of protecting distinctive or special landscapes and historic features,
Treaty Parties should encourage proposals for new protected and managed areas, 
together with appropriate historic sites and monuments, in order to achieve an adequate 
geographical distribution and comprehensive environmental representation of such 
sites within the Antarctic.

Recommendation 4

That, although the Protocol is not yet ratified, SCAR should continue to receive and 
evaluate proposals in the form of management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs as required 
under Annex V, and then advise the ATCMs directly or through the Committee for 
Environmental Protection (once it is established) of the results of its evaluations.

Recommendation 5

That proposals for areas for special protection or management should not be rejected 
because insufficient information is available, provided that adequate detail is included 
to place the proposed site within the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix and to 
establish the basis of a management plan.

Recommendation 6

That SCAR utilises the revised (at this Workshop) 1977 SCAR ecosystem classification 
system as the systematic environmental-geographic framework (identified in Annex V, 
Article 3.2 of the Protocol) to evaluate ASPA and ASMA proposals until such time as 
an improved and internationally agreed Antarctic ecosystem classification system is 
adopted by the ATCM. This system should be developed in collaboration with IUCN to 
provide a more comprehensive selection of criteria for assessments, including those 
features such as wilderness and aesthetic values, which are recognised to be of interna-
tional importance.

Achieving representation of the full range of environmental diversity within protected areas is 
now a widely recognised goal in developing national systems of protected areas. The Treaty Parties 
have also accepted this long-term objective in developing the Antarctic protected areas network 
by providing, in Article 3.2 of Protocol Annex V, a requirement that the Parties seek to identify 
within a systematic environmental-geographical framework and to include in the series of ASPAs, 
inter alia, representative examples of major terrestrial and marine ecosystems.

The existing network of protected areas in the Antarctic is both uneven in geographical 
distribution and incompletely representative of major terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosys-
tems. Overwhelming attention is given to protection of biologically exceptional or scientifically 
significant sites in coastal areas, especially to seabird and seal breeding localities and vegetated 
sites. Major gaps occur in according special protection to continental inland sites, particularly 
aquatic ecosystems; geological features, landforms and glaciological formations; and to marine 
areas. Also insufficient attention has been given to protecting examples of regional landscapes 
and ecosystems which have scenic and aesthetic values of importance to tourism and wilderness 
recreation activities.

Achieving a fully representative protected areas system has been hindered by the absence of a 
completely adequate biogeographical framework for selecting sites that merit special protection. 
The 1977 SCAR habitat classification system, though a useful yardstick with which to characterise 
and compare differing areas, is incomplete in its ecological scope and lacks a geographical 
framework.

Revision of this classification was begun at the Workshop, particularly to include consideration 
of invertebrate fauna and to expand or revise reference to physical features such as altitude, 
oceanicity, geothermal phenomena and ice formations. Consideration was also given to adopting 
major ice catchments as a first-order geographical reference point. It was agreed that SCAR should 
further refine the classification in collaboration with IUCN, in order to take advantage
Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System                        Recommendations

Recommendation 8

That in planning and establishing protected areas, (a) boundaries should be defined by 
natural features where appropriate, (b) their position should be fixed by Global 
Positioning System (GPS) techniques where possible, and (c) clearly visible and stand-
ardized signs containing basic site information should be erected and maintained, as 
appropriate, by the ATCPs or their delegated authorities.

Recommendation 9

That management plans clearly identify the values to be protected and the management 
objectives and practices to be observed, recognising that procedures must be practical 
to apply and are applied consistently among Treaty Parties. The support of COMNAP 
in achieving these objectives should be sought.

Recommendation 10

That when, in accordance with Article 3.3 of Annex V, existing Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSI) and Specially Protected Areas (SPA) are reclassified and renumbered, new 
management plans should also be prepared to conform with Article 5 of Annex V.

Management planning is essential to successful attainment of protected area goals. Without 
adequate management plans there is a greater risk that protected areas will be inappropriately 
designed in terms of their size, shape, coverage and boundary delimitation. Inadequate planning 
may also lead to incomplete formulation of policies and objectives, inconsistent application of 
management provisions, unsuccessful resolution of conflicts and ultimately lack of achievement 
of management objectives. Not only is the management planning process a vital guide for 
management decision-making, it can also serve a number of consultative and educational purposes.

To date management planning for Antarctic protected areas has been developed only to a 
rudimentary stage. Where plans exist they are generally very brief documents, which provide 
insufficient guidance for effective management.

Provisions in Articles 5 and 6 of Annex V of the Protocol, for mandatory and universal 
application of management planning to ASPAs and ASMAs, lay the foundation for markedly 
improved protected area planning in the Antarctic. Approved management plans will be required 
before new protected areas can be designated, and the Annex also contains a detailed checklist of 
matters to be addressed in proposed plans. Of particular significance are requirements for:

- clearly stated protection values and management objectives;
- comprehensive site descriptions and maps, including identification of any internal zoning 
allowing diversified management; and
- full specification of conditions relating to the granting of permits for access to and use 
of Areas.

To comply fully with this demanding set of provisions for management planning Parties will 
require considerable scientific and technical support and guidance. SCAR and IUCN can provide 
these, particularly through production of a handbook to guide the preparation and review of 
management plans. This will ensure that plans are developed uniformly and to the highest 
professional standards.

6                                                            

Recommendation 11

That to achieve consistency in management Treaty Parties, when preparing manage-
ment plans, are urged to establish a standard methodology for site surveillance and 
monitoring, as well as a co-operative management policy in those areas where more than 
one Treaty Party is operating and/or where different values requiring protection exist.

Recommendation 12

That the issue of a permit for entry to a protected area should require compliance with 
the management plan for that area, and permits should be subject to review and 
renewable where appropriate.

Recommendation 13

That the Treaty Consultative Parties conduct inspection visits to ASPAs and ASMAs at 
not more than five-year intervals to ensure that their use is in accordance with their 
management plans. In planning and conducting inspections, Treaty Parties should 
co-ordinate their efforts and avoid unnecessary duplication.

Active supervision and management of protected areas in Antarctica are time-consuming and 
expensive operations, which present a considerable burden for national authorities. However, site 
surveillance and monitoring, in particular, are crucial for ensuring that the provisions of manage-
ment plans are being met.

Providing a warden service--a common practice among protected area authorities elsewhere--
is at present impractical and, except in a very few instances, unnecessary in Antarctica. This 
absence of on-site supervision, however, accentuates the need for strict enforcement of permit 
procedures to control uses of Areas, and adverse impacts on them. At present the national systems 
for granting permits for entry into and use of protected areas vary, and few allow timely 
consideration of applications and the issue of permits. All permits should be consistent with 
management plans, and therefore such plans must give clear guidance on what are acceptable 
activities and how and when they should be conducted. This will allow appropriate conditions to 
be specified.

Annex V of the Protocol provides the necessary rules governing the issue of permits, but 
ensuring full compliance will require monitoring and regular inspection. To date, inspections under 
the Treaty have been infrequent and sporadic, and have generally not included visits to protected 
areas. More recent inspections, some of which have included specific reporting on protected areas, 
have already proved valuable for identifying management problems, such as inaccurate plotting 

Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System                        Recommendations

and avoid duplication. Even more important is the need to integrate protected area management 
with other legitimate but potentially conflicting activities, such as research and associated logistics 
operations, fishing and tourist activities. The ASMA concept, which is intended to allow integrated 
land use practices to be applied while avoiding adverse or cumulative impacts, holds the key to 
solving this problem. Consultative planning and management mechanisms will be needed if the 
concept is to achieve its full potential.

Recommendation 14

That the Treaty Consultative Parties implement appropriate protection measures for 
Historic Sites and Monuments through provisions under the Protocol, including the use 
of ASPA and ASMA designations and the listing of Sites and Monuments, as appropri-
ate.

Recommendation 15

That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to enjoin their operators to consider the 
historic and scientific value of each abandoned work site before sanctioning its clean-up.

Comprehensive protected area systems should give attention, in appropriate balance, to the 
conservation both of natural and cultural values. The Antarctic Treaty provides adequate measures 
for protecting historic resources and values, but historic site establishment and management have 
tended to be ad hoc and inadequately integrated within the overall Protected Area System.

Annex V of the Protocol, which allows ASPA and ASMA provisions to be applied in the case 
of historic resource protection, will promote the required integrated management. Application of 
the extensive protection mechanisms in Annex V will also provide for much improved manage-
ment of historic sites and artefacts, and it gives opportunity for overcoming existing deficiencies. 
For example, it will now be possible to extend protection to areas of historic significance, not 
simply to structures as at present. Area protection, in turn, will allow for buffering of historic 
structures, thereby enhancing retention of their physical and aesthetic integrity.

Among the further needs for protecting historic resources and values identified by the Work-
shop, and which could benefit from appropriate professional advice and support, are improved 
definitions for historic resources; comprehensive surveys, inventory, documentation and archiv-
ing, preferably employing standardised methods; and greater use of voluntary, commercial and 
charitable support in restoration and management, under specialist guidance, especially to reduce 
the considerable costs involved, which might otherwise detract from scientific research resources.

Recommendation 16

That, in the absence of specific reference to management of tourism in the Protocol, the 
Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to give consideration to establishing the conser-
vation principles for assessment and management of all tourist operations, and should 
give due weight to the opportunities and constraints for tourism deriving from protected 
area management.

Recommendation 17

That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to encourage and support research into 
and monitoring of tourist activities, in particular to assess the nature and degree of 
impacts and to facilitate improved planning and management of tourism.

Over recent years tourism in Antarctica has grown into a very substantial commercial enterprise, 
and it appears likely to continue to expand and diversify in the future. Experience to date, based 
on information from a very limited number of surveys and impact assessment studies, reveals that 
environmental impacts from tourism have generally been benign. However, there has been some 
disruption of the operation of scientific stations and associated research programmes, and there is 
much potential for an increase in the nature and degree of impacts associated with an expanded 
tourist industry in the region. On the other hand, there are many benefits to be derived from tourism, 
such as increased awareness of and support for Antarctic conservation and science.

Tourism requires careful planning and management according to conservation principles. This 
calls for the preparation of a comprehensive tourism management strategy, backed by appropriate 
scientific and technical information. Among matters to be considered in the strategy are the ways 
in which protected area management could support tourist operations, for example by identifying 
areas or zones within protected areas for the specific use of tourists. At the same time consideration 
would also be required of the means of avoiding detrimental impacts on protected areas, including 
those areas which protect elements of human historical heritage.

Tourism management is a complex matter involving, among others, programme planning, 
licensing of operations and issue of permits, supervision, insurance and liability for damage 
including environmental damage, safety and search-and-rescue considerations, development and 
maintenance of facilities, and management costs and revenues. Experience from around the world 
demonstrates that protected area management and tourism management can be highly comple-
mentary in attending to the wide range of issues involved.

The Treaty Parties have accepted that the question of tourism should be addressed within the 
context of environmental protection. This should include consideration of the ways in which 
lessons from tourism management in protected areas elsewhere can be adapted to the Antarctic 
situation, such that tourism and protected area management become mutually supporting in the 
cause of environmental protection. One useful initiative would be to encourage ATCPs to ensure 
that reporting procedures relating to tourist and non-governmental expeditions are complied with, 

contracts. This obligation is particularly relevant to those modes of transport crewed 
by nationals of, or chartered from, non-Party States.

Recommendation 21

That the Committee for Environmental Protection, when constituted under the Proto-
col, should develop an information strategy to advise on the collection, storage and 
evaluation of data associated with the management and monitoring of protected areas.

Management of Antarctic protected areas currently lacks the support of a dedicated information 
management system for recording, storing and retrieving management-related information from 
research and monitoring of areas, or for use in education, training and publicity programmes--all 
of which are fundamentally important given the steadily increasing pace of activity and interest 
in the region. Currently, information must be sifted from scientific papers, inspection reports and 
Treaty documents, many of which are not readily available.

The Protocol imposes very considerable requirements for acquisition and exchange of informa-
tion on protected areas. Parties are required to prepare and submit proposed management plans as 
part of the designation process and a record of all approved plans is to be maintained in the 
Depository and circulated to all Parties. The Parties are also required to make available information 
(including maps) on the location of protected areas and historic sites and monuments, and 
management plans, including lists of relevant prohibitions. There is also a requirement that the 
Parties maintain and exchange information on permits issued; reports of visits, including inspec-
tions; significant change or damage to sites; research in sites; and actions taken.

Such information is not required simply to satisfy Protocol requirements. It is also essential for 
a large number of other users and for a wide range of purposes, including research, environmental 
monitoring, Environmental Impact Assessment, the preparation of information and education 
resources for tourists and other visitors, and general information for the public, to increase 
awareness and encourage support for Antarctic conservation. Attention is required to the format 
and means by which such information is conveyed to the respective users.

There is an urgent need for development of a comprehensive information management strategy 
for Antarctic protected areas. This should, in particular, spell out clearly the information manage-
ment procedures which identify who does what and when. The strategy should also provide advice 
on the design and use of standard formats for this information, to ensure completeness and facilitate 
comparison, evaluation and analysis. Development of the strategy could be modelled on the recent 
SCAR/COMNAP discussion document on environmental monitoring. Input to strategy develop-
ment should come from SCAR, COMNAP, IUCN, national Antarctic authorities and agencies, 
and other independent Antarctic institutions with data management roles. The World Conservation 
Monitoring Centre, in Cambridge, UK, or a similarly experienced institution, could be asked to 
assist in co-ordinating preparation of the strategy.

Recommendation 22

That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to consider, and to discuss with the 
relevant international agencies, the opportunities for applying international protected 
area designations to areas of exceptional and universal conservation value in Antarctica, 
and in particular to explore the possibility of designating Antarctic Heritage Landscapes, 
analogous to World Heritage Sites under the World Heritage Conve[?]

Global experience demonstrates that international designation of protected areas has been a 
beneficial means of drawing world attention to them, strengthening their protection, and providing 
them with access to worldwide networks of management support, including information and 
financial resources.

Important among the international Conventions for designating and listing sites of outstanding 
international significance, and the one most relevant to Antarctica, is the World Heritage Conven-
tion (strictly the Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural 
Heritage). World Heritage Sites--both natural landscapes and cultural monuments--are nomi-
nated by States but are subject to supra-national approval by a Standing Committee of the Parties 
to the Convention (the World Heritage Committee) which takes appropriate professional advice. 
Primary responsibility for maintaining and managing Sites remains with the national authorities 
concerned. Listing under the Convention does not generally exclude scientific research or tourist 
uses of Sites.

Unquestionably, as the IUCN Strategy for Antarctic Conservation points out, there are natural 
sites in Antarctica which are of outstanding universal value in terms of their scientific, landscape 
and wilderness qualities, and which would qualify for consideration as World Heritage Sites. 
Given the unique legal accommodation about national sovereignty under the Antarctic Treaty, 
however, it must be presumed that the World Heritage Convention in its present form cannot be 
applied directly to Antarctica.

An alternative option would be to evolve parallel machinery for designation of sites within the 
Treaty Area, using comparable criteria and procedures, and applying a title such as Antarctic 
Heritage Landscape which made that comparability widely evident. Analogous procedures could 
also be considered for designation of sites that may qualify under related international protected 
area instruments, such as the Ramsar Convention, or the Biosphere Reserve concept of the 
UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme.

International protected area designation for appropriate parts of Antarctica, on a basis of and
Conservation of the Southern Polar Region No. 2

Progress in 
Conservation of the 
Subantarctic Islands

Edited by P.R. Dingwall


Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Protection, 
Research and Management of Subantarctic Islands, 
Paimpont, France, 27-29 April 1992


SCAR                  IUCN
                      The World Conservation Union

21
Recommendations

The participants in the Workshop agreed on the following Recommendations for consideration by IUCN, SCAR, and the governments concerned.

Interactions between marine and terrestrial ecosystems

1. Direct competition between seabirds and seals and commercial fisheries should be avoided and/or minimised by:

     (i) better management of existing fisheries, combining implementation of tighter controls on catch/effort, and on the timing and location of fisheries, especially with respect to the breeding seasons of dependent species;

    (ii) the establishment of protected areas coextensive at least with the foraging ranges of seals and penguins during the period when they have dependent offspring;

    (iii) independent assessment of the potential environmental effects of new fisheries before they start. When such fisheries are allowed to proceed, an extreme precautionary approach (in terms of restrictions on catch, effort, timing and locations) should apply, at least until actual environmental impacts can be adequately assessed; and

    (iv) the mandatory use of independent scientific fishery observers to collect all relevant biological data.

2. The current significant incidental mortality of seabirds and seals, caused by fishing activities should be avoided by, inter alia:

     (i) prohibition of the use of net monitor cables on fishing vessels;

    (ii) employment in longline fisheries of techniques which render baited hooks inaccessible to flying seabirds; and

    (iii) stringent restrictions on the magnitude, timing and location of trawl fisheries in areas where actual or potential by catch of breeding marine mammals occurs.

Compliance with such conservation measures and improvement of these requires the mandatory use of an independent observer programme (using suitable qualified scientists to monitor incidental mortality and collect additional relevant data) additional to that involved in monitoring fish catch and compliance with fishery management regulations.

3. The effects of known and potential competition between predators and fisheries and the effects of fishery-induced incidental mortality should be monitored by extensive shore-based programmes studying the population trends, reproductive performance and demography of key species of seabirds and seals.

4. The potential adverse effects of pollution in the marine environment (ingestion of plastics, entanglement in net fragments, packaging bands, etc) should be minimised through strict compliance with the MARPOL Convention. Compliance can be enhanced by:

     (i) widespread p[?]ty, especially on fishing vessels and in ports, analogous to that undertaken by CCAMLR for the Southern Ocean; and
(ii) monitoring the incidence and significance of this pollution and its effect on biota. 
Standardised protocols for monitoring entanglement and garbage, under 
development by CCAMLR, may be applicable to Subantarctic islands generally.

Introduced island biota

1. The eradication of cats, rodents, pigs and rabbits should be accorded a high priority at all 
southern islands where they occur, but new techniques need to be developed to deal with 
rodents at all but the smallest southern islands. Large herbivores should be controlled or 
eradicated at Kerguelen (sheep, moufflon, reindeer). At least one of the three herds of 
reindeer at South Georgia should be eradicated and recovery of the locality monitored, 
leading to decisions being made about the remaining two herds.

2. More efforts should be taken with quarantine measures for some islands/island groups. 
To this end, the production of manuals, such as that already produced for rodents, would 
be useful.

3. The compilation on control/eradication measures (Appendix 1) should be made freely 
available, and the exchange of information especially on newly developed techniques for 
control and eradication is most desirable.

4. The opportunity should be taken whenever possible to collect scientific data from control 
and eradication programmes, and such information should be used, inter alia, to improve 
the effectiveness of such programmes.

5. Close contact should be kept between scientists and managers on southern islands to share 
expertise and knowledge of new introductions. A list of potential invaders could be made.

Environmental impact assessment

1. National authorities should seek to minimise human impacts on southern islands by 
adopting environmental management principles and implementing these through island 
management plans.

2. A comparative review should be made of practices and policies that island management 
authorities use for the minimisation of human impact on the environment of southern 
islands.

3. National island management authorities should regularly exchange draft and final 
management plans and environmental impact assessments to facilitate the development 
of more consistent policies.

Ecological restoration

1. Eradication or major control programmes involving established introduced species 
should be based on research indicating the necessity of such a course to protect indigenous 
species or the conservation values of the island.

2. Before any such programmes, including translocation and reintroduction programmes, 
are carried out an Environmental Impact Assessment should be undertaken.

Legislation, institutions and management planning

1. Strict protection should be extended to the widest possible geographical and ecological 
diversity of Subantarctic islands through establishment and effective management of 
legally protected areas.

2. Coastal and marine environments and resources in areas surrounding the islands should 
be afforded greater protection through establishment of marine protected areas and buffer 
zones, and/or imposition of regulation on human activities where necessary.

3. The evolving network of terrestrial and marine Subantarctic island protected areas should 
be reviewed regularly by the relevant national authorities, and safeguarded through 
enactment of strong and enforceable legislation, and provision of adequate institutional 
support.

4. The preparation and implementation of official, legally binding protected area 
management plans should become a universal requirement of Subantarctic island 
conservation.

5. SCAR and IUCN should collaborate further to provide national island administrations 
with appropriate scientific and technical advice for Subantarctic island protection, 
including assistance in preparation of conservation and research policy and planning 
guidelines, handbooks, manuals, and educational, training and publicity materials.

Protection of historic and cultural sites

1. Historical sites and artefacts associated with whaling, sealing and other human activities 
should be mapped, documented and conserved as far as possible.

2. Appropriate provision for these activities should be included within management plans 
for southern islands.

Research

1. Biological inventories and baselines should be established for all islands and adjoining 
marine areas, noting that these will require taxonomic support.

2. Control measures for alien species on the islands should be utilised to gain scientific 
understanding of the ecosystems. Control programmes should therefore be preceded by 
and accompanied by appropriate research and monitoring.

3. The islands should be used as effective monitoring points, to study the impacts of 
human-induced change, encouraging:

    a. appropriate nations and scientists not currently actively participating in the 
       CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) to do so, in order to extend 
       the programme to Subantarctic islands and species not currently covered;

    b. the extension of CEMP principles and practices within the Subantarctic areas 
       outside the CCAMLR area; and

    c. monitoring of population trends and reproductive performance for representative 
       populations of key indicator species at all Subantarctic island groups.

xiv                                          xv
Progress in Conservation of the Subantarctic Islands

4. The prompt publication of scientifically useful information in widely available scientific 
journals and other sources should be encouraged.

5. Scientific collaboration between nations engaged in Subantarctic research should be 
encouraged where appropriate. In particular, the development of scientific databases 
should be undertaken in a collaborative manner, so as to encourage consistent approaches 
which facilitate the exchange of information.

6. Key research requirements should be identified during the development or revision of 
island management plans.

7. Where possible, scientific research output should include recommendations for 
management of Subantarctic islands.

Tourism

1. Tourism should be regarded as a legitimate activity on Subantarctic islands, but 
constraints are necessary including legal provisions for regulation and management of 
tourist activities. Such measures should be directed at maintaining the conservation values 
of islands, and ensuring in particular the strict protection of unmodified or near-primitive 
islands, where tourist landings should normally be prohibited.

2. National island administering authorities should be urged to exchange experience and 
information on tourism management to promote standardisation of policies and practices.

3. Close links should be established among tourist operators, tourist company associations, 
island management authorities, and the scientific and conservation community, to 
promote responsible and safe tourist operations.

4. Further effort should be made in both socio-cultural and environmental research to gain 
a better understanding of tourists, their activities and their impacts, and the results of this 
research should be widely disseminated.

5. Improved information and education about island conservation, the risks from 
unauthorised landings, and tourist restrictions is vital, especially for minimising problems 
associated with small private expeditions, and such information should be made available 
to yacht clubs and other maritime organisations.

International designation of Protected Areas

1. A Working Group representative of those countries administering Subantarctic islands 
should be established, under the conventorship of IUCN, with a view to assessing the 
natural environment values of the islands in accordance with World Heritage criteria.

2. The report of the Working Group should be submitted to the IUCN-SCAR Workshop 
participants for comment, prior to timely submission through IUCN to the World Heritage 
Bureau and Committee.

CHAPTER 1

THE CONSERVATION STATUS OF 
SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

xvi                                                             2'ii
Conservation of the Southern Polar Region No.3
Opportunities for 
Antarctic Environmental 
Education and Training
Edited by P.R. Dingwall and D.W.H. Walton

Proceedings of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on 
Environmental Education and Training,
Gorizia, Italy, 26-29 April 1993

IUCN
The World Conservation Union

SCAR
Summary of Discussion and Recommendations

1. Legal and Policy Issues

1.1 Antarctica

This session began with discussion of the obligations for environmental education and training required by the Antarctic Treaty System. It included an assessment of how effective the dissemination of information and training have been. It was noted that, while the Madrid Protocol includes requirements for information exchange among Treaty Parties and for making information available to a wider audience, the Protocol does not identify in a focused way the needs for education and training that are essential for its effective implementation.

Accordingly the Workshop recommended:

1.1.1 That the Treaty Parties, drawing upon the advice of SCAR, collaborate in the publication of a lay guide on the environmental protection obligations of the Protocol, and that they subsequently promote and distribute that guide to their Antarctic operators and to all who might visit the Antarctic.

1.1.2 That the Treaty Parties elaborate a comprehensive training programme to assist in the effective implementation of the Protocol, and that they include in the functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection advice on environmental education and training.

1.2 Subantarctic Region

The session reviewed environmental education policies and practices in place at Subantarctic islands, under national juridical situations, some lessons from the Subantarctic islands may be valuable for the Antarctic. The usefulness of management plans as a tool for translating laws and policies into practical management objectives and actions was highlighted, as well as the further step of producing a guidebook to explain the objectives of management and their implications to visitors to the islands.

Accordingly, the Workshop recommended:

1.2.1 That a comprehensive bibliographic listing of all Subantarctic island management plans and related documents (entry permits, policy statements, etc.) be prepared as part of the Workshop proceedings.

1.2.2 That a list containing a representative selection of island educational and publicity materials including books, maps and films and their location and availability be included in the Workshop proceedings, if possible.
1.2.3     That all appropriate national authorities be urged to develop environmental 
          education, training and public awareness policies and implementation 
          programmes as part of a Subantarctic island management planning process.

2.    Formal Education

This session first examined examples of higher education and training programmes in 
Australasia, the United Kingdom and the United States of America. The increased 
demand for such programmes consequent upon the Madrid Protocol requirements was 
noted, as was the absence of any comprehensive survey of the needs and opportunities 
for Antarctic environmental education and training. The experimental course at the 
Institute of Antarctic and Southern Ocean Studies, at the University of Tasmania in 
Hobart, Australia, which is designed to provide training relating to obligations of the 
Madrid Protocol, was seen as being particularly relevant. A comparative view was 
presented for three Latin American states—Chile, Argentina and Brazil—and the value 
of combining theoretical and practical studies (fieldwork) was stressed. Discussion also 
included the importance of environmental education and training at primary and 
secondary school levels.

Accordingly the Workshop recommended:

2.1     That, pursuant to Article 6.1(a) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
        which states, "Each Party shall endeavour to promote cooperative programmes 
        of scientific, technical and educational value, concerning the protection of the 
        Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems"; Antarctic 
        environmental education at a tertiary level should be undertaken nationally and 
        information passed to other countries through an agreed designated node, 
        institution or contact point.

2.2     That Antarctic environmental education at a tertiary level should be recognised 
        by the Treaty Parties as an important subject for international exchange and 
        cooperation through studentships, staff exchange and information and resource 
        sharing.

[Antarctica is the only instance where international continental-wide 
environmental management can be applied and therefore this recommendation 
is supported as encouraging the sharing of expertise and of providing appropriate 
assistance to contribute towards the protection of the Antarctic environment and 
its dependent and associated ecosystems and to ensuring that activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area do not have an adverse impact on the environment. This 
recommendation will, by the process of international 'cross-fertilisation', assist 
in the evolution of Antarctica as a special area of study not just in various 
branches of science concerned with environmental education but also in other 
learning and research fields such as in the legal/political and policy areas. 
'Bilateral' exchanges in Antarctic environmental education are worth fostering 
for all their potential benefits despite the problems of cost, language, cultural 
differences, sovereignty, and the visa and exchange requirements that different 
governments possess.]

2.3     That, recognising the importance of Antarctica in global environmental 
        processes, governments should have the goal of ensuring that present and future 
        generations are made aware of the significance of the Antarctic continent and 
        its dependent and associated ecosystems by incorporating, wherever possible, 
        teaching about these processes and these unique systems at all levels within 
        national educational systems.

2.4     That teaching about these processes and systems is coordinated by national 
        authorities within the relevant curricula for primary, secondary and tertiary 
        education so that the associated themes and issues and an understanding of the 
        systems and processes themselves is covered in a sequential manner.

[Any coordination of Antarctic environmental education on a national basis at 
the primary through to the tertiary level, by incorporation into existing curricula, 
will also assist in the promotion of consistent standards as will those measures 
associated with international exchange and cooperation in recommendation 2.2 
above.]

2.5     That a comprehensive survey and documentation of Antarctic environmental 
        education be carried out by a university institution such as SPRI and/or IASOS. 
        This survey should include details about courses that are offered, their content 
        and duration as well as their approach (i.e. theoretical, practical or applied) and 
        to have this work completed by, for example, student(s) research topics. This 
        survey should also identify the range of needs at the post-school level and how 
        they are met by present courses that are both short and long term, academic and 
        practical, undergraduate and advanced, as well as those that offer training in the 
        form of refresher courses, or in teacher training and through 'training the 
        trainers' at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels.

[Thus, a diversity of treatments can at present be identified as being necessary, 
at a range of levels, from courses on waste management/cleaner production 
techniques and technologies to environmental monitoring methodologies for the 
effective implementation of the Madrid Protocol. The relationship of global 
environmental issues and processes to national Antarctic policies and strategies 
and how national environmental strategies are related to Antarctic 
environmental issues should also be considered.]

2.6     That a coverage of extracurricular courses for the general public on awareness 
        of the Antarctic environment be undertaken
Opportunities for Antarctic Environmental Education and Training                   Summary of Discussion and Recommendations

3.  Education and Training for Scientists and Support Staff 
of National Programmes

Current experience from the national programmes of the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Australia and New Zealand was described. It was clear the great extent to which there were common practices involving the provision of relevant literature, the provision of general briefings for all personnel with specific briefings for smaller groups with specialised deployment needs, and an assessment of the effectiveness of training, using post-season debriefings. The workshop concluded that experiences should be shared among national programmes. Sanctions are needed for those transgressing environmental standards, so as to encourage wider understanding of regulations and it is vital that educational materials used are appropriate if they are to be effective. Emergency training is vitally important and some form of assessment of training effort is required to make sure the effort is cost effective.

Accordingly the Workshop recommended:

3.1  That proposed training methods from the Workshop be considered by COMNAP, with a view to promoting their implementation and the sharing of experiences of national programmes among national operators.

3.2  That where behaviour and activity is observed contrary to the Protocol (reflecting a lack of understanding of the Protocol's provisions) these should be reported to national operators and, if necessary, to other relevant authorities for appropriate action to be taken.

3.3  That appropriate hazard contingency training to address emergency response action for fire, oil spill, laboratory, field, ship and aircraft emergencies should be practised frequently by all relevant personnel.

3.4  That national programme training officers should consider making written material visually attractive, concise and informative; and should consider the introduction of video training aids, the use of theoretical and practical problem-solving, and the use of language appropriate for the target audience.

3.5  That national operators should use appropriate means, such as end-of-season debriefings, to assess the effectiveness of training programmes. There should also be debriefing of visitors who are not part of national programmes.

4.  Education for Visitors to the Antarctic

Discussion in this session covered the general principles for educating all Antarctic visitors and the various codes of conduct that are currently used by Treaty Parties and by others such as tourist operators. Consideration was given to the merits of a certification scheme for authorising tourist operators or elements of their operations. The expectations and aspirations of tourists were discussed along with the range of experiences in providing education for tourist groups. Concern was expressed that some large groups of tourists, on tour ships for example, were not receiving adequate educational briefings or preparation. The role of EIAs for tour operations as an educational mechanism was viewed favourably.

Accordingly, the Workshop recommended:

4.1  That effective implementation of the rules of the Protocol for visitors to the Antarctic would benefit from the availability and use of a layperson's guide to the Protocol.

4.2  That COMNAP, in association with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) and other interested parties, should compile a manual or guidebook for use by tour operators and organisers of non-governmental expeditions, as a prescribed code of conduct, which might cover among others: environmental protection; flora and fauna protection; avoidance of disruption to scientific research; minimising waste and pollution; respecting the rules relating to specially protected areas; prohibition of collections and souvenir[?]
and encouraging safe operations.

5.  Public Education

During a wide-ranging discussion, the workshop considered the principles and processes associated with public environmental education and the role of non-governmental organisations in educating the public about the Antarctic environment and in motivating the public to work towards resolution of Antarctic environmental issues. Particular attention was devoted to the role of film-makers in educating the public, particularly through various entertainment techniques and the part played by Antarctic visitor centres in public education. The role of museums in public education about Antarctica, based in particular on the South Georgia Whaling Museum was examined together with the needs of the print media forms such as newspapers and magazines, as well as technical print material and various forms of non-commercial educational publications, including maps. Finally, the educational role of libraries and archives was discussed.

The Workshop recommended:

5.1  That, considering the continued growth of publication of relevant Antarctic information, and the absence of Antarctic libraries in some Antarctic countries, Treaty Parties should each establish a depository for published information and ATS documentation in at least one library, and should ensure public access to it.

5.2  That, considering the importance of providing visitors to the Antarctic with authoritative and accessible information in a variety of forms and ensuring it is available at points of departure for the Antarctic, and welcoming the establishment of the International Antarctic Visitor Centre in New Zealand and the Whaling Museum on South Georgia, the Treaty Parties with suitable points of access to Antarctica be urged to consider how they might develop similar facilities.

5.3  That, recalling that much valuable information on Antarctica is published in forms not officially recorded as books or serials, and noting that material of this type is not
Opportunities for Antarctic Environmental Education and Training

5.4     That, convinced of the need to maintain and extend public interest in Antarctica 
        by production of informative and accessible works in all media, with special 
        attention given to popularisation of science and the workings of the Antarctic 
        Treaty System, national and international bodies (including SCAR, IUCN and 
        ASOC) should be encouraged to collaborate in producing material which fosters 
        public interest in and awareness of Antarctica.

5.5     That SCAR and IUCN should seek sponsorship to provide funding for a 
        regularly awarded prize for the best book about Antarctica written for a general 
        audience.

5.6     That SCAR and IUCN, convinced of the importance of television in improving 
        public awareness of Antarctic environmental management and conservation, 
        and aware that material currently produced by television companies may not 
        present a balanced picture, should seek sponsorship for production of a 
        television documentary and associated videos for broadcast and distribution.

                                                        Introduction

The specific purpose of the Workshop was to bring together people with experience in Antarctic 
science, conservation, education, training and communication in order to:

• exchange information on the subject of environmental education and training for those 
  who work in or visit the Antarctic and Subantarctic regions;

• identify needs for advancing this subject;

• review and document the resources available; and

• make recommendations on future requirements and activities.

The objectives for achieving this were as follows:

• To examine the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and other 
  legal instruments and policies, in terms of their implications for environmental education 
  and training needs.

• To review and compile information on the resources and networks of people, organisa-
  tions and institutions currently involved in environmental education and training in the 
  Antarctic Region, and the potential for further developing these.

• To consider and make recommendations on the environmental education and training 
  needs of scientists and their support staff, tourists, and others who visit the Antarctic 
  Region.

To identify the opportunities for raising public awareness of the Antarctic and Subantarctic 
regions and their conservation.

                  29
Annex B

WORKSHOP ON CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN
ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION AND MANAGEMENT

Washington DC
18 - 21 September 1996

DRAFT REPORT

IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee                                  31
Background Document
32                                              IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee
                                                                  Background Document
1 INTRODUCTION

[DRAFT - WILL BE EXPANDED AND/OR EDITED FOR FINAL REPORT]

IUCN's Antarctic Conservation Strategy [ref] geographically covers the Antarctic continent and 
surrounding iceshelves, the Antarctic maritime zone, the ocean out to the Antarctic Convergence, 
and the Subantarctic Islands within that zone. The Antarctic Convergence is the ecological 
boundary created in the region where cold surface waters spreading outward from the continent 
meet warmer surface seas in a frontal zone. For the purpose of this workshop, the same boundary 
was adopted.

In the Antarctic area, several different areas of jurisdiction are encountered:
    • The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) 
      applies to the whole area south of the Antarctic Convergence
    • Antarctic Treaty and the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
      (The Protocol) apply to the area south of 60° South. This is also the area of application for the 
      Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS).
    • Subantarctic Islands north of 60° South are under various national jurisdictions
    • The Southern Ocean Whaling Sanctuary, established by the International Whaling Commission 
      (IWC)in May 1994, has a different boundary again, extending partially North of the area 
      considered here [add legal description of boundary]

The Protocol, signed in 1991, designates Antarctica a "Special Conservation area, dedicated to 
peace and science". Its main principle (Article 3) states that the protection of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and the intrinsic values of Antarctica 
(including wilderness, aesthetic, and scientific values) shall be fundamental considerations in the 
planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. The Protocol also contains 
Annexes on Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA),Protection of Flora and Fauna, Waste 
Disposal, Avoidance of Marine Pollution, and Protected Areas. Although the Protocol is not yet 
legally in force, all of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have pledged to abide by it just as 
though it were binding [ref to ATCM report].

The Protocol makes several references to cumulative impact, and its implementation requires a 
better understanding of this concept and its ramifications for environmental management in the 
Antarctic context. IUCN decided to organise an international workshop of invited experts from the 
polar and environmental impact assessment communities with the aim of furthering discussion and 
understanding on this subject, building on existing knowledge inside and outside the Antarctic.

"We're not here to reinvent the wheel, but to put chains on it so it works on the 
ice" (Martin Riddle, workshop participant, September 1996)

This document is the draft report of that workshop, which took place in Washington DC(USA), 
18-21 September 1996. The final report will be presented to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting (ATCM) in May 1997, and to many other Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) fora after that, 
as well as being widely distributed to IUCN channels. It will be published in the "Conservation of 
the Southern Polar Region" series.

Page - 3
2 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
[DRAFT]

IUCN gratefully acknowledges the generous financial distribution made by the Tinker Foundation
(USA) which made this workshop possible.

The workshop was held in Washington DC (USA) during the period 18-21 September 1996. We
are grateful to all participants for their enthusiasm and hard work. Dr Maj De Poorter (IUCN
Antarctic Advisory Committee member) was responsible for the organisation. Janet Dalziell and
Beth Marks (IUCN AAC) provided invaluable input for the smooth development and running of
the workshop, Scott Hajost, Debbie Good and other USA IUCN staff gaciously helped with
various local organising tasks. Anne Wakeford's legwork during the meeting is appreciated, so was
Dr B De Poorter's assistance with litterature searches for the main organiser. We gratefully
acknowledge Paul Dingwall [title within IUCN] where the idea initiated and Dr Bruce Davis [title
within IUCN] who took on earlier stages of organisation. We wish to thank Dr David Sheppard
[title] and all IUCN AAC members for their encouragement.

 
                                                                                  Page - 4

                                                                                                   34
3 DEFINITION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE ANTARCTIC CONTEXT

3.1 Definition:

Based on the discussions of Working Group I, the Workshop came to the following definition in 
the Antarctic context:

A cumulative impact is the impact of combined past, present and reasonably 
foreseeable activities. These activities may occur over time and space.

Clarification notes
•	A cumulative impact may, for example be the result of
  •	the repetitive occurrence of a single activity
  •	the combined effect of multiple activities by one or several agents
  •	individually minor but collectively significant activities
•	Cumulative impact may be additive or interactive (e.g synergism, antagonism, 
biomagnification)

                                                                               Page 5
                                                                                 35
4 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

[RECOMMENDATIONS: FINAL].
EXPLANATORY POINTS: DRAFT TO BE EXPANDED AND/OR EDITED FOR FINAL 
VERSION WHERE NEEDED, E.G. TO EXPLAIN CONCEPTS/TERMINOLOGY TO NON-
ANTARCTIC AUDIENCE]

The participants in the workshop agreed on the following Recommendations for consideration by 
IUCN, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting (ATCM), the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR) and the scientific community in general, the governments concerned and all 
Antarctic operators:

[NOTE: WHEN PRESENTING THE FINAL REPORT TO. THE ATCM, SCAR. COMNAP, 
ETC, A COVERING LETTER WILL HIGHLIGHT WHICH RECOMMENDATIONS ARE 
SPECIFICALLY OF RELEVANCE FOR THAT GROUP. IT IS HARD TO DO IT IN THE 
TEXT HERE, BECAUSE MOST RECOMMENDATIONS ARE AIMED AT MORE THAN 
ONE LEVEL, E.G. ATCM BUT ALSO NATIONAL AUTHORITIES OR GOVERNMENT 
AND NON GOVERNMENTAL OPERATORS DIRECTLY]

4.1  Area Protection under the Environmental Protocol

Annex V of the Protocol specifies the objectives and provides the measures for area protection and 
management. Among its features are provision for two categories of areas: Antarctic Specially 
Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). allowing strict 
protection and multiple use management; it also includes criteria for establishing a geographically 
extensive and ecologically representative series of areas to protect a wide range of natural and 
human conservation values; [ref IUCN/SCAR report "Developing the Antarctic protected Area 
System"]

· The ASMA/ASPA mechanism is adequate for managing cumulative impacts so long as 
it is approached in an open minded way. The framework is in place but it has not yet 
been applied in respect to some values or used explicitly for the purposes of protecting 
against cumulative impacts eg:
   · for the protection of the environmental integrity of remote areas (Annex V 
Art. 3(2a) and Art 4(2a)), the area designated may have to be much larger 
than for previously designated ASMA/ASPAs;
   · for marine areas - a marine ASMA/ASPA would have to take account of 
other international agreements such as CCAMLR, CCAS or the IWC - 
however this may not preclude their designation or potential use for 
management;
   · it is possible to designate a short-term (5-10 year) ASMA/ASPA to provide 
interim protection while longterm management options are assessed (a 
precautionary approach allowing site management when sufficient 
information is not yet available to demonstrate conclusively whether a value 
is being impacted or at risk of being impacted. This is particularly

page 6                                                             36
applicable to cumulative impacts because of the complexity of interacting 
factors such as different operators and activities)
        - areas that have been degraded in the past could be designated as 
ASMA/ASPA with the objective of allowing time for possible recovery.

        - The designation of an ASMA/ASPA may not be sufficient to prevent cumulative 
impacts unless there is effective cooperation and communication between parties.
        - A mechanism for joint management by parties is needed when interactions of operators 
and activities of different states may occur in ASMA/ASPAs.
        - Whilst there is explicit reference in the Protocol to prevention of environmental impacts 
as a reason for designating an ASMA, there is no explicit reference to prevention of 
environmental impacts as a reason for designating an ASPA - although this might be 
implied in Annex V Art. 3(1, 2a & 2i).
        - The permitting and reporting procedures, including site inspections required within 
ASPAs represents an important procedural tool for tracking human activities within 
these areas, thereby allowing more effective identification and assessment of cumulative 
environmental impacts.

Protected Areas, by virtue of their natural qualities or availability of scientific data, may 
attract further scientific activities and thus lead to increased risk of cumulative impact 
which needs to be addressed in management.

Recommendations

(1) The use of ASMAs and ASPAs under Annex V (Area Protection and Management) 
should be encouraged as a tool for the management of cumulative impacts.

(2) International cooperation is essential and should be strongly encouraged in the 
establishment and management of protected areas.

(3) In the management of these areas, steps should be taken to avoid or minimise the 
increased risk of cumulative impacts from the possibility that Protected Areas attract further 
scientific activities.

(4) "Pristine" areas should be identified for a site register, and consideration should be 
given to the use of designations under Annex V to achieve the appropriate level of protection 
(which could include exclusion of activities) of such sites where appropriate.

4.2  Specially Protected Species under the Environmental Protocol

        - The only Specially Protected Species designated under Annex II Appendix A are Fur 
seals and Ross seal.

        - The Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex II (Art. 3(4)) may have utility for 
preventing or managing cumulative impacts. [This is qualified [by some] because 
Annex II (Article 3) of the Protocol accords protection to [bird and mammal species]. 
However, [according to others] designation as a Specially Protected Species would 
raise the level of protection required as well as the profile of protection and hence 
awareness of protected status.]

Recommendation:

(5) Consideration should be given to a review of the Specially Protected Species in 
Appendix A to Annex II with a view to examining its utility for the protection of species whose 

Page - 7 
37
decline may be the consequence of. inter alia. cumulative impact (e.g southern giant petrel. 
Macronectes giganteus).

4.3 Environmental Impact Assessment

The Environmental Protocol sets out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) requirements and 
procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of proposed activities during the planning 
processes. This applies to* scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental 
and non governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required 
under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities" 
(Article 8 (2)). EIA procedures are contained in Annex I of the Protocol. Three levels of 
assessment are specified, depending on the magnitude of the predicted likely impact. Preliminary 
Assessment (PA), Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) and Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation (CEE)

Where EIA is a prior assessment in the planning phase, and required by the Protocol, an Audit or 
review is an assessment carried out for past activities, and it is not a specific Protocol 
requirement. However, it is seen as a useful tool in environmental management [ref GOSEAC 
report 1994 or 1995]. It focuses on compliance with international, national or programmatic 
requirements or policies, and can hence contribute to knowledge about, and minimisation of 
impacts, including cumulative ones.

  • The EIA process does not require prior exchange of information of minor activities and 
    their impacts that may contribute to cumulative impacts.
  • There is concern that the time frames for exchange of information for CEE is so long 
    that other activities which may contribute to cumulative impacts may have been initiated 
    during the process.
  • The Protocol requires that activities shall be planned and conducted on the basis of 
    sufficient information. This should include assessment of cumulative impacts. 
    However, EIA procedures under Article 8 and Annex I are usually interpreted as 
    relating specifically to proposed activities or changes to existing activities. However, to 
    accommodate assessment of cumulative impact , existing activities and their impact 
    need to be taken into account as well., as do past activities and their impacts. Some 
    operators have produced programmatic EIAs which extend the EIA procedure to 
    existing (ongoing) operations. There also is a role for environmental audits/reviews 
    and appropriate monitoring when dealing with past and/or existing activities.
  • Joint EIAs can be an effective tool for managing and/or preventing cumulative impacts 
    when activities of different operators are known or predicted to overlap. Such joint 
    assessments could be developed across many levels or combinations of operations, 
    including within and between programmes, states, and government and non-
    government operators. In some cases this is already occurring.
  • Current systems of information exchange about planned activities, both formal and 
    informal, may not always provide enough information, at the right time, to allow 
    informed decisions about the potential for cumulative impacts.

Page - 8
                                                                                              38
- There is no explicit requirement to consider cumulative impact at the PA level.
however, cumulative impacts are a sub-set of impacts and where ever impacts are
referred to it is assumed that this includes cumulative impacts.
- Even though Annex I (Arts. 2&3) specifically mentions only existing and (other) known
planned activities as elements that need to be taken into account when assessing
cumulative impacts, past activities should also be included in the assessment.
- The need to address cumulative impacts should be drawn to the attention of the
regulatory authorities as well as to the proponent.
- In dealing with cumulative impact there is a need for a more holistic and ecosystem-
based approach than might otherwise be required for environmental assessment.

Recommendations
(6) Consideration of cumulative impact should include all relevant past, present and
reasonably foreseeable activities.
(7) Wherever obligations regarding environmental impact are identified, it should be
taken that this includes cumulative impacts.
(8) Environmental audits/reviews and monitoring, particularly for past and/or existing
activities, should be used as a further tool in the assessment of cumulative impact.

4.4    Information exchange under the ATS

- Information exchange may include information on available technologies.
- There is a need for readily available information on past activities (NB: the Protocol
includes a requirement (Annex III, Art. 8(3)) to prepare an inventory of locations of
past activities before the information is lost).
- There is a possible role for intermediary and experienced coordinators of information
relevant to the assessment of cumulative impacts (such as the Canadian EPA, who may
return EIAs to the proponent with advice to consider other activities that might interact
with the proposed activity). With respect to this point:
    - there is an issue of who has the onus to provide/collect information about
possible interacting activities;
    - there [could/would] be a role for the CEP to advise on how this is
achieved.

Recommendations
(9) Antarctic Treaty Parties should review elements of information exchange under the
ATS to see whether the format, timeliness and content of current exchanges are adequate to meet
the obligations under Annex I of the Protocol, to consider cumulative impacts in environmental
impact assessment. Particular emphasis should be placed on geographic precision and
standardised reporting.
(10) In order to facilitate assessment of cumulative impact, timely and frequent
distribution of:
- lists of completed, and notification of planned, IEEs including summaries and contact
details; and

Page - 9
39
- lists of permits issued under Annexes II and V 
should be considered.

4.5 Tools for Assessing Compliance with Protocol obligations

Compliance assessment can be carried out at several levels: the ATS (e.g. ATS inspections), the 
national level (e.g carried out by national authority on its nationals), or the programmatic level (e.g 
an operator commissioning or carrying out an audit /review )

      - Inspections under the ATS (under the Antarctic Treaty provisions or under Protocol 
provisions) are not an appropriate mechanism for checking predictions of cumulative 
impact because of their infrequent and ad hoc nature.
      - Similar problems occur with non ATS observers.
      - Although there are no provisions in the Protocol that specifically require reviews/audits 
of operational and management procedures, such reviews have value in identifying 
whether appropriate procedures are in place to identify and manage cumulative 
impacts, including consideration of cumulative impacts in the EIA process.
      - If this type of review/audit were undertaken, there would be an educational benefit 
from making it available. Other parties would then know what management procedures 
are possible and in place.
      - Treaty Parties are required by the Protocol (Article 13) to draw the attention of other 
Treaty Parties to activities that affect the implementation of the Protocol and the 
attention of non-Treaty counties to activities by that State (etc) that affect the 
implementation of the Protocol. Although applying to all impacts these requirements 
have particular relevance to cumulative impacts.

Recommendation:
(11) Mechanism should be developed to assess whether cumulative impact has been 
adequately addressed in EIAs, and to evaluate effectiveness and/or compliance in general with 
requirements relating to cumulative impact.

4.6 Technology

      - Use of Best Available Technology (BAT), (terminology as defined by 
SCAR/COMNAP [ref of ATCM XX paper]), and Best Existing Procedure (BEP) can 
contribute to reducing the risk of impacts, including cumulative impacts.
      - Appropriate technology should be shared and encouraged, noting that:
            - this happens already through COMNAP/SCALOP (eg SCALOP 
Symposiums); and
            - both the actual BA technology and information about such technology 
should be shared if practical.

The Antarctic community can learn from experiences elsewhere in the world and select  the best 
environmental management practice, appropriate to Antarctic conditions.

Page - 10
40
4.7 Education and Training

- Education and training to increase awareness of cumulative impacts can decrease the risk of them occurring.
- There needs to be greater recognition and education about sensitive species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts (e.g sensitivity of giant petrels and the lack of knowledge by many people that approaches should be avoided)

It is important to educate the public about cumulative effects of global human activities on Antarctica, through the links in global environmental systems, including:. climate change, ozone depletion, long-range transport of contaminants.

Recommendation:

(12) Training programmes should include the notion that minor impacts by individuals can, when taken together, have cumulative impacts.

(13) Training programmes should include education about sensitive species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts.

4.8 Information Management

- Effective procedures for information management are crucial to managing cumulative impacts.
- It will not be possible to meet cumulative impact obligations without an effective data management system. Issues that need to be considered in this respect include:
    - links with national Antarctic programme data systems;
        - links with SCAR/COMNAP data entries (eg. monitoring/AMEN);
        - consistency of data for comparability;
        - cost and cost effectiveness;how to ensure public access.
        - GIS systems
- For cumulative impact management, access to several types of data and databases (eg. scientific, monitoring, operational, past surveys ) is required.
- In areas with multiple operator activities (eg multiple stations) a common database, including information from all past surveys or monitoring in the area, may facilitate the management of cumulative impacts.
- Circulation of information on past as well as planned surveys or monitoring programmes could help avoid unnecessary duplication in areas with multiple operators.
- GIS is an information, analysis and management tool that may assist and facilitate cooperation and coordination in areas subject to potential cumulative impact, particularly in multi-national situations, through its ability to combine data from a variety of disciplinary and national sources into an integrated framework for handling environmental information.
- There appears to be a gap in current arrangements for exchange and access to operational data (eg records of spills, types of activities undertaken) which may be important for the identification of cumulative impact.

Page - 11
                                                                                             41
- Useful information for assessment of cumulative impact may be accessed through CCAMLR.

Recommendations

(14) Data or other information should where possible be provided with lat long 
      coordinates (using GPS).

(15)COMNAP and SCAR should examine the feasibility and means of including 
      references to operational databases in the ADDS.

(16) The development of common databases containing comprehensive data on all 
      activities and other relevant variables should be considered in multiple operator areas.

4.9     International Cooperation

   - Sharing of logistics operations and/or facilities may reduce cumulative impacts.
   - Duplication of logistics/facilities can increase cumulative impacts.
   - Assessment and management of cumulative impact is more difficult if activities are 
     being undertaken outside the ATS framework, because there is no mechanism to 
     integrate information about those activities and because there can be further 
     confounding of the problems associated with overlapping regimes.

Recommendations

(17) Logistics/facilities should be shared where practicable and effective in order to 
      reduce cumulative impact.

(18) Any non-Treaty Party operator in the Antarctic should be encouraged to conduct 
      activities in accordance with Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices, including 
      exchanging information with other operators, to allow cumulative impacts to be addressed.

(19) International collaboration and exchange of ideas, and appropriate meetings 
      should be used to foster standardisation of approaches to research methods and management 
      procedures that will assist in the recognition and reduction of cumulative impacts.

4.10   Monitoring

[Note: in the final report, the definition of monitoring, from the SCAR/COMNAP workshops will 
be repeated in the section of definitions, and if needed, in this section]

   - Monitoring is an appropriate tool for checking predictions about cumulative impacts 
     [chuck?][  Rootes]

   - The requirements noted as essential in the design of monitoring programs (eg. 
     hypotheses, replication, controls) by the SCAR/COMNAP monitoring workshops, also 
     apply in the context of cumulative impacts.

   - Monitoring programmes in multiple operator areas are likely to benefit from the 
     establishment of mechanisms or procedures to integrate the studies from different 
     operators.

Page - 12
Recommendations

(20) The outcomes of the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental monitoring 
should be supported as key to effective management of cumulative impact.

4.11 Further research:

- Further research necessary for managing cumulative impacts includes the mechanisms 
(pathways, processes etc) by which impacts accumulate.
- For wildlife, changes in population levels seem obvious parameters to study, but 
studies at other levels (individual, colony) are likely also important (in penguins for 
example: habituation or physiological or behavioural changes in individuals, long term 
patterns of recruitment at colonies and potential impacts on small colonies, age 
distribution within a population). In general, questions that need to be addressed 
further include:
  - What parameters of flora and fauna (and other values) should be studied?
  - Which parameters should be selected with respect to types of activities?
- The understanding of cumulative impact, especially in areas where there are multiple 
activities or operators, would benefit from research into the "footprint" or "sphere of 
influence" of impact. Specific aspects to be addressed include the size of the 
"footprint" on different environmental components; and the overlap of footprints.
- Spatially and temporally distant impacts need further study (for example the reduction 
in breeding success of a colony of antarctic petrels caused by chronic exposure of 
individuals to hydrocarbons in another location, and potential subsequent secondary 
effects on microbial populations or flora due to changes in guano production (nutrient 
input) ).
- Another issue to be addressed is whether it is better to concentrate or to spread 
activities.
- The genetic structure of populations (eg relatedness within and between colonies) is 
often unknown and may be a significant factor in determining the significance of 
cumulative effects.
- One potential cumulative impact of concern is the translocation of organisms within the 
Antarctic as well as from outside the Antarctic (for example micro-organisms, diseases 
and birds which follow ships beyond their usual areas).
- Natural variability complicates impact studies and needs to be controlled for with 
suitable randomly selected replicates.
- There is a need for knowledge of the location of "untouched" or "pristine " areas. 
[cross ref section 6.1]. However, care needs to be taken because the act of gaining this 
information may in itself compromise the "environmental integrity" of these areas. In 
addition, visits to these areas may be difficult to document or control.

Recommendations
(21) Further research should be carried out on:
  - the processes and full extent of cumulative impact in different environments:

Page - 13
                                                                                       43
- the development of methods applicable to assessment and monitoring for cumulative impact;
  - the procedures for managing cumulative impact;

(22) Suitable control areas be established relevant to stations or other activities as a tool 
for determining the impact of those activities.

(23) Potential translocation of species within Antarctica should be addressed through 
precautionary management measures and through further research.

 
                                  Page - 14
                                                                      
                                  44
5 GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS IN ANTARCTICA
WHERE LIKELY CUMULATIVE IMPACTS WOULD OCCUR
(EXAMPLES)

Outcome of discussion in Working Group II]
All human activity in Antarctica generates impacts, including cumulative impacts. But already there are areas where frequent multiple-operator activities occur, as well as intense or repeated activities from one operator. If these areas have some local characteristics that make them particularly sensitive to impacts, environmental damage may occur.

Examples of factors which may influence the probability and/or scale of cumulative impact include:
-   the number of operators (governmental or non governmental)
-   the level of activity
-   the accessibility of the area
-   the history of previous activity;
-   whether the site is ice free
-   whether fauna and flora (eg bird colonies, moss beds) are present.

and:
the values (scientific, historic, tourist, "pristine", public profile, wilderness, uniqueness, aesthetic, etc) of the area in question may affect the significance of the cumulative impact.

Some examples of areas where cumulative impact is likely to occur, or has occurred, include:

5.1 KING GEORGE ISLAND

Activities:
-   Stations -- year-round, summer only, refuges
-   Ships -- tourist, navy, resupply, research
-   Tourist visits -- (ships) foot traffic, inflatables
-   Science -- biology, glaciology, marine biology, oceanography, geology
-   Airstrip and associated infrastructure
-   Fishing in surrounding waters
-   Helicopter operations
-   Vehicles
-   History of human activity

Sensitive systems:
-   Enclosed bays
-   Vegetation
-   Soils
-   Rookeries, seal breeding areas

Page - 15

 
45
- Inshore/nearshore marine
- Fossiliferous strata

Values
- Scientific
- Tourist
- Historic
- Uniqueness

5.2 ROSS ISLAND

Activity
- Ships - tourist, resupply, research
- Helicopter operations
- History of human activity
- Science
- Runway
- Vehicles
- Stations

Sensitive systems
- Snow free sites
- Flora and fauna: rookeries, moss/algae/invertebrates
- Inshore/nearshore marine

Values
Scientific, historic, tourist interest
Public profile
Uniqueness
History

5.3 ELLSWORTH MOUNTAINS

Activities
- Flights: science and tourist
- Climbing/mountaineering/walking
- Long term field camps: tourist and science
- Refueling aircraft
- Snow tractors and snowmobiles

Sensitive Areas
- Isolated nunataks
- Mountain ranges

Page - 16
                                                                                                  46
- Periglacial features
- Biological communities (moss/lichen, associated invertebrates)

Values
  - Isolation
  - Adventure
  - Scientific

5.4 NORTHERN ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

Activities
  - Stations, summer huts, field camps
  - Abandoned facilities
  - Historic sites
  - Tourism (shipborne, mountaineering)
  - Shipping - tourist, resupply, navy, research
  - Yachts -- traveling, anchoring, over wintering
  - Science

Sensitive systems
  - Coastal ecosystems
  - Enclosed, semi-enclosed bays and channels
  - Moss, lichens
  - Rookeries, breeding sites (birds and seals)
  - Whales
  - Fossiliferous strata
  - Historic sites

Values
  - Scenery/aesthetic
  - Wildlife
  - Historic
  - Scientific

5.5 DRY VALLEYS

Activities
  - Field huts
  - Walking
  - Temporary camps
  - Tourism
  - Helicopter operations
  - Science

Page - 17
         
47
- History of human activity

Sensitive systems
  - Ice-covered lakes
  - Sediments
  - Moss and algal beds
  - Soils

Values
  - Uniqueness
  - Size as non-coastal, ice-free area
  - Aesthetic
  - Scientific

5.6 SOME SUB-ANTARCTIC ISLANDS, FOR EXAMPLE SOUTH 
GEORGIA AND SURROUNDING SEA (CCAMLR AREA 48.3) AND 
HEARD AND MCDONALD ISLANDS AND SURROUNDING SEA 
(CCAMLR AREA 58.? .2)

Activities
  - Tourism -- ship-based and shore visits
  - Fishing -- finfish, krill, possible squid
  - Scientific stations
  - Shipping: science, tourism, fish, military, CCAMLR inspection
  - Overflights: military, CCAMLR inspection
  - Past whaling and sealing
  - Introduced species
  - Adventure tourism
  - Introduced species
  - Yachts, transitory and overwintering

Sensitive systems
  - Upwelling
  - Bird and seal colonies, feeding areas, migratory routes
  - Vegetation
  - Marine ecosystem -- pelagic, benthic
  - Semi-enclosed bays
  - Soils
  - Historic sites

Values
  - Aesthetic, historic, wilderness
  - Rich fisheries

Page - 18
                                                                                 48
- Sub-Antarctic wildlife

5.7 SCHIRMACHER OASIS

Activities
  - Stations: summer and winter
  - Science
  - Tourism and adventure tourism
  - Aircraft operations
  - Refuelling aircraft
  - Snow tractor and snowmobile traffic
  - Traverses

Sensitive systems
  - Isolated nunatak
  - Mountain ranges
  - Biological communities (moss/lichen, associated invertebrates, birds)
  - Schirmacher Oasis
  - Lakes

Values
  - Isolation
  - Adventure
  - Aesthetic
  - Scientific

Note: This list is intended as illustrative only, in order to show the factors which contribute to cumulative impact and concentrates on areas where there are multiple operators.

Page - 19
                    49
World Headquarters

IUCN - The World Conservation Union
Rue Mauverney 28
CH-1196 Gland, Switzerland
Tel.:   ++ 4122 999 00 01
Fax:    ++ 4122 999 00 02
