ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


GREENPEACE 1996/97 ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION REPORT


Agenda item 10                  Submitted by ASOC

XXI ATCM/IP66
May, 1997
Original: English
GREENPEACE

1996/97
ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION
REPORT

May 1997
1996/97 Antarctic Expedition Report

This report was written by Janet Dalziell and Ricardo Roura, with layout by Louise Bell.
Hans Hoek produced the maps.

Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank Lyn Goldsworthy and Erwin Jackson
for their comments and contributions to this report.

Greenpeace International
Keizersgracht 176
1016 DW Amsterdam
The Netherlands

Phone: +31 20 523 6222  Fax:+31 20 523 6200

© Greenpeace
1996 /97 Antarctic Expedition Report
May 1997

ISBN 90-73361-34-6

Printed on 100% chlorine-free paper
Contents

1    Introduction ....................................................... 1
2    Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio (Argentina) ....................... 6
3    Base Aérea Teniente Matienzo (Argentina) ........................... 13
4    Base Antártica San Martín (Argentina) ................................ 17
5    Estación Antártica Comandante Ferraz Station (Brazil) ................. 21
6    Base Antártica Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalvá (Chile) .............. 24
7    Estación Antártica Machu Picchu (Peru) ............................... 28
8    Arctowski Station (Poland) ............................................. 32
9    Bellingshausen Station (Russia) ......................................... 34
10   Vernadsky Station (Ukraine) ............................................ 38
11   Rothera Station (United Kingdom) ...................................... 41
12   Palmer Station (United States) .......................................... 45
13   Base Gabriel González Videla (Chile) .................................. 47
14   Estación Científica Almirante Brown (Argentina) ...................... 48
Appendix: List of Acronyms ................................................ 49
1       INTRODUCTION

In contrast to Greenpeace's previous voyages to Antarctica, which have focussed on 
the environmental impacts of human activities in Antarctica, the 1996/97 expedition 
was designed to document signs of global climate change in Antarctica—the impact 
on Antarctica of human activities elsewhere in the world. Less emphasis, therefore, 
was placed upon the traditional Greenpeace activity of inspecting stations, and this 
year's report reflects that reduced emphasis. Instead of listing the many operational 
facts about each station, we have concentrated this year on the overall impression 
gained at each station and throughout the Antarctic Peninsula as a whole.

1.1     OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS

Greenpeace has conducted six expeditions to the Antarctic Peninsula since the 
1987/88 season. Over that time, there have been significant political and physical 
changes (most notably in response to the agreement of the Madrid Protocol). 
However some things have, regrettably, changed little.

One of the most noticeable changes for the better observed on this expedition was a 
shift in attitude—or at least in awareness of environmental issues. All station leaders 
could discourse more or less knowledgeably about the Protocol, and most had 
environmental rules and regulations (particularly about behaviour with respect to 
fauna and flora) displayed prominently in the station.

If such a thing as a Greenpeace awareness index could be imagined, where points are 
gained for awareness of correct answers to the types of questions Greenpeace asks, 
then stations are unquestionably scoring much higher than they used to. However, 
given the necessarily snapshot nature of the impressions formed by Greenpeace when 
it visits these stations, the "Greenpeace awareness index" does not necessarily equate 
directly to good all-round environmental practice, and we suspect that in several 
cases actual practice falls short of stated practice.

With respect to the operational aspects of station life that have a direct impact on the 
surrounding environment, Greenpeace's biggest concerns continue to be sewage 
treatment (usually maceration at best); the use of incinerators to dispose of rubbish, 
and the sheer spread of stations over the surrounding landscape. These practices are 
either permitted (in the case of the first two) or at least not regulated (the latter) by the 
Madrid Protocol, but Greenpeace does not feel that in these instances the Protocol 
goes far enough.

On the scale of the Antarctic Peninsula as a whole, major concerns remain about the 
extent to which new stations are being built in areas where there is already a surfeit of 
human activity. The major expansion of Peru's Machu Picchu in Admiralty Bay is 
only the latest example of a station for which other options could and should have 
been canvassed. On the positive side, however, the handover by the UK of Faraday 
station to the Ukraine (who have renamed it "Vernadsky"), and its associated close 
scientific cooperation between the programmes of the two countries, is a good 
example of creative use of existing resources.

Introduction                                                                     1
The Polish programme is currently planning a major rebuild of Arctowski, and we speculate that, given the age of some of the other stations on the Peninsula, similar work must be due in a number of places. Construction work is also under way, for example at Machu Picchu. Such rebuilding and building programmes give an ideal opportunity to install and institute Best Available Technologies (BATs) and Practices (BAPs). Greenpeace urges all Antarctic Treaty nations to offer assistance to each other to ensure that all operations in Antarctica are upgraded to BAT and BAP standards, which could include maximising usage of renewable energy technologies to reduce the current reliance on fossil fuels, as well as waste management technologies such as sewage treatment plants and waste separation and handling facilities.

Beyond the day to day running of stations and the environmental impact they cause, and the measures taken to minimise them, Greenpeace believes that there is room for developing a more environmentally friendly vision for the continent, where a permanent foothold in Antarctica is no longer essential. In that sense, we support initiatives such as the ongoing research programme developed by the Netherlands without running a base of its own.

Greenpeace notes with concern a new trend towards commercialisation of Antarctica: upon return to Ushuaia, the Arctic Sunrise was berthed next to a ship which was loading tonnes of filming equipment for an expedition to the Gerlache Strait/Lemaire Channel region. The purpose of this expedition was to film a cigarette advertisement.

1.2     EXPEDITION DESCRIPTION

Greenpeace's ship MV Arctic Sunrise departed from Ushuaia, Argentina, on 21 January 1997, with first Antarctic landfall in Maxwell Bay, King George Island. After visiting stations in Admiralty Bay, the ship moved to the Larsen Ice Shelf area to document the collapsed and collapsing ice shelves in that area. The ship achieved the first ever circumnavigation of James Ross Island, made possible by the 1995 disappearance of the Prince Gustav Ice Shelf. The ship then sailed down the western side of the Peninsula, through the Gerlache and Lemaire Channels, to Marguerite Bay, as far south as the retreating Wordie Ice Shelf, and arrived back in Ushuaia on 18 February, 1997. (Fig 1.)

1.2.1   MV Arctic Sunrise and crew

The Dutch-registered MV Arctic Sunrise was once the MV Polarbjorn, built in Norway in 1975. She is registered as an icebreaker of class 1A1, and has been used extensively in both the Arctic and Antarctic by previous owners. Only 50 metres long, she carries up to 33 people, including a basic crew of 14. On board for the voyage were two Hughes 500 helicopters. The ship was captained by Arne Sorensen, an experienced ice pilot, and the expedition was led by Janet Dalziell.

1.2.2   Greenpeace expedition procedures

Prior to the expedition, environmental impact assessment and exchange of information documents were submitted to the Dutch government. They were also circulated to all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party embassies in the Netherlands.

2                                                                                                                   Introduction
Before the ship arrived in the Southern Ocean, everyone on board the ship received 
information on the unique nature of the Antarctic environment and the procedures 
required to protect it. This was reinforced in regular crew meetings. Prior to any 
landfall the crew was briefed again about each site.

Once the vessel entered Antarctic waters, all solid waste was stored on board. North of 
the Antarctic convergence, only food scraps were dumped overboard. All other waste 
was kept on board for disposal in New Zealand (the post-Ushuaia destination for the 
ship). Paper, glass and aluminium, which had been separated and washed on board, 
was accepted by New Zealand authorities for recycling upon arrival in Christchurch. 
Sewage was treated on board with a chemical-free tertiary-level treatment plant.

Station inspections were carried out under the supervision of expedition campaign 
staff. All attempts were made to advise inhabited stations of Greenpeace's arrival at 
least 48 hours in advance, although sometimes this was not successful. Crew 
members did not enter any buildings without an invitation from station management 
or personnel. Whenever time and weather permitted, base staff were invited to board 
and tour the Arctic Sunrise.

1.3    SCIENCE PROGRAMME

A bathymetrical survey of the area formerly covered by the northernmost part of the 
Larsen Ice Shelf (Larsen A) was carried out in a joint research programme between 
Greenpeace and the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA). A researcher from the IAA 
travelled aboard the Arctic Sunrise for some days, while approximately 450 nautical 
miles of previously uncharted waters were surveyed by simultaneous recording of 
echo sounder and GPS information. The survey gave a first picture of the seabed in 
the area: a system of deep underwater channels ("tunnel valleys") with recorded 
depths of up to 1,000 metres, and peaks of presumably volcanic origin rising to 
depths of around 100 metres. Academic publications outlining the findings of this 
survey are in production, jointly authored by IAA and Greenpeace.

General observations on ice conditions were also carried out for Australia's Antarctic 
Cooperative Research Centre in Hobart.

1.4    CLIMATE CHANGE IN ANTARCTICA

While there are still many uncertainties, the global scientific community now agrees 
that human activities are causing heat-trapping greenhouse gas concentrations to 
increase in the atmosphere and that "the balance of evidence suggests a discernible 
human influence on global climate."1

Concurrent with global changes in climate, the climate around parts of Antarctica has 
also recently changed. Antarctic temperatures have increased by around 0.6°C since 
the 1950s. Along the Antarctic Peninsula, where the oldest records can be found, the 
temperature increase has been around 2.5°C since the 1940s, the fastest temperature 
increased observed anywhere in the world other than in the Arctic.

1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change. 
Summary for Policy Makers. IPCC, Geneva, 1996.

Introduction                                                    3
The collapse of ice shelves around the Antarctic Peninsula, the retreat of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic island glaciers, some regional increases in snowfall, a possible reduction in the extent of Antarctic sea ice and changes in the ice cover of Antarctic lakes all indicate that increasing temperatures are having a significant impact on the ice cover of the frozen continent.

Temperature increases and other changes in the climate are also affecting the distribution and abundance of a wide range of Antarctic animals and plants. This suggests that widespread impacts are likely to be occurring throughout the Antarctic ecosystems as a whole and that these systems are both vulnerable and sensitive to any further changes in climate that are likely to occur in response to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations.

In the late 1960s, changes in the floating ice shelves that surround the Antarctic Peninsula were considered to be a "sign that dangerous warming is beginning in Antarctica".2 Recent events have borne this out with the retreat and collapse of the more northern Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves.3 The MV Arctic Sunrise visited the sites of these latest changes.

The Larsen Ice Shelf, the Antarctic Peninsula's largest ice shelf, is showing a dramatic response to temperature changes. The northern most section of the ice shelf—called Larsen-A—began to retreat in the 1950s and collapsed completely in January 1995. The ice shelves just north at Larsen Inlet and Prince Gustav Channel also disintegrated. BAS scientists have suggested that if temperatures continue to increase—as is likely—the more southern ice shelves would also be at risk.

The Greenpeace expedition found massive cracks forming in Larsen-B, consistent with an ice shelf collapse.

The expedition also me with scientists from the US, Europe and Latin America who have been studying and observing the impact of changes in climate on the Antarctic marine and terrestrial environments.

Sea birds generally and penguins in particular are considered good indicators of environmental change because as predators at the top of the Antarctic food chain they are sensitive to changes which occur at all levels of the system. Declines in Adelie penguin populations were reported to Greenpeace all along the Antarctic Peninsula, apparently in response to a loss of winter sea ice caused by warmer sea and air temperatures.4

A separate report on the signs of climate change documented by Greenpeace during the 1996/97 expedition is in production.

2  H Mercer, Antarctic Ice and Sangamon Sea level. International Assn of Scientific Hydrology, Commission of Snow and Ice, IAHS Publ No. 79, 1968: 217-225.]

3  DG Vaughan, CSM Doake. Recent atmospheric warming and retreat of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula. Nature 379; 1996:328-330.]

4  WR Fraser, et al. Increases in Antarctic penguin populations: reduced competition with whales or a loss of sea ice due to environmental warming? Polar Record 11; 1992:525-531.

4                                                                                           Introduction
Figure 1: Route of MV Arctic Sunrise, January - February, 1997.

                      South America                                  Antarctic Peninsula

                                                   Esperanza (Argentina)
                                                   Vicecomodoro
                                                   Marambio (Argentina)
          Ushuaia                             Larsen Ice Shelf
                                                   Palmer (USA)
                                                   Vanadskiy (Ukraine)

                                                   Rothera (UK)
                                                   General San Martin
                                                            (Argentina)
                                                   Wilkins Ice Shelf

200 km

                      King George Island

                                                   Comandante Ferraz (Brazil)

                                                   Henryk Arctowski (Poland)
                                                   Admiralty Bay

                                                   Teniente Rodolfo Marsh (Chile)
                                                   Bellingshausen (Russia)
                                                   Great Wall (China)
                                                   Maxwell Bay

10 km

Introduction
5
2    BASE AEREA VICECOMODORO 
MARAMBIO (ARGENTINA)

2.1     OVERVIEW 

Marambio was built in 1969 by the Argentine Airforce on Seymour Island in the 
northwestern Weddell Sea. The location was chosen because it enabled an airstrip to 
be constructed on a single flat-topped island. The base has traditionally been used as 
a center for air resupply operations to bases or temporary camps further afield.

The station is run by the Argentine air force, although a small complement of civilian 
personnel from the National Antarctic Directorate (DNA) is present during the 
summer months. It is crewed year-round by 22 personnel, rising to 150 in summer 
with the addition of flight crews, maintenance crew and DNA personnel both on 
station and in transit to field camps.

At the time of Greenpeace's visit, the OIC was Major Ricardo Valencia from the 
Argentine Airforce. His term of duty was from October 1996 to October 1997.

No recent inspections have been done at Marambio, with the exception of an internal 
one in the early 1990's.

2.1.1   Contact 

Greenpeace visited Marambio on January 31, 1997, and was welcomed by the OIC, 
who said that he had instructions to receive the Greenpeace team, and gave a full tour 
of the station to one member of the team. Other contacts were made in ensuing days: 
due to mechanical failures that affected both of Greenpeace's helicopters, the 
expedition organisers asked for advice from the station's maintenance team. The base 
commander agreed to this, and to his credit, kept Greenpeace's inspection of the base 
as an entirely separate matter. The Greenpeace helicopters were taken to Marambio's 
helipad and checked, but could not be repaired. Consequently, two helicopters were 
chartered from the Argentine Air Force to carry out the planned filming flights over 
the Larsen B Ice Shelf.

2.1.2   Previous visits 

Greenpeace had visited Marambio only once before, in November 1989. The visit is 
described in the 1989/90 Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Report. Greenpeace 
attempted to reach the island again in March 1991, but very close pack ice in Antarctic 
Sound prevented the visit.

2.2     PHYSICAL STRUCTURE 

Marambio is a large station composed of over 20 buildings of different sizes, mostly 
devoted to servicing a 1100-metre airstrip. Most of the facilities, including the older 
                                                                                  6 
                                  Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio
buildings, are in good condition. Two new living quarters have been built to replace 
those destroyed by a fire in the early 1990's. The station is quite spread out: some 
buildings are over a kilometre from the main part of the station. Several of the more 
isolated buildings have facilities to allow staff to stay inside should the buildings 
become snowbound.

The airstrip has been built directly on the ground surface. Due to the summer thaw 
the maintenance of the airstrip requires intensive seasonal maintenance. Aluminium 
pallets (approximately 2 x 0.5 x 0.03 m) were brought in by the hundreds in the early 
1980's to be used as a cover for the airstrip. However, the characteristics of the soil 
cause an unstable, changing surface that has prevented the use of these pallets, which 
are now used in many different ways: for the construction of new buildings; in the 
interior of existing buildings as shelves and partitions; and as an elevated pathway 
connecting most buildings. They have also been used as a barrier to prevent the 
spreading of a fuel spill (see below).

Water is taken from two artificial ponds that collect meltwater. Part of the water is 
filtered for direct human consumption; the rest is used for washing.

Considerable activity was taking place at the time of Greenpeace's visit. Complete 
external rewiring was under way, moving aerial lines (on 2-3 m high poles) into an 
elevated pathway. The plan is that in the near future all buildings (and electrical 
wiring) will be connected by this pathway. The base was being earthed, while a 30-50 
centimetre trench was being dug all around the station to bury a thick copper wire.

2.3    OPERATIONS

The OIC was familiar with the Protocol and, within the limits of his responsibility as 
base commander, had written down detailed instructions as to how to implement it. 
He said he makes a circuit of the station every couple of days to check the personnel 
and systems.

2.3.1   Air operations

Air operations are the main function of the station. Hercules C-130 aircraft land at 
Marambio most of the year. In the summer season, two Twin Otters and two Bell 212 
helicopters are kept at the station. The former are used to transport personnel and 
some supplies to other Argentine stations (Jubany on King George Island; San Martín 
in Marguerite Bay; and Matienzo in the Seal Nunataks), and also as back-ups for 
emergency use; the latter to transport scientist and other civilian support personnel 
to field camps.

Regionally, the station acts as a self-appointed centre for search and rescue operations.

Overflying a penguin rookery several kilometres to the south of the station, on the 
eastern coast of the island, was reportedly banned.

Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio                                                  7
2.3.2    Science

One of the primary functions of Marambio, in addition to servicing the airstrip, is the 
deployment of field parties. At the time of Greenpeace's visit there were several 
teams deployed in the field, mostly on the nearby James Ross and Snow Hill Islands, 
and elsewhere on Seymour Island. Most of the research is in earth sciences and some 
in biology. One of the geology programmes was being carried out in cooperation 
with Italian scientists, some of whom were at the station.

Ozone measurements are regularly carried out at the station, both with a Dobson 
photospectrometer and using balloons. The former is operated as part of an 
agreement with Italian scientists. A civilian technician in charge of the readings is 
part of the wintering over crew.

2.3.3    Resupply

Resupplies are carried out both by plane and by ship, using the Argentine icebreaker 
Almirante Irizar. Station personnel and some supplies come by plane, while bulkier 
supplies such as fuel come by ship. Other stations are resupplied through Marambio.

2.3.4    Waste Disposal

A non-commissioned officer is in charge of waste disposal, his responsibilities 
including re-separating the waste and instructing summer personnel. He mentioned 
that it took some time to get newcomers to follow the system, but that wintering over 
personnel were much more conscious of the system.

Waste is separated into four categories as at all Argentine stations. Organic waste, 
paper, wood and untreated timber are burnt in an incinerator; the rest is returned to 
Argentina. Separation takes place in the galley as well as inside (or outside) living 
quarters and some of the workshops.

All waste is stored in 200-litre drums, of which there are many at the station, both old 
and new. The upper lids are removed to store the waste, and once the drum is full the 
lids are put back on and the edges of the drum bent over in several places to keep the 
lid in place.

The incinerator, housed in its own building, is built of concrete and bricks and has 
two chambers, one where combustion takes place and the other where the smoke 
cools down and supposedly precipitates some of the particulates. Reportedly the 
temperature in the incinerator reaches around 400°C at best. Ash is collected in 
drums and returned to Argentina. Other waste to be returned to the continent is 
temporarily stored in this building.

There are several dumps on Seymour (Marambio) Island. The OIC emphasised that 
none of these are currently being used, and that all waste in the dumps was generated 
in the past (and hence is officially referred to as "historic rubbish"). There are four 
main dumps on the edge of the plateau, from where fuel drums and assorted waste 
(e.g. plastic bags containing human waste) used to be dumped down the hill into the 
gullies. Reportedly, there are over 6000 drums lying on the slopes, some empty, some 

8
Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio
full of waste fuel, and some with a mixture of water and waste fuel. Many of these 
are embedded into frozen slope deposits, a situation which, along with the steepness 
and instability of the slopes, makes their removal very laborious. A pile of several 
dozens of empty drums was located near one of the dumps. The OIC reported that 
these were drums retrieved by the winter crew.

In addition, there is a very large dump on the flatter part of the plateau, where 
materials are partly dumped and partly stored in a relatively orderly manner. Items 
included the remains of a crashed helicopter, a satellite dish, numerous coils of 
electric wire, scrap metal, etc. Generally, there appeared to be little evidence of 
plastics, glass fragments, food waste or other small items lying around. This 
suggested that there had been a clean-up and/or that these types of materials were 
not dumped there any longer. Cigarette butts could be found around the buildings, 
as well as the occasional piece of polystyrene.

A detailed survey of the dumps and contaminated sites was carried out by IAA 
scientists. A ten-year clean-up plan has been produced as a result.

An environmental officer is at the station throughout the summer.

Most waste is removed by aircraft, and waste drums are kept near the airstrip 
terminal. For 1997, the station commander had instructions to remove several 
hundred drums of waste.

2.3.5    Sewage

Sewage is treated in a three-stage bio-physical treatment plant, located in a separate 
building. Treatment includes rotation, aeration and sedimentation: the treated 
effluent is discharged over the edge of the plateau. Grey water (showers, kitchen, etc.) 
and human waste are all put through this process.

A similar but smaller plant serves the summer living quarters, and these effluents are 
also discharged over the edge of the plateau. At the time of the Greenpeace visit, the 
effluents were light-whitish, had a moderate smell, and the flow appeared to be 
relatively low. Sludge is transferred to drums from time to time, and reportedly 
returned to Argentina.

2.3.6    Energy

Fuel Consumption and Storage

The bulk of fuel is stored in over twenty 20,000-litre tanks, located to the west of the 
airstrip, at one end of the station. The tanks have top input and bottom draw-off 
valves (circular and not individually identified), and had recently been painted. They 
are located next to a helipad, so that they can be refilled from 2,000-litre tanks which 
are flown to the site from the ship. The helipad can accommodate up to three of these 
tanks at a time. The OIC commented that the main pipeline connecting the tanks to 
each other will have to be replaced in a few years.

In addition, there are several 5,000 to 10,000-litre day tanks serving the different 
buildings.

Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio                                  9
Additional fuel—kerosene, petrol and aviation fuel—is stored in 200-litre drums for transport to and use in the field.

Spill Prevention

Drips from valves are contained by using 200-litre drums cut lengthwise and hung with wire under each valve. Extra fuel containment for larger spills is provided only by tanks that become empty as the fuel is consumed throughout the year, into which fuel from a leaking tank can be pumped. Tanks not in use have their valves closed off. Reportedly, valves inspection take place daily, and the content of the fuel tanks is checked regularly by the person in charge of the power plant. A few of the drip trays had small drips.

A spill occurred in the winter of 1994, when one of the valves broke under snow. It remained undetected for several days. At the time, it appeared that it was common practise to leave several of the valves leading into the pipeline open so as to minimise trips to the fuel farm. The spilt fuel ran at least 100 metres down a gentle slope. Efforts to contain the spill included bulldozing ridges and using aluminium panels as barriers. Contaminated soil has been removed into fuel drums, which have been used as retaining walls. They have frozen into the soil and the OIC mentioned that it would be difficult to remove them. IAA scientists were monitoring the spill site but there were no current plans for further remedial action.

The OIC said that during repairs carried out at the generator building they had come across contaminated soil, which had pooled inside some hollow metal structures part of the building.

The 1994 spill highlighted some of the deficiencies in dealing with potential spills. This particularly concerning because of the large supplies of fuel kept at the station. Reportedly, current practice is to carry out regular, frequent checks of the fuel inventory and valves (this is done by the person in charge of the engine room). According to the OIC, in the event of another large spill, the first action to take would be to close all valves and "get the bulldozers out" so that snow and sediments could be used to dam the spill.

Energy Production

Three generators provide energy to the base. One or two of them are run at a time, depending on demand. A system installed in the previous season to scavenge waste heat for space heating had helped produce a 20% reduction in fuel consumption.

The exhausts are not filtered or monitored and the wall of the power station was covered with soot.

2.3.7    Future Plans

Future plans include an ongoing clean up of the station, and the centralisation of all buildings in one part of the plateau.

10
Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio
The airstrip is due for maintenance and, according to the OIC, this will necessarily involve earthworks. There are very few areas where the original vegetation remains and there are plans to preserve at least one of them. Two IAA biologists were trying to identify a suitable area. Earthworks related to the maintenance of the station will make this difficult.

The IAA has a well-established system for carrying out EIAs. However, it is not clear whether any EIA has been planned for future developments at the station.

2.4    TOURISM

No tourists had visited the station while the current OIC was there.

2.5    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

The surface of the plateau has mostly been destroyed by the station and the airstrip. Waste disposal practises have affected a very large area. Because of the mobility of the slopes, waste is likely to remain for a very long time. There appeared to be genuine efforts to return waste back to Argentina, including the backload of waste dispersed in several dumps over the plateau. The magnitude of the task is however very large.

The large quantities of fuel used at the station have also left their mark, and the regional effect of the airstrip is likely to be significant, particularly on the nearby islands.

Generally, it appears that some attention is being devoted to reducing environmental impact within the constraints imposed by running a very large operation. For example, paint is separated in small containers so that if they spill the amount will be less. The OIC commented that keeping up standards required constant pressure on the personnel.

2.6    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Greenpeace will remain grateful for the technical assistance received from Marambio station, and hopes the scientific collaboration was as fruitful for the Argentine science programme as it was for us.

Nevertheless, it must be said that the legacy of the way this station was operated in the past is having a major environmental impact on Seymour (Marambio) Island. It is clear that the Argentine Antarctic programme as a whole is aware of this, and is attempting to take steps to mitigate the impact. Greenpeace can only urge that clean-up be given a very high priority in the programme, as the existing state of affairs is unacceptable.

With respect to current practices, the aspect requiring most urgent attention would appear to be the fuel system. In particular, containment in case of fuel spills is

Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio                                  11
required. While the reported 20% reduction in fuel consumption is to be commended, 
further reductions should be sought, particularly through the use of renewable 
energy systems.

It also appeared that the degree to which current practices avoid environmental 
impact is very dependent on the enthusiasm of the station commander and his or her 
ability to motivate station personnel. Systems implemented one year may not be 
continued in following years. For long term minimisation of environmental impact, 
prevention and mitigation measures need to be institutionalised to a greater degree 
than at present.

 
12                                                                   Base Aerea Vicecomodoro Marambio
3   BASE AEREA TENIENTE MATIENZO  
(ARGENTINA)  

3.1   OVERVIEW  

Matienzo is located on the Larsen Nunatak (64° 58'S, 60° 04'W), one of a chain of  
nunataks and islands that extends due east of the Antarctic Peninsula and across the  
Larsen Ice Shelf. The ice shelf immediately to the north of Matienzo collapsed  
catastrophically in early 1995, leaving open water.  

The base was built in the 1950's by the Argentine Airforce as a precursor to the  
construction of Marambio Station, located approximately 100 nautical miles to the  
north. In recent years the station has been used as a summer camp only by scientific  
parties. However, the airforce is now using it throughout summer and there are plans  
to expand its use to the whole year.  

At the time of Greenpeace visit, the OIC was Mayor Nstor Nicosia from the Argentine  
Airforce. The base was staffed by 12 Airforce personnel.  

3.1.1   Contact  

Greenpeace visited Matienzo on February 3 and 4, 1997, to rendezvous with  
helicopters chartered by Greenpeace from Marambio to overfly the Larsen B Ice Shelf.  
The primary purpose of the visit was not, therefore, to inspect the station. The OIC,  
however, insisted on taking Greenpeace personnel for a tour of the station. Staff from  
the station also visited the Arctic Sunrise.  

The Arctic Sunrise was the first ship to anchor off Matienzo station, as, until 1995, the  
nunatak had been surrounded by an ice shelf extending a further ten nautical miles to  
the east.  

This was Greenpeace's first visit to the station.  

3.2   PHYSICAL STRUCTURE  

Matienzo comprises five relatively large buildings and several smaller ones. It has  
been opened in the past couple of years after more than a decade of not being used  
other than by science field parties. The base includes three living quarters (two of  
which are only used by civilian personnel), a generator room, a workshop and garage,  
and several smaller buildings.  

The buildings are old but in relatively good condition and have recently been painted.  

Around ten snow machines and four tractors were kept at the station for use by  
scientists on the ice shelf. All vehicles appeared to be well kept, including the very  
old tractors.  

Base Aerea Teniente Matienzo                                            13
The station is located on the ridge of a steep island (formerly a nunatak) composed of 
volcanic debris. Since the sea has reached the island only in the past two seasons, 
there are severe erosion problems on the sea-facing slopes that will eventually affect 
the buildings. Some basic erosion control measures (a retaining wall formed by 
flattened drums supported by stakes planted in the debris) were placed down-slope 
of some buildings to prevent further erosion. The base personnel were, however, 
relatively sceptical that their efforts would yield any result. Some waste that, in past 
years, had been stored on the edge of the slope had reportedly slipped away. Station 
personnel reported that in places a couple of passages up and down the slope had 
caused visible, severe erosion, and that down-slope from the buildings they were 
having to refrain from using the slopes in order to minimise erosion.

Base personnel had abundant anecdotic information about the sequels of the collapse 
of the ice shelf. During this summer stay they had seen a bay, seven to eight 
kilometres long and one to two kilometres deep, develop on the ice edge to the west 
from the station.

3.3     OPERATIONS

Personnel stay four months at the station, from the end of October to early March. 
The main function of the military crew is to maintain the buildings.

3.3.1   Science

Scientific research usually takes place towards the end of the winter and beginning of 
spring, while the ice shelf surface is still cold and safe to work on. Small teams of 
glaciologists and geologists spend up to two months at Matienzo. Less scientific 
activity takes place in summer.

3.3.2   Resupply

The station is resupplied by air from Marambio Station or from the icebreaker 
Almirante Irizar. Twin Otters land on the glacier, approximately 1.5 kilometres from 
the station, and helicopters use two sites designated as a helipad.

Prior to the collapse of the ice shelf, the ice breaker was able to get to some 20 to 30 
miles off the ice shelf edge. Resupply systems may change now that the area can be 
reached by ship.

3.3.3   Waste Disposal

Waste is separated into four categories. Some of the domestic waste is incinerated in 
home made braziers.

Near Matienzo Station there is a very large dump. The dump is located on the edge 
of the nunatak, towards the remaining part of the ice shelf (south) and extends as a 
50-metre wide strip of waste, 200-300 metres long. The waste found there, labelled 
"historic rubbish", includes all sort of items: clothing, food waste, glass, scrap metal, 
bottles, etc., which are partly buried and partly frozen in. This will make its clean-up 
a very laborious process.

14
Base Aerea Teniente Matienzo
The base personnel appeared to have been working very hard to collect the waste in drums, compact them, and transport them some 200 metres to a temporary helipad, from where the waste is sent to Marambio or the ship. Reportedly, 50 working days through the season were devoted to this task, in which the entire crew was involved. The clean up presents some hazards to the base personnel, some of whom had suffered cuts.

A small collection of items of historic interest found in the dump was on display at the station.

After some lobbying, a compactor had been donated by one of the suppliers to the Airforce, specifically to be used at Matienzo. All drums are compacted: empty drums can be compacted to 1/3 of the original volume, while full drums are compacted to about 2/3 or more of the original volume. A local policy is that no aircraft can leave without taking some waste drums on board.

In addition, the OIC reported efforts had been made to clear all buildings of defunct or unusable equipment or supplies.

Except for some cigarette butts, there appeared to be little waste that had been recently dumped on the ground. In some places, such as in parts of the slopes, down-slope from waste storage sites, and on the stream bed of one of the meltwater streams running over the ice shelf (downstream from the dump), there were some pieces of rubbish visible, including fuel drums (which were presumably empty).

3.3.4    Sewage

Sewage is collected in 200-litre drums and then poured untreated into the sea.

3.3.5    Energy

Energy is provided though two 110-kilowatt generators which are used for eight hours each day. Heating inside the station was provided by kerosene stoves, and heavy clothing. All fuel used at the base is transported to the site in drums. Approximately 40 drums are used during the summer.

3.3.6    Future Plans

The opening of the station by military personnel foreshadows year-round operation of the base. The instability of the site will however determine the long term feasibility of this plan, and indeed of keeping the station.

3.4    TOURISM

No tourist ships (or other ships) had previously visited the station.

3.5    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

The environmental impact of current operations appears to be kept relatively low and mostly limited to the use of the ice airstrip and the running of the station.

Base Aerea Teniente Matienzo                                              15
Past operations were clearly conducted on a much larger scale and had left a major 
impact. The combination of a large dump and an unstable site suggests that the 
existing environmental impact may increase, particularly in the near-pristine marine 
environment.

3.6    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Matienzo is a small, well-run station. It was clear that the personnel took personal 
interest in the running of the station. Greenpeace commends the efforts made to clean 
up the dump.

However, given that a significant scientific activity has been carried out successfully 
at this station for the past decade by the DNA, using small, well kept buildings, it 
would appear that a year-round presence of military personnel is not necessary.

In addition, the feasibility of opening the station year-round should be investigated in 
view of the instability of the site. Indeed, it may well be that some of the buildings 
will need to be pulled out before they collapse into the sea, and contingency plans 
should be formulated immediately so that this can be done in a planned, orderly, and 
minimally impacting way.

 
                                  16
                                  Base Aerea Teniente Matienzo
4       BASE ANTARTICA SAN MARTIN
(ARGENTINA)

4.1     OVERVIEW

San Martín (68° 07'S, 67° 06'W) is located in Marguerite Bay in one of the small islands that form the Debenham Islands. San Martín was built in 1951 as part of an ambitious plan of expansion of Argentine activities in Antarctica in the early 1950s, which included the creation of the Argentine Antarctic Institute, the purchase of an ice breaker, and an overland expedition to the South Pole.

The base was crewed by 17 men, all members of the Argentine army, except the two civilian engineers who were in charge of the science programme. The OIC was Captain Carlos Flesia; he and the SIC were officers, the rest non-commissioned officers. Their term of duty was for one year starting in February 1996. The base personnel was due to leave to return to Argentina on their anniversary at the station, the day after Greenpeace's visit to the station. However, they expected a delay of up to two weeks, as the ice-breaker was ice-bound in the Weddell Sea.

4.1.1   Contact

Greenpeace visited San Martín on February 13, 1997. Greenpeace was welcomed at the station. The visit included a tour of the station, interviews of the personnel in charge of the science programme by some of the journalists on board, and lunch. It was the first time the station had received visitors that year.

Greenpeace had visited San Martín once before, in November 1989.

4.2     PHYSICAL STRUCTURE

San Martín has seven buildings, most of which appear to be the originals, and are in good condition.

San Martín traditionally had sledge dogs, which were removed in 1991. The dog house is now used to store food supplies and climbing gear.

4.3     OPERATIONS

4.3.1   Science

Two civilian engineers associated with one of Argentina's main universities (University of Córdoba) were in charge of the science programme. According to a document given to Greenpeace, the main research has been carried out uninterruptedly since 1986. Besides the collection of meteorological records, which are transmitted three-hourly to Marambio, science programmes included upper

Base Antartica San Martin                                                    17
atmospheric physics and glaciology. The former focuses on the penetration of solar 
energy in the atmosphere and is part of the Solar Terrestrial Energy Programme 
(STEP). The latter is in cooperation with the Institute of Physical Geography of the 
Albert Ludwig University of Freiburg, Germany, and has been carried out since 1993. 
In addition, a pilot study on ozone measurement was being conducted in cooperation 
with the Center for Optical Research in La Plata, Argentina.

4.3.2    Resupply

The base is resupplied once a year, in February by the Argentine ice breaker, at which 
time crews are exchanged. The personnel was to be transported by ship to Marambio 
and from there flown back to Argentina.

4.3.3    Waste Disposal

Waste is separated into four categories, of which two are returned to Argentina and 
the rest incinerated. Separation takes place inside the buildings and workshop.

There were no dumps to be seen at San Martín, and it is not clear what was formerly 
done with the station's waste. Greenpeace speculates that it used to be ice-staged.

Chicken bones are collected separately in 10-litre tins and incinerated in a brazier. 
Paper and wood are also incinerated. Ashes are, reportedly, "treated as hazardous 
waste" and returned to Argentina.

4.3.4    Sewage

Food waste (except chicken bones) is macerated along with human waste and piped 
into the bay.

4.3.5    Energy

The base has four engines of 34 horsepower, of which two run at one time. The 
station uses 70,000 litres of diesel, 5,000 litres of petrol and 3,000 kilos of propane a 
year. Fuel is stored in 10,000-litre metal tanks and in rubber bladders, all sitting on 
concrete platforms. The bladders are gradually being replaced by metal tanks. The 
rubber bladders become covered by snow in winter time, and their location must be 
flagged to prevent accidents such as rupture by heavy machines. All connecting 
hoses used to resupply fuel are left in situ so that they do need to be vented.

Potential rupture of rubber bladders is a major concern, particularly as there are no 
real means to contain a potential spill except by pumping it into empty petrol drums, 
some empty rubber bladders (some of which are being returned to Argentina) and the 
extra volume of metal tanks that may become available throughout the year.

While there are some ideas as to how to deal with potential ruptures of rubber 
bladders, the focus appears to be prevention rather than on a detailed contingency 
plan.

18
Base Antartica San Martin
4.3.6     Transport and field activities

The base had one 4x4 articulated truck, one winch for lifting cargo, and seven snow mobiles. Station personnel frequently go into the field. There is some cooperation with UK's Rothera in the maintenance of emergency and historic huts.

4.3.7     Other activities

Throughout the winter, the station maintained regular, weekly radio-telephone links with different schools and radio stations in Argentina. Schools are encouraged to prepare a questionnaire before the radio link. The OIC reported that, in addition to general interest in the Antarctic conditions, wildlife, the base's activities, etc., they bring up the issues of environmental protection, science and the role of Antarctica in global change, and encourage students to become actively involved in the protection of the planet.

In the 1996 winter, a four-member field party travelled over the sea ice to visit UK's Rothera Station. They become stranded at Rothera when the sea-ice broke out. The group become involved in maintenance tasks at the British Station until they were flown back to San Martín five weeks later.

4.3.8     Future Plans

The replacement of some of the rubber bladders by metal tanks is one of the main projects, as well as the construction of a satellite antennae for telephone communications.

4.4     TOURISM

Tourist visits are accepted provided there has been prior coordination with the station. No tourist ships had visited the station in the year prior to Greenpeace's visit.

4.5     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

A film of fuel was visible at the cove where landings take place. The day before, while the Arctic Sunrise was drifting off the Uspallata Glacier at approximately two nautical miles west of the station, Greenpeace detected what seemed to be a film of fuel in an area bounded by a concentration of brash ice. This was explained by station personnel as a consequence of the boat operations that had taken place during the past few days. However, Greenpeace suspected some chronic source of pollution from the generator room, which was situated on the foreshore some 30 metres from the high water mark of the polluted bay.

4.6     COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

San Martín is a relatively small, well run station. At the time of the Greenpeace visit, days before a handover, the station was spotless. All personnel were enthusiastic

Base Antartica San Martin                                                    19
about their stay in Antarctica and appeared to have taken personal interest in running 
the station.

Incineration should cease and all waste should be returned to Argentina.

Fuel management is the main cause of concern. Rubber bladders should be replaced 
as a matter of priority by safer fuel containers with adequate spill containment. 
Alternative energy systems may minimise the cost of transporting fuel, and minimise 
the risk of potential spills. The apparent chronic problem of fuel release at the cove 
should be investigated.

The science programme appears to be well-established. Greenpeace believes that 
there may be opportunities to increase the ratio of scientists to logistic/military 
personnel without increasing personnel numbers.

 
20                                                                Base Antartica San Martin
5   ESTAÇÃO ANTARTICA 
COMANDANTE FERRAZ STATION 
(BRAZIL)

5.1   OVERVIEW 

Comandante Ferraz (62° 05'S, 58° 23'W) is situated in Keller Peninsula in Admiralty 
Bay, King George Island. The station facilities are located near the sea, between the 
beach and two freshwater lakes.

Brazil opened the station in 1984, and it has been continuously occupied since then.

The base commander at the time of Greenpeace's visit was a Brazilian navy captain, 
Francisco de Paolo Acosta, whose term of duty ran from March 1996 until the end of 
the 1996/97 season.

While the base is run by the military, they do not wear uniform and the ambience at 
the station is distinctly civilian and relaxed.

A Greenpeace team visited Ferraz on January 26, 1997, for six hours. The film crews 
and journalists travelling with Greenpeace also landed to carry out interviews and 
filming at the station and in a nearby cove. Later that day, several groups of Ferraz 
personnel visited the Greenpeace ship.

Greenpeace previously visited Ferraz in April 1988, November 1989, January 1993 
and January 1995. Detailed descriptions of Ferraz are included in the 1992/93 and 
1994/95 expedition reports.

5.2   PHYSICAL STRUCTURE 

As reported after previous Greenpeace visits to Ferraz, the station has reached its 
functional size and further expansion is not expected. This was once again confirmed 
by the Head of the Brazilian Antarctic Programme.

Brazil had taken the initiative of removing and cleaning up the abandoned British 
facilities, Base G and an old whaling station, that had been located at either side of the 
Ferraz facilities. This was reportedly done because of the perceived risk of debris 
flying off from the British facilities into the Brazilian station. The buildings and their 
contents had been removed entirely but a thorough clean up of the ground around 
them was still to be completed: bits and pieces of small litter were lying around. It 
appeared that no advice or help had been provided by British authorities.

Estação Antartica Comandante Ferraz Station                                                    21
5.3    OPERATIONS

5.3.1  Science

Two groups of scientists use the station consecutively during the summer, staying for 
six weeks each. At the time of Greenpeace's visit the first team, comprising 22 
scientists, was at the station, in addition to 12 support staff. The head of the Brazilian 
Antarctic programme was also visiting the station.

5.3.2  Resupply

An ice breaker bought two years ago, Ary Rongel, is now resupplying the Brazilian 
station. The ship visits the station two to three times a year during the summer.

5.3.3  Changes in Waste Disposal

No changes in the waste disposal system were reported in relation to past visits. 
Garbage is separated into five categories: plastics, metal, glass, organics, and paper, 
wood and cardboard. The former three are returned to Brazil and the rest incinerated 
in a two-stage incinerator. The ashes and all waste to be removed are packed in 
plastic boxes and returned to Brazil.

5.3.4  Sewage

No changes were reported in relation to past visits. The system, which has three 
settling tanks and uses chemical additives to accelerate breakdown, was reported to 
work well.

5.3.5  Energy and fuel

No changes to the energy systems were reported in relation to past visits. The 
installation of new double walled tanks has been completed, and one extra tank is 
kept available for emergency containment.

5.3.6  Future Plans

The main impending change was an external one, and relates to the increase of 
Peruvian activities across the bay, eventually leading to a year-round presence (see 
chapter 7).

5.4    TOURISM

Ferraz continues to be one of the preferred destinations for tourist ships in the area. 
However, the fact that the abandoned British facilities have been removed may in 
future reduce interest in visiting the station.

5.5    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

While reportedly the station itself is not expanding, earth works seemed to be taking 
place at the beach in front of the station, where the disturbances in the gravel were 
obvious.

22
Estação Antartica Comandante Ferraz Station
The door of the generators room was kept open (as reported in past reports, this is to keep the temperature inside the engine room low enough). The noise levels appeared to be high and were clearly perceptible right along the front of the station including the labs.

Greenpeace has made similar observations after other recent visits, and it is apparent that these are standard practises rather than circumstantial events.

5.6    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

It is commendable that the Ferraz is not expanding, and is run as a tight operation following pre-established, long term plans and in accordance with the management plan for Admiralty Bay.

It is also commendable that Brazil has taken the initiative of cleaning up abandoned facilities, even though this should have been done by those responsible for the buildings.

  • Incineration of waste should be phased out and all waste should be removed from the Antarctic instead. The fact that the programme is self sufficient, having an icebreaker, and has relatively low numbers of personnel, could facilitate such a change.

  • The presence of a Peruvian station in Admiralty Bay, and their contribution to cumulative impact in the area, should be taken into consideration in terms of the incineration of waste as well as for other activities in the area.

  • Fuel consumption and heat generation should be improved to make the base more energy-efficient. For instance, waste heat from the engine room could be recycled inside the station rather than dispersed outside. Renewable energy systems should be developed.

Esta¸c˜ao Ant´artica Comandante Ferraz Station                                  23
6     BASE ANTARTICA PRESIDENTE 
      EDUARDO FREI MONTALVA 
      (CHILE)

6.1   OVERVIEW 

Presidente Frei Station (62° 11.8'S, 58° 55.5'W) is located on Fildes Peninsula in 
Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. It was opened by Chile in 
1969, adjacent to Russia's Bellingshausen Station. In 1980, Teniente Marsh was 
established as part of the complex and a 1300-metre airstrip was constructed to serve 
the station. Villa Las Estrellas, a group of accommodation buildings that includes 
quarters for married staff and their families, was added in 1984. A scientific annex, 
Profesor Pedro Escudero Guzmán, was inaugurated in 1995.

At the time of Greenpeace's visit the OIC was Commander Roberto Sarabia of the 
Chilean air force. There were over 70 personnel at the station, mostly military or 
families of military personnel. In addition, there were three Chilean scientists based 
at the station, one civilian INACH representative, and several German scientists in 
transit to O'Higgins station.

Two navy ships—the Lautaro and the Garbarino—were at anchor off Frei station.

6.1.1   Contact 

Frei station was contacted by radio on January 23, 1997. That evening, a Greenpeace 
representative met the OIC to discuss arrangements for a visit the following day and 
was given a short tour of the station by car. The next morning a group of Greenpeace 
crew and independent journalists and film crews visited the station. As in other 
visits, Chilean authorities did not approve of Greenpeace "inspection" of the station 
on the grounds that only ATPs can carry out inspections, and instructed the base 
commander not to allow the organisation's representatives at the station.

Eventually, some Greenpeace representatives and all of the journalists from the ship 
were given a tour of the station.

Military presence and protocol is quite conspicuous at Frei. Ships approaching or 
departing Maxwell Bay are routinely contacted on the radio and asked a set of 
questions by the local "port captaincy". All resupply ships from the Chilean navy 
carry at least one 8mm gun; however, crew on the Garbarino reported to Greenpeace 
that they were not carrying ammunition on board.

Greenpeace had previously visited Frei in April 1988, October 1989, March 1991, 
January 1993 and January 1995. The station and its operations are described in detail 
in the 1990/91, 1992/93 and 1994/95 Expedition Reports.

 
24 
      Base Antartica Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva
6.2     PHYSICAL STRUCTURE

Several changes have occurred since Greenpeace's previous visit.

A set of old fuel tanks next to the beach of Maxwell Bay had been disconnected and were in the process of being removed. New replacement tanks had been built further inland, uphill from the station.

New buildings were being added to the science annex: construction workers were working round the clock to complete them before the end of the summer season.

The incinerator building had been relocated within the station, away from the OIC's headquarters and the science annex.

6.3     OPERATIONS

6.3.1   Science

The station is mainly used as a transfer point for Chilean and German scientists going to the field (e.g. to O'Higgins).

Accommodation for scientists is being expanded with two more small buildings being built. The construction and running of this part of the station is the responsibility of INACH. A civilian INACH represente remains at the station throughout the summer season, coordinating the movement of scientists and related tasks. This position is new since the previous Greenpeace visit two years ago and seems now to be a permanent feature, coincident with a higher profile for science activities at Frei.

Three Chilean scientists were on station. Two of them, who run an automated cosmic radiation laboratory, visited the Arctic Sunrise and talked to the journalists on board.

Some Chilean and German scientists were on board the Lautaro, which was at anchor in Maxwell Bay and was seen taking sediment samples.

6.3.2   Resupply

Resupplies are carried out both by planes and by some of the navy ships that patrol the area in summer. Reportedly there are two or three flights a month between Punta Arenas and Frei; however, personnel from nearby stations commented that flights were much more frequent, almost daily, although this included flights of non-Chilean aircraft.

The Chilean navy ship Garbarino or other navy ships also participate in the resupply. The navy ship Lautaro supports activities of INACH personnel as well as those of foreign scientists cooperating with the Chilean programme (mostly trips to O'Higgins or to other field camps).

Base Antartica Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva                        25
6.3.3   Waste Disposal

No changes were reported to the waste management system at the station: waste is 
either incinerated or returned to Chile. During Greenpeace's previous visit, the 
station appeared to be burning plastics and other substances prohibited by the 
Protocol, but this was not witnessed during this visit.

The waste to be shipped back to Chile is stored in shipping containers, which are 
loaded on a barge and transported to the ships. The procedure of shipping waste is 
quite laborious, because the containers are very heavy and the barges have to be 
towed with inflatables. The OIC commented that they have been trying 
(unsuccessfully so far) to obtain permission from the Russians to repair a large, 
motorised Russian barge, which is in reasonably good condition but is stranded on 
the beach.

A large deposit of waste located by the beach was due to be returned to Chile. This is 
an unsightly deposit that has been there every time Greenpeace has visited (although 
the composition of waste varies from year to year). Once this is cleared, waste is 
supposedly going to be stored in more containers that have been ordered from Chile.

6.3.4   Sewage

A physical, chemical and biological sewage treatment system is now used in all 
facilities. Greenpeace noticed a three-chambered sewage treatment plant (similar to 
those described in past reports) awaiting return to Chile: apparently it had stopped 
working and had had to be replaced.

6.3.5   Energy production and fuel disposal

The fuel storage system was due to be changed. An old and rusty set of tanks by the 
shore were in the process of being removed, and a fuel farm was being built in 
between the station and the airstrip. In addition, six more 10,000-litre tanks had been 
installed at the airstrip itself. A large deposit of heavy duty 200-litre plastic drums 
containing aviation fuel was also being removed, as all fuel will now be stored in the 
new tanks.

The new tanks do not have bunding or any other system to contain fuel in the event 
of a rupture of the tank.

6.3.6   Future Plans

The OIC commented that the airforce was in the process of drawing up long term 
plans for the station—essentially to decide whether it should remain as it was, or 
expand. He personally did not believe it was necessary to expand it any more, 
particularly to support families, as it was already very expensive to maintain.

As did his predecessor, who was interviewed by Greenpeace two years before, the 
OIC believed that sooner or later "Antarctica would be divided". This, he said, would 
not happen "in our lifetimes".

26
Base Antartica Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva
6.4     TOURISM

Tourist ships occasionally call at the station and small parties are toured around the station. Commercial planes land there, but according to the OIC the airstrip is not open to all, and to land, potential users have to request permission in Chile. A ultra-light plane was reported to have landed there recently, coming from Ushuaia.

6.5     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

Frei Station was built next to Russia's Bellingshausen in an area which had been designated as a Specially Protected Area (SPA). Following the construction of these bases the SPA designation was abandoned.

The environmental impact on the ice free area and in Maxwell Bay is large and has been described in past reports. Essentially nothing has changed, and the station (along with those nearby) continues to have a heavy impact on the environment.

      Visiting biologists from a nearby station commented on the poor diversity of benthos in Maxwell Bay, including the total absence of limpets, which are ubiquitous in other bays in the South Shetlands. Detectable levels of heavy metal contamination have been measured in the benthos offshore Ardley Island.

      The large fuel spill located next to the airstrip, which extends several hundred metres down-slope into Elephant Valley and possibly to the sea, continues to seep, confirming that it is a chronic problem rather than a single critical event. Greenpeace personnel and the OIC visited the site. The OIC admitted that there was a problem. However, he thought it was almost impossible to fix and that prevention of similar events was the priority.

      The OIC had completed a course on GIS and was interested in applying this technology to the protection of the environment.

      Overflying Ardley Island, the nearby SSSI/ASPA, is not allowed. However, scientists from a nearby station commented that helicopters from other programmes landed from time to time.

6.6     COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Although there are few scientists based on-station, there seems to be an increase in science activity centred at Frei. In particular, the cooperation of the Chilean and German programmes appears to be quite intensive and well organised. Greenpeace commends this improvement and suggests that reduction in logistic and support personnel (particularly the families) could make it possible for more scientists to use the station.

The Protocol appears to be in the process of being implemented, although the standards are not as high as at many other stations. It was not clear what sort of EIA (and at what level), if any, had preceded the physical changes that took place at the station. Greenpeace encourages Chilean authorities to table EIAs at the ATCM.

Base Antartica Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva
27
7       ESTACION ANTARTICA MACHU PICCHU (PERU)

7.1     OVERVIEW

Machu Picchu (62° 06'S, 58° 29'W) is located on Mackellar Peninsula in Admiralty Bay, 
King George Island. Its construction began in 1989 (following a preliminary 
expedition to assess the site). Only one other visit/expedition took place between 
then and the 1993/94 season, and it appears that there has been activity during most 
summers ever since. Although livable, the base has not yet been finished.

At the time of Greenpeace's visit there were 42 members at the base, all military 
personnel from the Peruvian air force and army, except four scientists and an 
independent journalist. Their term of duty was from mid-November to early 
February. The OIC was Colonel Luis Córdobá Zavala from the Peruvian air force. An 
army colonel was in charge of the construction team. The command of the station 
alternates each year among the air force, army and navy.

7.1.1   Contact

Greenpeace visited Machu Picchu on January 25, 1997. Several Greenpeace personnel 
and journalists visited the station for approximately three hours. The visit included a 
meeting with the base commander along with most of personnel present at the base, 
and a tour of the station.

7.1.2   Previous visits

Greenpeace previously visited Machu Picchu in November 1989, January 1993 and 
January 1995. This was the first visit in which the base was manned: on all previous 
occasions the base had been unoccupied, and, in the earlier visits, appeared to have 
been nearly abandoned.

7.2     PHYSICAL STRUCTURE

The base is still in the process of being completed although the rate of construction 
has accelerated and at least the main living quarters are nearly completed.

Machu Picchu consists of three buildings of polystyrene-insulated metal panels on 
steel frames. The SIC remarked that the use of concrete had been minimised so that 
the structures could be dismantled easily if required. However, concrete has been 
poured to support the steel frames, to form a pillar to pull cargo up the beach, and to 
make a water tank (see below).

One of the buildings, the main living quarters, is about twice the size of the other two, 
and is supposed to be further extended. At the time of Greenpeace's visit, base 
personnel were working round the clock to complete the building before their

28
Estacion Antartica Machu Picchu (Peru)
departure a few days later, so that the building would be weather-proof for the 
winter.

In the meantime, two large, heavy duty tents were being used as hangar and 
accommodation.

Water is collected from a stone pit dug into the stream bed. There is also a 20,000 or 
30,000-litre concrete water tank.

7.3    OPERATIONS

The main activities at the station are building and the running of a large radar 
antennae.

7.3.1   Science

Four scientists were at the station at the time of Greenpeace's visit. This included two 
people running the equipment of the radar antennae, a hydrologist and a geologist. 
The radar is one of the main projects; its structure occupies a large area behind the 
station.

The radio antennae is part of a research programme with a US university.

7.3.2   Resupply

Resupply is carried out only once a year, with the deployment and withdrawal of the 
summer crew. In the 1996/97 summer, resupply was carried out in a Peruvian air 
force cargo plane that took the base personnel to Chile's Frei. From there to the 
Peruvian station, personnel and supplies were flown in a Peruvian helicopter that 
was also carried on the plane. The withdrawal is carried out in the same way.

7.3.3   Waste Disposal

Waste is stored in 200-litre drums. Nine of these drums were stored near the base 
awaiting being returned to Peru, and these were reported to be the waste collected 
through the summer season (to Greenpeace it appeared to be a rather small amount of 
waste, compared to other stations). The drums are closed with the original lids, 
which are then secured with four heavy duty plastic strips riveted to both the lid and 
the body of the drum to prevent the contents coming out. A compactor had been 
transported to the station but had not been installed.

Reports from personnel from a nearby station indicate that the waste had eventually 
been left behind, outside the main building, when the team pulled out at the end of 
summer.

There are no dumps at Machu Picchu and the grounds were generally tidy.

Estacion Antartica Machu Picchu (Peru)                                  29
Incineration

It was not clear whether some form of open burning was taking place or not. There are plans to build an incinerator in the future.

7.3.4    Sewage

Currently human waste is treated in portable chemical toilets. The contents are thrown into the sea. Grey water is collected in a temporary pipeline and directed to the sea.

7.3.5    Energy

Currently energy is provided with portable generators while the generator building is being completed.

Fuel is stored in heavy duty plastic 200-litre drums. This are stored in a vertical or horizontal position. Consumption for the summer was around 30 drums. No particular measures to prevent large spills are taken. There was one contaminated patch inside the tent used as a hangar.

There are also plans to build an alternative energy system, and it appears that there is a major interest in completing this project swiftly. An engineer was on site assessing the best sites, as Machu Picchu is affected by katabatic winds which are on average much stronger than at any other station on King George Island (indeed, when Greenpeace was there the wind was over 40 knots and increasing). He mentioned that there was political will and funds to build state-of-the-art generators, and that it was not their intention to develop a system themselves. Advice was to be sought from other programmes that have already installed such systems.

7.3.6    Future Plans

The station is still to be completed, and the plans are to have a first crew wintering over by the year 2000.

7.4    TOURISM

While tourists go frequently to Admiralty Bay, there had been no visits at Machu Picchu while the current crew was there.

7.5    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

Aside from Ezcurra Inlet, Mackellar Peninsula is one of the few ice free areas in Admiralty Bay (the last one is occupied by an Ecuadorian hut). While the impact of the station appears to have been relatively minor (aside from the large visual impact of the radar antennae), the presence of the Peruvian station will necessarily cause a severe impact on the peninsula as different structures encroach over the ice free area energy, and waste and sewage systems start to be used more frequently and on a larger scale. This will in turn increase the cumulative impact over the whole of Admiralty Bay.

30
Estacion Antartica Machu Picchu (Peru)
Except some small plots for monitoring the impact on vegetation, no protected areas 
have been set aside. Reportedly only two of the scientists ever leave the base 
surroundings.

The procedures to carry out environmental impact assessment were not at all clear. 
The hydrologist was said to be in charge of monitoring some aspects of 
environmental impact (some vegetated areas had been left aside as control plots). He 
reported that an EIA had been made prior to the construction of Machu Picchu and 
that it had been filed with the Antarctic Treaty.

7.6    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The presence of yet another year round station in King George Island can only be 
regretted. While Peru has as much right to have Antarctic activities as any other 
nation, it could have followed more imaginative models, such as the Dutch model of 
cooperation with other nations, and thereby operate at a lower cost and with less 
military involvement. Indeed, the construction rush in King George Island started ten 
to 15 years ago: having a station yet to be completed in the late 90s appears to be out 
of step with time.

The function of the base, particularly if it is to run year round, should be clearly 
defined from its inception. Machu Picchu planners and managers have the 
opportunity to learn from the past and often bad experiences of other stations in the 
area. This particularly includes the areas of waste management, fuel storage and 
management and alternative energy systems, and in the context of Admiralty Bay, the 
management plan for the area as drawn by Brazil and Poland. To their credit, the 
station managers seemed interested in receiving advice from more experienced 
Antarctic operators.

If it is true that the waste from the summer season was left behind, then the 
programme's procedures need revising so that a higher priority is placed on 
minimising impacts on the Antarctic environment.

Estacion Antartica Machu Picchu (Peru)                                                    31
8    ARCTOWSKI STATION (POLAND)

8.1  OVERVIEW

Arctowski is situated in Admiralty Bay, King George Island (62° 09'S, 58° 28'W). 
Immediately to the south of the station is SSSI No.8 (Western shore of Admiralty Bay).

There had been 13 people at the station over the previous winter, with a summer complement of twenty.

8.1.1  Contact

The Arctic Sunrise visited the station on 25 January 1997. The morning visit took around four hours, and some Greenpeace personnel accompanied on-board journalists back to the station that evening to interview Sue Trivelpiece, a US researcher from the nearby field camp inside SSSI No. 8.

Greenpeace's previous visit to Arctowski took place in January 1995.

8.2  PHYSICAL STRUCTURE

The station had changed very little from previous visits, the most notable alterations being the addition of a high-temperature incinerator and the removal of the old burner.

A major rebuild is planned in the near future, with new buildings due to be brought in by ship next season. Some of the old buildings will be removed, although attempts are to be made to renovate those that can be still used. The station leader did not know whether an environmental assessment had been done for the rebuilding programme.

8.3  OPERATIONS

One of Arctowski's major points of interest in the past has been its greenhouse, which operated until the early 1990's. After Greenpeace's last visit, we reported that there were plans to repair it and use it once again. However, this time base personnel reported that while a couple of pot-plants were thriving in the sun-warmed, glass-sided room, it takes too much energy to keep the greenhouse warm enough to grow plants in winter. The building to which the greenhouse is attached is currently being used by Czechoslovakian scientists who are working with the Polish programme.

8.3.1  Waste Disposal

Plastic and metal is separated and sent out with resupply (tourist) ships. Wood, paper and aluminium is burned in the incinerator.

32
Arctowski Station
The new, diesel-fed incinerator is fired up around four to five times per week, with a box of garbage being burnt each time. Paper, wood and aluminium is burned in the incinerator. The operator said that it reaches a temperature of 1000° C.

The site of the old burner which had been manufactured from old oil drums had been reasonably thoroughly cleaned up, although the ground was still littered with tiny pieces of metal, glass, ash and rust. A strong magnet could be used to pick up more of this litter.

8.3.2    Energy

Fuel is stored in four horizontal cylindrical fuel tanks, which sit on a concrete pad perforated by drainage holes. There were no visible signs of leakage. Apparently the station uses less than 100 tonnes of fuel per year, which is quite low by Antarctic standards.

The station’s energy needs are supplied entirely by diesel. The station commander said that they had tried wind generation eight years ago, but that the propeller had broken and it was felt that the winds were too sporadic and unsuitable for power generation.

8.3.3    Future Plans

A major rebuild of the station is planned in the near future, when most of the buildings will be replaced.

8.4    TOURISM

Arctowski is currently on of the stations most frequently visited by tourist ships.

8.5    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The rebuilding of the station offers an ideal time to move to best available technology in many aspects of the station. For example, with recent advances in wind power technology, the problems of eight years ago are unlikely now to be insurmountable, and the installation of such as system could dramatically reduce the amount of diesel that must be transported to and stored in the Antarctic. Similarly, an efficient and clean sewage system could be installed.

Arctowski Station                                                                  33
9    BELLINGSHAUSEN STATION
     (RUSSIA)

9.1   OVERVIEW

Russia's Bellingshausen (62° 12'S, 58° 58W) is located on the Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Island. The station is contiguous to Chile's President Frei Station, from which it is separated partly by a stream, although in places the bases merge. The station was established in 1968, in what was then a designated Specially Protected Area (Fildes Peninsula).

At the time of Greenpeace's visit, the OIC was Anatoly Alexandrov. His term of duty was one year, finishing in March 1997.

There had been 17 people at the station for the previous year, including two German scientists. Two more German researchers had come in for the summer.

9.1.1   Contact

Greenpeace met the OIC at Bellingshausen, as it had not been possible to establish prior radio contact, on January 23, 1997. Later that day the OIC and other base members visited the Greenpeace ship. The following day some of the Greenpeace crew members paid a further, social visit to Bellingshausen.

Meetings were held in Russian and English.

9.1.2   Previous visits

Greenpeace had previously visited Bellingshausen in April 1988, November 1989, March 1991, January 1993 and January 1995. In 1989 a protest was carried out to complain about the piles of waste at the station, while a ship was returning to the then Soviet Union with an empty hold. In 1991, a four member research team, including a Russian speaker, spent a month on Fildes Peninsula and had extensive contact with Bellingshausen winter personnel.

The physical structure and operations of Bellingshausen are described in detail in the 1990/91 and 1992/93 Greenpeace Expedition Reports.

9.2   Physical Structure

Most buildings are in poor condition, although three are relatively new and in good condition, and one appeared to have been painted recently. Some of the buildings had been taken apart and were stored in one of the dumps, presumably awaiting to be returned to Russia. They had been constructed of steel clad with aluminium sheets and fibreglass or similar insulation, which in cases was coming apart.

As reported after the previous visit, a new building had been built on the "Chilean" (Western) side of the stream. According to Chilean personnel the building was still empty and had not been used.

       Bellingshausen Station
9.3     OPERATIONS

9.3.1   Science

Science at the station included meteorology (although the technician in charge of meteorological balloons had run out of chemicals some months previously and had worked on other projects until the next crew came in), aerology and biology: a Russian ecologist, and four German researchers were also at the station for the summer working with bird populations in the area.

9.3.2   Resupply

Resupply is done once a year in one of the Russian icebreakers. On their way to Antarctica, the ship had broken down in Buenos Aires and the crew had undertaken a gruelling three-day bus trip to Punta Arenas in southern Chile, from where they flew in a Brazilian plane to King George Island. Due to the change of plans they had to leave behind their clothing and supplies, and had been receiving support from the neighbouring stations until their situation was resolved.

9.3.3   Cooperation

Logistic and medical cooperation takes place with neighbouring bases, particularly the Chilean station. The night before Greenpeace's visit, an medical emergency involving a Russian crew member (appendicitis) had been treated at the Chilean hospital. The operation had been unsuccessful, apparently because the Chilean and Russian doctors had communication problems and could not agree on the procedures to follow. The patient had been stabilised and evacuated to Punta Arenas.

Four German scientists were staying at Bellingshausen.

9.3.4   Waste Disposal

There are no less than eight sites at Bellingshausen where waste is stored and/or dumped. Their number and quantity of waste appeared to have increased since Greenpeace's previous visit. The contents of the dump included miscellaneous items, both large and small, biodegradable ad non-biodegradable, and toxic or inert. Some of the waste appeared to have originally been stored to be returned to Russia and had deteriorated on site; in some cases, the dumps had been bulldozed over. Rivulets cross some of the dumps situated between a road and the beach, passing through remains of moss cover before reaching the sea.

In some cases, however, waste is separated into broad categories. Some of the waste, mostly scrap metal and other bulky items such as building parts, is more or less neatly stored and it would appear that it will be returned to Russia at some time. Some of these materials, however, have been there for at least two years. In some cases it was apparent that items had been boxed with the intention of being returned to Russia, perhaps to be repaired, but the boxes had collapsed around them and they were entirely rusted.

Drums with waste fuel, oil and oily water are separated at one end of one of the dumps, with a wooden sign indicating their content. Some of the drums were located

Bellingshausen Station                                                     35
in pallets, suggesting that at some stage they were going to be retrograded. Most of 
the drums are old and weathered, and have become full of water which has 
overspilled. The ground and dying moss patches around them are heavily stained.

A few batteries, one of them overturned, were dispersed throughout the dump.

A large pile of chemical waste (oxides of aluminium and sodium) directly below the 
meteorological building was still there, although its volume appeared to have 
diminished. Some of this waste was also stored next to a nearby shack inside eight 
40-kilo aluminium canisters. The meteorological officer mentioned that he had run 
out of chemicals several months before.

Aside from long term storage and dumping, incineration is the main method for 
dealing with waste. As discussed in previous Greenpeace reports, this takes place in 
the "Ecology Complex", where waste is burnt with a combination of waste oil and 
fuel, and new fuel.

The OIC reported that three men had been due to come with the team to prepare the 
old equipment for returning to Russia. However, because of the problem with the 
ship (see 9.3.2 above), they had gone to Mirny instead.

9.3.4    Sewage 

Sewage is poured to the stream dividing Bellingshausen from Frei, less than one 
hundred meters from the stream's outlet to the sea. Reportedly a great deal of the 
sewage is treated in the "Ecology Complex".

9.3.5    Energy production and fuel management 

The exhaust outlet of the new generator building, which used to point at the soil, had 
been re-routed inside a building. Remains of a thick film of soot could be seen where 
the exhaust had been but in all the system was tidier.

The large, deteriorating fuel tanks on a nearby beach are still there (during the past 
visit, Greenpeace was informed that they would be removed). Fuel hoses were 
deployed across the beach as if ready to be used. The base commander reported that 
the oldest three are due to be torn down next season, and a special team of seven 
people are supposed to be coming from Russia to clean the remaining six.

When asked about progress towards developing a common spill response strategy 
among the stations in the area, the station commander said that there was no such 
thing.

9.4    TOURISM 

There is a small tourist shop where visiting scientists and the occasional tourist may 
purchase souvenirs.

36
Bellingshausen Station
9.5     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

While it was not easy to precise how the Protocol was being implemented, the OIC 
appeared to be well informed about its regulations, and general awareness of 
environmental issues appeared to be higher than in the past. A document with 
Protocol regulations was prominently displayed on the mess.

An effort has been made to cover the food waste drums awaiting incineration (by 
boards weighted with a stone), thus preventing seabirds from having access to the 
food. Most drums were covered (at least those located behind the "Ecology 
Complex"), although one or two were still open, and there was some food waste in 
wooden boxes. The skua population is still tame and hangs around waste deposits 
and people, occasionally being able to scavenge some food.

The Russian ecologist on-station said that he had instituted this change, and had 
managed to convince most (but not all) stations in the area to do the same. However, 
an immediate (albeit probably short-term) effect has been massive skua predation on 
this year's penguin chicks on Ardley Island.

The biologists at the station (German and Russian) also reported that their research 
indicates major impacts on local bird populations (e.g. giant petrels four kilometres 
away) from the frequent air traffic in Maxwell Bay.

9.6     COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

As in previous visits, the base crew appears to barely have the means to subsist while 
the base continues to have a significant impact on the environment.

The waste situation remains desperate, although is commendable that some efforts 
had been made to comply with the Protocol, particularly by preventing seabirds from 
feeding on food scraps.

Bellingshausen Station                                                    37
10   VERNADSKY STATION (UKRAINE)

10.1   OVERVIEW

Vernadsky (65° 15'S, 64° 16'W) is located on Galindez Island in the Argentine Islands. 
Previously named Faraday, it was built in 1956 by the United Kingdom and was 
occupied continuously by the British Antarctic Survey until the 1995/96 season, when 
it was transferred to the Ukraine.

At the time of Greenpeace's visit, the OIC was an upper atmospheric physicist, Dr. 
Genady Mi. He had been involved with Vernadsky since before the base was 
transferred to Ukraine, and had participated in all stages of the transfer. There were 
11 other station members, all from the 1996 winter crew. Some had been at the station 
during the hand-over summer season, while others had come in at the end of that 
summer for the winter. Four were scientists, the rest comprising a doctor and 
maintenance personnel.

Four yachts were at anchor in the sheltered channels found in the area.

10.1.1   Contact

Radio contacts were made with the station the day prior to the visit, which took place 
on 9 February, 1997. Upon arrival, a team of Greenpeace personnel and independent 
journalists was welcomed by the station leader and shown around the inside of the 
main building. The film teams then visited vegetated areas immediately outside the 
perimeter of the station (where a 25-fold increase of vegetation has been reported). 
Later, the base commander and other station personnel visited the Greenpeace ship 
and, on return, some filming was carried out at the historic, UK-owned Wordie House 
and outside the station.

10.1.2   Previous visits

Greenpeace visited the UK-run Faraday in April 1988, November 1989, April 1991 and 
January 1993. A detailed description of Faraday can be found in the 1990/91 and 
1992/93 expedition reports.

10.2   PHYSICAL STRUCTURE

The station is relatively compact although several small buildings, antennae and 
power lines extend about 300 metres from the central area. Generally, the handover 
of the station took place without major changes of both form or operations of the station. 
The transfer was done at no cost to Ukraine, which paid only for the radio equipment. 
However, Ukraine in return has agreed to run the scientific instruments and provide 
the data to the UK for the next ten years.

The agreement between UK and Ukraine also reportedly stipulates that Ukraine 
replaces the fuel tanks (water tanks that are used as fuel tanks). This had not yet taken

38
Vernadsky Station
place, but was cited as one of the main projects for the incoming year's crew. The 
project should be regarded as particularly urgent, as BAS experienced problems with 
them (in 1992 they had two spills involving approximately 1000 and 1500 litres of 
fuel).

The building from where meteorological balloons were launched was not in use any 
more, as the programme has been discontinued.

10.3    OPERATIONS

10.3.1  Science

Particular care was taken to transfer the science programme unchanged, particularly 
the long-term data sets kept for several decades. Ukrainian scientists received 
training on UK's science programme and the instruments used by British scientists 
were left at the station for continued use. This included the famous Dobson 
spectrophotometer with which the ozone hole was discovered in 1982.

In addition, some other projects had been added, such a project on glaciology.

10.3.2  Resupply

Resupply takes place once a year on an Ukraine-owned ship. At the time of 
Greenpeace's visit she was half way from the Ukraine with the replacement crew on 
board.

10.3.3  Waste Disposal

The waste disposal system used at Faraday is still being used. All waste is separated 
at the source (inside of buildings and workshops) and packed for return to Ukraine. 
In the past, inert waste was sent to the Falkland Islands for incineration or landfilling, 
and hazardous waste was sent to the UK for proper treatment and disposal

Paper and other combustible waste is burnt in home-made braziers (a 200-litre drum 
with holes punched through it).

There are no dumps visible at Vernadsky.

10.3.4  Sewage

Sewage is macerated, along with food scraps, and piped into the bay.

10.3.5  Energy

The station has three 80-kilowatt generators. There are no sources of alternative 
energy at the station.

A total of approximately 240,000 litres of fuel is stored in two large "Braithwaite" 
water tanks which are to be replaced (see above). A valve in a pipeline connecting 
both tanks was dripping and had a drip bucket underneath. Furthermore, the station

Vernadsky Station                                                             39
leader reported that the legacy of the 1992 spills were still causing problems, with fuel 
sludge seeping out of the rocks near the tanks. He reported that they collect around 
half a bucket (a couple of litres) of this every couple of days.

10.3.5    Future Plans

The plans for the station very much seem to be to keep it running as it has been in the 
past, with the replacement of the Braithwaite fuel tanks the only large project on the 
horizon.

10.4    TOURISM

The OIC reported that they receive a considerable number of tourist visits, including 
yachts. Two days before Greenpeace's visit they had received tourists from one of the 
larger tourist ships working in the area.

10.5    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

Vernadsky is a small, well-run station. The major environmental problem would 
appear to be the fuel spill legacy, and is difficult to see how this can be mitigated, 
other than by the slow, laborious process of collection that is already being conducted. 
The replacement of the old fuel tanks, however, must be viewed as an absolute 
priority.

10.6    COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

From the visit it appears that Ukraine is committed to keep the station running at its 
best, and that the base personnel have taken this as a personal challenge.

One of Greenpeace's main concerns is whether Ukraine will be able to keep up the 
waste management system so that all waste is returned to Ukraine. The system 
implemented by BAS was based on their ability to take a lot of the base's waste to the 
Falkland/Malvinas Islands. The system had other features such as, for instance, 
heavy duty waste bags which were returned to the base and reused. Sending the 
material to the Ukraine will no doubt involve higher costs.

Incineration should cease.

Given the small and compact nature of the station and the Ukraine regime of constant 
personnel numbers year-round, it would appear that alternative technologies such as 
composting toilets and renewable energy systems could be deployed relatively easily. 
Greenpeace recommends that the Ukraine works to develop such systems at the 
station.

40
Vernadsky Station
11 ROTHERA STATION (UNITED KINGDOM)

11.1    OVERVIEW

Rothera (67° 34' S, 68° 07' W) is located on Adelaide Island, in Marguerite Bay. It sits across a small rocky peninsula, with the 900-metre crushed rock airstrip spanning the isthmus, and the main buildings tucked in between the runway and the rocky hills of the peninsula.

Rothera is the logistics hub for the United Kingdom's Antarctic operations, with field operations throughout the Antarctic Peninsula supported by Twin Otter. There were around 70 staff at the station at the time of the visit. Canadian aircraft chartered by the US programme also use the station for fuelling on ferry routing across Antarctica.

This visit to Rothera was arranged in advance between Greenpeace International and the British Antarctic Survey. The primary objective of the visit was to interview scientists and document sites in Leonie Island where research on terrestrial vegetation is being carried out.

11.1.1  Contact

The Arctic Sunrise arrived at Rothera on 11 February and spent two days tied up to the wharf. Upon arrival, the ship's complement was briefed by the station manager, Paul Rose, and other senior staff as to the specific environmental and safety rules for the station. Ship's personnel were then given guided tours around the station in small groups, and the needs of journalists and film crew on board were patiently accommodated by station staff. The visit included social contact that evening, and the ship departed mid-afternoon the following day.

11.1.2  Previous visits

Greenpeace's previous visit to Rothera took place in November 1989, when the runway was still under construction. In that opportunity, at a time in which the minerals convention was being developed, Greenpeace carried out a protest against the construction of the airstrip.

11.2    Physical Structure

Since Greenpeace's previous visit, there have been significant changes made to the station, not the least of which is the completion of a 900-metre crushed-rock runway and associated facilities. In addition, this season saw the completion of a major new laboratory complex, which was still in the commissioning phase at the time of Greenpeace's visit.

Rothera Station                                            41
11.3    OPERATIONS

11.3.1  Science

Most of the science associated with Rothera is carried out in the field, beyond the range of a station inspection. The primary science carried out on station is biology, and this is now supported by a major new laboratory complex, the Bonner lab. Much of this laboratory had been completed during the 1996/97 summer and was operational at the time of Greenpeace's visit; however, some offices and laboratories were still being finished off. Facilities in this complex include a recompression chamber, a wet lab, a terrestrial biology laboratory (with facilities to simulate exposure to changing UV radiation and CO2 levels) and other laboratories. Biological programmes included:
      • the effects of climate change and ultraviolet radiation on terrestrial ecosystems;
      • remote microclimate and UV recording; and
      • benthic biology.

Other science under way at or from the station at the time of Greenpeace's visit included human biology, meteorology, mapping, geology, glaciology and upper atmospheric physics.

Cooperation with other countries was evidenced by the presence of a group of Dutch scientists led by Dr Ad Huiskes, who was conducting a programme to look at the effect of different levels of UV radiation on plants. There was also a co-operative programme on the upper atmosphere between the UK and the USA with the installation of a new mesospheric radar at the station.

11.3.2  Resupply and logistics

Major resupply of Rothera is carried out by ship, although most personnel arrive by air, using Twin Otters and Dash-7s on the new runway. Prior to the construction of the runway, air traffic landed on the glacier runway to the west of the station, from and to which cargo and supplies were carried using a snow ramp that sloped down to the peninsula. In recent years however this snow ramp has been retreating and deteriorating, and the movement of major supplies (e.g. fuel) up the ramp is now very difficult.

11.3.3  Waste Disposal

The waste separation system seemed to be efficient and well-organised. Metal waste is shredded and sealed in drums for return to a landfill in Port Stanley (Falkland Islands). Paper and plastic is baled, and also landfilled in Port Stanley. Aluminium is shredded, sealed in drums and returned to the UK for recycling. As one of the remnant practices from past years, food bones and medical wastes are burnt in an oil-drum brazier. Ash from this process is returned to the Falklands for landfill disposal. Apart from this, no other incineration is done at Rothera. One person is in charge of the waste management at the station as her primary role.

The station had a plentiful supply of clearly-labelled, ISO-standard containers for shipping hazardous materials back to the United Kingdom.
No dumps are visible at Rothera.

42
Rothera Station
11.3.4   Sewage

Sewage is carried through the station by a continually pumped flow of sea water with 
an intake in South Bay and outflow into North Bay. (Fresh water is made by 
desalination from this supply). The outlet is above the high water mark. At the time 
of Greenpeace's visit, the bay was choked with bergy bits, preventing rapid dispersal 
of sewage, and therefore the sea water by the outlet appeared cloudy. Bones from a 
large animal were also present immediately below the outfall. Generally, the system 
appeared to be much less sophisticated than other systems in use at the station.

11.3.5   Energy

     Fuel Consumption and Storage

Fuel is stored in six tanks of 240,000 litres each; three each of marine diesel (for the 
station's generators) and Avtur (for aircraft).

The main fuel tanks, which are located near the aircraft hangar, are double-walled, 
and surrounded by bunding which can contain the entire contents of the six tanks 
enclosed. Water must be pumped from the contained area each week. The supply 
ship is connected by flexible hose to an underground fuel line that runs from close to 
the wharf to the tanks. Visible with the coiled flexible hose were 200-litres drums that 
had been cut down and shaped to provide drip trays to go underneath each 
connection in the pipe. Piping is blown out after each supply to clean the insides. 
During normal operation of the station, fuel is pumped continuously through the fuel 
lines, which run under the airstrip between the main tanks and the generator 
building, to prevent waxing.

In addition to the bulk storage, around 500 drums of fuel destined for field depots 
were lined up, lying on their sides, between the airstrip and the main station 
buildings.

     Spill Prevention

A spill retrieval kit is stored in a container next to the wharf. The kit includes a boom 
rolled into a reel, a pump, collapsible tanks, adsorbent pads and pillows, protective 
clothing, gloves and masks. Empty 200-litre fuel drums are stored nearby.

     Energy Production

There is no use of clean energy production methods visible on the station, although 
there are plans to introduce heat scavenging next season. Solar panels and small 
wind generators are reportedly used to charge batteries at field sites.

11.4   TOURISM

The station does not receive as many tourist visits as those to the north, and in any 
case restricts the number of ships that may visit to three per year. The occasional 
yacht also calls in to the station.

Rothera Station                                                                   43
11.5     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT

Dr Walton commented during the visit that the greatest impact of the station is probably the extended range that has come from the increased air operations facilitated by the Rothera airstrip, and Greenpeace would concur with this. The station itself is tidy and appears very well run, with systems in place to minimise environmental impact from ongoing operations. Compared to other stations of similar size, fuel and waste management standards appeared to be very high. However, a busy station with so many flights each day must be having a wider impact.

Locally, the airstrip has had a very significant impact in the ice free area, which, apart from a small protected site, is entirely covered by the station's structures (e.g. buildings, antennae, etc.) and modified terrain.

Site of Special Scientific Interest no. 9, designated for monitoring the impact of the station on the immediate area, is located across the north-eastern end of the Peninsula. The boundaries of this site are marked by orange-painted drums.

11.6     COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Rothera appeared to be a well-run station, and was generally tidy. This is particularly commendable given its role as the operations hub. Often such stations are noticeably dirtier than others because of the high proportion of logistical activities to science, and because a much higher proportion of the population is transient and therefore less likely to care about the station or know its systems. In particular, the amount of attention paid to sorting and handling waste (particularly the care with which it is clearly labelled) is to be commended.

The station itself (not including the runway) appears to operate on a simpler level than equivalent stations belonging to some other nations.  There is no doubt, however, that the runway itself has had a major effect on the immediate area (if nothing else, through extensive terrain modification and from the volume of traffic it carries) and on opening up the station's hinterland.

Apart from wider questions of how large the programme is, and the existence of the runway, Greenpeace's major criticisms of the station are:
• the sole reliance on fossil fuel energy; and
• the relatively primitive sewage system in a station that at the height of the season can house more than 70 people. Much better treatment could and should be developed for this station.

 
44
Rothera Station
12    PALMER STATION (UNITED STATES)

12.1   OVERVIEW

Palmer Station (64° 46'S, 64° 03'W) is located on Anvers Island, off the Antarctic 
Peninsula. It is built on a rock outcrop in a small natural harbour, and is surrounded 
by small rocky islands.

The station manager at the time of Greenpeace's visit was Janet Phillips, an employee 
of Antarctic Support Associates, which is the company contracted to run the US 
Antarctic stations.

12.1.1   Contact

Greenpeace's visit to Palmer was arranged in advance with the US Antarctic 
programme, the primary purpose of the visit being to enable journalists on board to 
interview Dr William Fraser, a penguin biologist, about his work. Final details of the 
visit were confirmed by Inmarsat and radio over the two days preceding the visit.

The visit took place on 7 and 8 February 1997. The first day was occupied by visits on 
the part of the journalists and some crew to Torgersen Island, immediately offshore 
from the station, to interview Dr Fraser and film the penguin colony there. The 
following morning, some crew visited the station briefly. As in previous visits, the 
only part of the station that Greenpeace crew were invited into was the dining room, 
so nothing was seen of the station apart from this and the outside. The ship departed 
the harbour at around 11am.

Despite an invitation to do so, no station personnel apart from Dr Fraser visited the 
ship.

12.1.2   Previous visits

Greenpeace had previously visited Palmer in April 1991. The station and its 
operations are described in the 1990/91 Expedition Report.

12.2   PHYSICAL STRUCTURES

The station consists of two large buildings (one housing the living quarters and 
laboratories and the other, the stores) and some smaller structures—including the 
dive stores, fuel tanks, Inmarsat domes, antennae etc. The station is relatively 
compact, but nevertheless seems to have several heavy vehicles.

The station is well equipped for marine work, with diving facilities and several large 
inflatable boats.

Palmer Station                                                      45
12.3     SCIENCE

Palmer's science programme tends to concentrate on biology, although other 
disciplines are also represented at the station. The laboratories include wet lab and 
aquarium facilities. Several long term biological programmes have been run from 
this station. Dr W. Fraser's work on penguin populations on the surrounding islands, 
and his recent findings related to climatic change, were the reason for Greenpeace's 
visit.

12.4     TOURISM

The US places strict limitations on the number of tourist vessels that are permitted to 
visit Palmer in each season. These visits are determined in advance of the season at a 
meeting between the National Science Foundation and tour operators.

12.5     COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Palmer is a relatively compact station which appears to have relatively low 
environmental impacts. However, in Greenpeace's opinion it would be possible to 
reduce the environmental impact further if more thought were given to the matter. 
For example, the number and size of heavy vehicles on what is a very tiny piece of 
land seems unnecessary. In addition, more use could surely be made of renewable 
energy technology to reduce the fuel consumption of the station.

 
46                                                              Palmer Station
13    BASE GABRIEL GONZALEZ VIDELA
      (CHILE)

13.1   OVERVIEW

González Videla (64° 49.2'S, 62° 51'W) is located on Waterboat Point in Paradise Harbour. Established by Chile in 1951, it had been abandoned for many years, until basic maintenance and clean-up were carried out in the 1992/93 season. The base is managed by the Chilean air force (FACH). Several hundred gentoo penguins nest between the buildings.

13.2   Contact

Greenpeace did not visit Gonzalez Videla because of the tight schedule but established radio contact as the Arctic Sunrise sailed southwards through Paradise Harbour. The base now appears to be occupied in summer by Chilean military personnel, and fulfils functions of "port captaincy" (or harbour master). As with other Chilean stations, ships passing by are called on the radio and asked a standard set of questions—such as the name of the ship, port of departure, destination and radio call—which are presumably logged in some form of record.

There were no scientists at the station, although reportedly there had been some earlier in the season who had already left.

Base Gabriel Gonzalez Videla                                                    47
14   ESTACION CIENTIFICA ALMIRANTE 
BROWN (ARGENTINA)

14.1   OVERVIEW 

Almirante Brown (64° 53'S, 62° 53'W) is located in Paradise Harbour a few miles south 
of Chile's González Videla. It was built in 1951 by the Argentine navy. Abandoned 
from 1960 to 1965, it was then transferred to the Argentine Antarctic Institute to 
become the only year-round civilian-run station of the Argentine programme. The 
base was destroyed by fire in 1984, and was abandoned until 1988/89. Basic clean up 
and maintenance has been carried out since then during summer.

14.2   Contact 

Greenpeace did not visit Almirante Brown because of lack of time, but established 
radio contact while sailing through Paradise Harbour. Greenpeace noticed that two 
small new buildings—containers or pre-fabricated buildings—had been added to 
serve as labs. These were located where the main part of the base, destroyed by fire, 
used to be. Plans for expansion of this kind had been reported to Greenpeace in its 
last visit.

Most of the station personnel—around ten people—were scientists.

48
Estacion Cientifica Almirante Brown
APPENDIX ONE: LIST OF ACRONYMS

ASMA:   Antarctic Specially Managed Area
ASPA    Antarctic Specially Protected Area
ATP:    Antarctic Treaty Party
BAP:    Best Available Practice
BAS:    British Antarctic Survey
BAT:    Best Available Technology
DNA:    Dirección Nacional Antártico (National Antarctic Directorate)
EIA:    Environmental Impact Assessment
FACH:   Fuerza Aérea de Chile (Chilean Airforce)
GIS:    Geographic Information System
IAA:    Instituto Antártico Argentino
INACH:  Instituto Antártico Chileno
IPCC:   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
OIC:    Officer In Charge
SPA:    Specially Protected Area
SSSI:   Site of Special Scientific Interest

Appendix One                                  49
