·
 
ANTARCTIC TREATY           TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING   XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


COMNAP REPORT TO THE XXI ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING




Agenda item 5                  Submitted by COMNAP

XXI ATCM/IP102
May, 1997
Original: English
REPORT TO THE XXI ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

May 19–30, 1997   Christchurch, New Zealand

by the
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
COMNAP
Report to XXI ATCM

May 1997

1      INTRODUCTION

1.1    National programs of science and logistics have continued in Antarctica through another 
       operating season. The 1996/97 summer Was an overall successful season with only 
       minor casualties and no fatalities recorded. The activities on the Atlantic side of the 
       continent were blessed with good weather most of the time, but ice conditions were very 
       difficult. Several cruises were delayed or had to be rerouted because of severe ice in the 
       Weddell sea area. On the whole the scientific programmes were carried out according to 
       plan. Some national operators were also involved in major construction works such as 
       improving waste water treatment systems or replacing energy generators with more 
       efficient and environmentally less harmful systems. The new South African base, SANAE 
       IV at Vesleskarvet, was opened in the 1996/97 season.

       There has been a high degree of international cooperation in the field both logistically and 
       in the scientific programmes. Today it is a rule rather than an exception that scientists from 
       two or more nations work together in Antarctica. In the spirit of the discussions at ATCM 
       XX there is also a closer interaction developing with the tourist operators which could 
       make operations in the future safer and more efficient for both sides. A major effort by the 
       operators has been devoted to the implementation of environmental measures, 
       assessments as well as monitoring, and the introduction of more modern and better 
       technology. In all of these activities close contacts among the national operators on a 
       practical level has been of utmost importance.

1.2    The national operators have continued to work together in many areas of common 
       interests, including the topics in this report. The annual meetings of COMNAP, the 
       Council of Managers, and SCALOP, the Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and 
       Operations, provide the essential opportunity for direct personal contact and association, 
       as well as the forum and basis for collective efforts. In August 1996 the eighth meeting of 
       COMNAP/SCALOP was held in Cambridge in conjunction with XXIV SCAR. Members 
       from twenty-five national programs participated. The Seventh Symposium on Antarctic 
       Logistics and Operations was included, together with a trade exhibit. The current 
       membership of COMNAP/SCALOP appears on the last page of this report. The 1997 
       meeting, COMNAP IX, will be held in Cape Town in August.

1.3    This report to the XXIst ATCM is submitted by COMNAP pursuant to agenda topic 5, 
       Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System; Reports, and to Recommendation XIII-2.

2      SCIENCE SUPPORT

       The COMNAP reports to ATCM in 1995 and 1996 called attention to several major 
       scientific projects that feature international cooperation in Antarctica. A brief report of 
       current progress is given along with mention of other similar projects selected from among 
       many possible examples.

2.1    In December 1996 ice core drilling operations at Dome C were commenced as part of 
       EPICA, the European Project of Ice Coring in Antarctica. The drilling will be resumed next 
       season. Meanwhile, EPICA site surveys have been successfully accomplished in 
       Droning Maud Land, including ground traverses and airborne radar measurements. 
       EPICA engages most of the European operators.

       Another major international programme is the Cape Roberts Project. The goal is to 
       recover deep sediment cores from the sea floor in the southwestern Ross Sea with the 
       sea ice being used as a platform. The planned drilling was not possible during the 1996-
       97 season, as a result of unusual sea ice conditions. Some equipment testing was carried 
       out on site.
The international team at Vostok has continued the deep ice core drilling. The depth of 
the hole has now reached 3523 meters, illuminating the paleoclimate record 500 
thousand years back in time. Scientists have continued to examine the indications of a 
subglacial lake at Vostok. It is located at a depth of 3750 meters below the ice surface with 
a water depth of approximately 650 to 700 meters. Further studies are planned for next 
season.

The AMANDA Project (Antarctic Muon and Neutrino Detector Array) has so far 
successfully installed 382 optical modules on 14 long strings buried in the ice at depths 
from 800 to 2200 meters at the South Pole. Scientists from several countries are 
collaborating in this unique neutrino telescope project which is already producing 
valuable data.

2.2     The scientific projects mentioned above involve international cooperation both in science 
and logistics on a big scale. In addition, there are numerous cases where scientists from 
different countries are working together or contributing to a common goal. Typically such 
coordination is required for measurements and monitoring programmes that cover big 
geographical areas and run over long periods of time. Stratospheric ozone 
measurements, seismic profiling, monitoring of seal populations, and auroral radar 
experiments are just a few illustrations of areas where such collaboration has taken place 
during the previous season. It is especially in the Peninsula area that many nations are 
working closely together.

It is also worth noting that the cooperation of Antarctic managers has facilitated the 
involvement and contribution from new nations with relatively limited operations in 
Antarctica. The Netherlands are contributing to Antarctic science with primary logistics 
from other European operators. Another example is Ukraine which has taken over the 
former U.K. station Faraday, now named Vernadsky Station.

2.3     National programs are involved in the science projects of SCAR, especially through the 
work of individual investigators. COMNAP continues to work with SCAR toward the goal 
of making international cooperation in Antarctic science more efficient. Again in 1996, 
when the annual meeting of COMNAP was held in conjunction with SCAR, there was a 
special session at which the SCAR Chief Officers briefed the COMNAP/SCALOP 
members on major programs that depend on substantial international cooperation and 
logistic support.

2.4     1996-97 was an important year for infrastructure development in Antarctica. The new 
South African station SANAE IV was inaugurated. A new waste water treatment plant was 
installed at Neumeyer and a new facility, the Bonner Laboratory, was opened at Rothera. 
A new energy system based on butane gas has been installed at the Swedish station 
Wasa. These are just a few examples.

As mentioned above, the ice conditions in the Weddell Sea region turned out to be 
exceptionally difficult in the 1996/97 season. It affected the science programmes and 
hampered logistic support especially for stations far south in the Weddell Sea, such as 
Halley and Belgrano II. In unusual situations like this, close direct contacts between 
managers, sharing observations about weather and ice and helping each other in 
unforeseen logistic difficulties become extremely valuable.

3      OPERATIONS, LOGISTICS AND TECHNOLOGY

3.1     The 1996 meetings in Cambridge included special sessions of SCALOP where 
management officials and other specialists in logistics and operations shared experience 
and discussed common interests. The growth and extent of bilateral and multilateral 
collaboration in science support and logistics was noted. SCALOP is doing a special 
survey to show in greater detail the current level of involvement among the national 
operators.

2
3.2 The SCALOP Working Group on Antarctic Air Operations continues to meet annually to 
share information and to review the implementation of measures adopted by ATCM Rec. 
XV-20 to improve air safety in Antarctica. The Second Edition of The Antarctic Flight 
Information Manual, in its improved size and printing style, was published in November 
1995. Amendment No. 7 was distributed in December 1996.

3.3 The Seventh Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and Operations was conducted by 
SCALOP during the XXIV SCAR/COMNAP VIII meetings in Cambridge-England in August 
1996. This two-day event successfully served to provide a forum for exchanges of 
information, discussion and the presentation of new ideas, best available techniques 
(BATs) and achievements in a wide range of Antarctic activities. Twenty eight papers 
were presented that had been selected from sixty submitted abstracts, according to the 
six topic themes as follows:

•	Remote Sensing and the Use of Satellites for Science Support
•	Deep Drilling Technologies
•	Significant and Proven developments in Operations, Logistics & Science Support
•	Energy Conservation
•	Best Available Technologies for Waste Management and the Protection of the 
    Antarctic Environment
•	Science Operation Planning and Resource Allocation

The Symposium attracted a large audience including many SCAR participants. The 
Symposium Proceedings are in the process of being published.

3.4 There was a four-day commercial trade exhibition at Cambridge in association with the 
SCALOP Seventh Symposium. As was previously reported, there is a distinct and 
growing industry related to Antarctic (polar) operations and logistics. At Cambridge the 
trade exhibits included more than 30 international companies representing:

•	Shipyards, marine support and shipping agents.
•	Aviation engineering & operations.
•	Vehicle & sledge manufacturers.
•	 Special mechanical & electronic engineering designers & fabricators
•	Book publishers.
•	Clothing manufacturers.
•	Building & temporary shelter manufacturers.
•	Logistic support providers and contractors.
•	Rope manufacturers.
•	Manufacturers of waste management equipment & machinery.

4    ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION

4.1 COMNAP reviewed its environmental management activities at its annual meeting in 
Cambridge in August 1996. To encourage the sharing of environmental management 
information between national programmes, it established an Antarctic Environmental 
Officers Network (AEON) and a COMNAP Environmental Co-ordinating group.

AEON is a network of national Antarctic programme environmental officers and managers. 
The objectives of the network are to:

•	Exchange information and ideas about practical and technical environmental issues 
    in Antarctica;
•	Promote the mutual understanding and practical application of the Environmental 
    Protocol;
•	Respond to requests from COMNAP for advice on environmental issues.

The Environmental Co-ordinating Group provides a linkage between AEON and 
COMNAP, and is the steering group for COMNAP environmental interests such as 
responding to ATCM requests and liaising with SCAR.
The activities undertaken in this area in the past 12 months have included:
	•	The establishment of an AEON homepage of the World Wide Web
	•	Working with SCAR on the preparation of a report to the ATCM on the environmental monitoring workshops and follow-up action
	•	Preparation of a review of past and present monitoring activities for presentation to the ATCM as an Information Paper
	•	Preliminary work on the development of an Antarctic environmental monitoring handbook

Consideration is being given to running a workshop(s) on practical implementation of environmental monitoring and environmental impact assessment. These would follow on from the development of the monitoring handbook and encourage exchange of experience built up in EIA since the signing of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol.

4.2	A Working Paper presented jointly by SCAR and COMNAP on Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in Antarctica reports on the conclusions drawn from the results of two workshops, and provides several recommendations for further steps to be taken.

5		INFORMATION MANAGEMENT

5.1	The Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) is now established at the International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) in Christchurch, New Zealand. Data set descriptions about Antarctic scientific data are being entered into the AMD using the Directory Interchange Format (DIF) of the International Directory Network (IDN). A search interface to the AMD, based on the World Wide Web (WWW), is being developed by ICAIR and for those without access to the WWW alternative information products will be provided.

Following XXIII SCAR, 1994, SCAR and COMNAP issued a call to their members to establish National Antarctic Data Centres (NADCs). Together with the AMD, the NADCs form the key component of the SCAR-COMNAP Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS). Currently eight countries have formally designated NADCs and a further six NADCs have been informally identified. An inaugural NADC Managers workshop will be held during the first week of XXI ATCM for the purpose of training the national data managers in the technical aspects of operating within the AMD framework. The workshop will mark the transition of the AMD and NACD network into an operational system.

With the design of the ADDS and the establishment of the AMD, the SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc Planning Group on Antarctic Data Management has completed the tasks for which it was formed. Effective from April 1997, the Planning Group has been replaced by a SCAR-COMNAP Joint Committee on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM) to provide on-going oversight in the area of Antarctic data management and the development of the AMD/ADDS.

5.2	AMEN

During the past year COMNAP has continued to develop the use of the home page on the Internet World Wide Web as the principal means of distributing documents and information. Since May of 1996, 15 Notices have been issued and posted on the website for access by members. Reports of meetings and draft documents for review have similarly been distributed.

The AMEN website includes an on-line reporting system. As previously reported, the Advance Exchange of Operational Information can be posted by each national program and edited as necessary to be maintained current.

The Antarctic Station handbook has most recently been added as a second function of the on-line report part of the COMNAP website. A demonstration of the system and assistance to members in entering information into both of these on-line reports will be held in Cape Town during COMNAP IX in August 1997.

4
6      INTERACTION WITH TOURISM

6.1  During the past year the national program operators and the Antarctic tourism operators 
     have continued and expanded their practical cooperative relationship. At the August 
     1996 COMNAP meeting in Cambridge, a representative of IAATO addressed the 
     COMNAP and SCALOP members and described some of the concerns by tour 
     operators. In the discussion it was apparent that there are several areas of mutual concern 
     and that a new initiative should be taken to provide a forum for additional discussion and 
     exchange of experiences.

6.2  Members of the COMNAP Working Group met with IAATO members in New York on 21 
     March 1997. The meeting provided very useful and far-ranging discussion that included: 
     improving the procedures for station visits, expanding the use of written material on 
     research programs, a review of the current level and further opportunity for national 
     program personnel to be transported or otherwise supported by tour vessels, and the 
     present and future requirements for data collection. It was noted that the standard forms 
     for advance notification and post-season reporting, that had been adopted by XX ATCM 
     for a one year trial, were being used by tour operators.

6.3  COMNAP and IAATO representatives have proposed to continue the pattern of two 
     meetings each year: during the second half of March to focus on the experiences of the 
     season just completed, and in July at a special session of the annual IAATO meeting.

 
5
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

OFFICERS

CHAIRMAN                                  ANDERS KARLQVIST (Sweden)
Members of the Executive Committee:      
MEMBER                                    OSCAR PINOCHET DE LA BARRA (Chile)
MEMBER and Chairperson Elect              GILLIAN WRATT (New Zealand)
CHAIRMAN                                  ERICK CHIANG (United States)
(Standing Committee on Antarctic
Logistics and Operations)
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY   To October 1997     AL FOWLER
                      From Oct. 1997      JACK SAYERS

Secretariat: c/o American Geophysical Union
To October 1997:  2000 Florida Avenue, NW
                  Washington, DC 20009, USA
From October 1997:  HOBART, AUSTRALIA


                              MEMBERS
                    MNAP (M) - SCALOP (S)

ARGENTINA         (M)   Brig. Gen. Jorge Leal
                  (M)   Dr. Carlos A. Rinaldi
                  (S)   Mr. Luis Fontana
                  (S)   Col. Carlos Fernandez

AUSTRALIA         (M)   Mr. Rex Moncur
                  (S)   Mr. Jack Sayers

BELGIUM           (M)   Mr. Serge Caschetto

BRAZIL            (M)   RADM Antonio Carlos da Camara Brandao
                  (S)   CAPT. Herz Aquino de Queiroz

BULGARIA          (M)   Dr. Christo Pimpirev
                  (S)   Mr. Nikolay Stanchev

CANADA            (M)   Dr. Peter Suedfeld
                  (S)   Mr. Olav Loken

CHILE             (M)   Amb. Oscar Pinochet de la Barra
                  (S)   Eng. Patricio Eberhard

CHINA             (M)   Mr. Chen Liqi
                  (S)   Mr. Jia Genzheng

ECUADOR           (M)   Capt. Jose Olmedo
                  (S)   Capt. Fernando Zurita Fabre

FINLAND           (M)   Prof. Pentti Malkki
                  (S)   Mrs. Riitta Mansukoski
FRANCE                  (M)  Mr. Pierre Lise
                       (M)  Dr. Roger E. Gendrin
                       (S)  Mr. Patrice Godon

GERMANY                (M)  Prof. Max M. Tilzer
                       (S)  Dr. Heinz Kohnen

INDIA                  (S)  Mr. A.K. Chugh
                       (M)  Mr. Prabh Das

ITALY                  (M)  Dr. Mario Zucchelli
                       (S)  Dr. Antonino Cucinotta

JAPAN                  (M)  Mr. Wataru Iwamoto
                       (M)  Dr. Takeo Hirasawa
                       (S)  Dr. Kazuyuki Shiraishi

NETHERLANDS            (M)  Dr. Jan H. Stel
                       (S)  Mr. Raymond M.L. Schorno

NEW ZEALAND            (M)  Ms. Gillian Wratt
                       (S)  Mr. Julian Tangaere

NORWAY                 (M)  Dr. Olav Orheim
                       (M)  Dr. Jan-Gunnar Winther
                       (S)  Mr. Jan-Erling Haugland

PERU                   (M)  Amb. Jorge Colunge
                       (S)  Mr. Octavio Vizcarra

POLAND                 (M)  Prof. Stanislaw Rakusa-Suszczewski
                       (S)  Dr. Seweryn M. Zalewski

REPUBLIC OF           (M)  Dr. Byong-Kwon Park
KOREA                  (S)  Mr. Kyung In Lee

REPUBLIC OF           (M)  Mr. Dirk van Schalkwyk
SOUTH AFRICA           (S)  Mr. Richard N. Skinner

RUSSIA                 (M)  Mr. Valery A. Martyshchenko
                       (M)  Mr. Valery V. Lukin
                       (S)  Dr. Valery Klokov

SPAIN                  (M)  Dr. Juan-Ramón Vericad
                       (S)  Mr. Alberto Castejon

SWEDEN                 (M)  Prof. Anders Karlqvist
                       (M)  Dr. Olle Melander
                       (S)  Mr. Ulf Hedman

UKRAINE                (M)  Mr. Poitr Ghozik
                       (S)  Mr. Juriy Oskret

UNITED                 (M)  Dr. Barry Heywood
KINGDOM                (M)  Dr. Dougal Goodman (Acting)
                       (S)  Mr. John Hall

UNITED STATES          (M)  Prof. Cornelius W. Sullivan
                       (S)  Mr. Erick Chiang

URUGUAY                (M)  Gen. Julio C. Ruggiero
                       (S)  Col. Av. Manuel Vilar
                       (S)  Col. Jacinto Acuna
