25

ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY ZONE


Agenda item 9                  Submitted by France

XXI ATCM/IP25
May 1997
English
Original: French
TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY ZONE

Tourist activities at the French Dumont d’Urville base

Management and supervision of tourist activities in Antarctica is a preoccupation of
the Treaty Parties. The various consequences of these activities on the logistics of bases,
research programs, security of persons and goods, as well as environmental risks have all
been discussed at previous ATCM meetings and are the focus of discussions and
recommendations within the various structures (TEWG, COMNAP/SCALOP working group,
IDAT data base, IAATO, ...)

This document aims to describe the conditions under which tourist activities took place
at the French Dumont d’Urville base during the 1996/97 campaign. High altitude overflying
of the area will not be discussed, since it produced no local impact.

Two ships called at the base during the southern summer. Necessary authorizations
were requested and granted in time and relevant information was provided. The two visits
took place in slightly different ways.

• The first visit occurred at the end of December. A helicopter was used to disembark
visitors from the new ship. The first helicopter round-trip did not fully abide by flight
instructions as it overflew a protected zone at low altitude. However, instructions were
respected subsequently. Some 120 persons, split up into groups of 25 and supervised by
“winterers”, were able to visit Petrel Island and the base’s facilities.

The second visit took place 12 days later. It should be stated that, following our
request, this visit occurred one day later than scheduled. Indeed, the base’s supply ship was
still present, as a consequence of the change in schedule imposed by ice conditions. This
inconvenience was happily accepted by the operator. After disembarking in a Zodiac, the 40
tourists split up into two groups; the first visited the island and base on foot while the second
(using three Zodiacs) visited the archipelago. Each group was supervised by three
“winterers”.

• This experience, together with that gained in preceding years, enables us to
propose/confirm a certain number of provisions. First, the respect for instructions regarding
environmental protection is of primary importance if these activities are to take place in the
best possible manner. Second, the respect for specific instructions, such as avoiding visits
when the base’s supply ship is present, is of particular importance. Indeed, the entire staff of
the base is mobilized for logistical operations and is thus not available to assist in the visit of
the base and surrounding areas.

The number of visitors arriving at the base is an important factor as it can represent a
four to fivefold increase in the head count. When “winterers” cater for small groups and
activities are spread out both in time and geographically, visitors are better supervised and
receive more relevant information, and possible impacts on the environment are minimized. It
is thus recommended to prevent cruise ships carrying large numbers of passengers from
gaining access to bases which have a small surface area and are surrounded by specially
protected areas.
. 
2

The presence of the cruise ship's physician during visits is an important security 
factor.

Finally, it is necessary to reassert the need to notify those in charge of the base prior 
to a visit and to convey to such persons an appropriate report using agreed formats currently 
under study by COMNAP and IAATO. Only a codified procedure for visit reporting, along 
the lines of what has already been suggested, will enable the TWEG and ATCM to ensure 
that tourist activities do not hamper scientific research and that their impact on the 
environment is kept to a minimum.
