ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


COMMENTARY ON CHAIRMAN'S SEVENTH OFFERING
ANNEX ON ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY


Agenda item 6g                  Submitted by ASOC

XXI ATCM/IP63
May, 1997
Original: English
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION

Commentary on Chairman's Seventh Offering Annex on Environmental Liability*

May 1997

GENERAL COMMENTS

ASOC supports the continued development of the Liability Annex through the Chairman's
Seventh Offering. The approach presented by the United States in its XX ATCM Information
Paper 43 is too restrictive to meet the obligations under Article 16 of the Protocol, or the
mandate of the Group of Legal Experts.

      As the Chairman and others have recognised, the primary impediments to resolving the
Liability Annex are political rather than legal, although a number of important legal issues
remain to be fully discussed and resolved. ASOC submits that the credibility of the Treaty
Parties is at stake if they don't generate the political commitment needed to negotiate a
liability regime to complete the Protocol. In our view, the Treaty Parties should set a target
date for concluding the liability negotiations in order to reach the desired goal.

ARTICLE 1 OR PREAMBLE (Purpose)

The text is identical to the Sixth Offering and ASOC's remarks on that draft continue to
apply:

      "We note that the first sentence of the text here is unchanged from Alternative A of the Fifth
Offering except for the replacement of "reparation" with "containment". The effect of this
change is to shift from an Annex which incorporates response action and remediation to one
more narrowly focussed.

      The implication could be that a separate annex on response action/remediation will be
elaborated, but no such agreement has as yet been arrived at. Where the possibility of a
further annex is canvassed, in the second sentence, this is not the concern. Further, the
present Offering continues to contain definitions of response action and remedial measures
(Art 3), a specific article (Art 4) and repeated further references. Thus the contraction of
scope to "containment" is not consistent with the rest of the Offering.

      The new second sentence is an otherwise reasonable qualification of the purpose of this
Annex, which may address the concerns of those parties seeking some coverage of established
use. ASOC continues to believe that such aspects are outside the proper scope of this Annex,
which should remain focussed on damage to the environment." ASOC Commentary on
Chairman's Sixth Offering.
ARTICLE 2 (Scope of Application)

Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 have been made clearer. However, the amendments to Paragraph 3 in 
relation to "other international instruments" represents a mixed blessing. Although it tries to 
address the concern of the Netherlands and others that progressive treatments of environmental 
liability in current and future instruments not be precluded from application in the Antarctic 
Treaty area, the phrasing here allows other interpretations. The new qualification refers not 
just to liability, but to international instruments "concerning environmental protection". The 
essence of the Netherlands' proposal, as ASOC understood it, that the "best" liability 
provisions available be operational in Antarctica, and the present text does not quite capture 
that sense.

Paragraph 4 of the Sixth Offering, deleted here, represented a positive attempt to ensure that 
the liability annex does not preclude the application of subsequent liability obligations under 
other instruments. It should be restored.

ARTICLE 3 (Definitions)

Substantial changes to the drafting of this article have occurred since the Draft Seventh 
Offering.

The reworking of Article 1(a) to identify "damage" positively (rather than by what it is NOT) 
is positive. However, "damage" remains qualified by either "more than minor and more than 
transitory" or "significant and lasting". Both terms are new to the Protocol, and substantially 
raise the threshold for "damage". "Significant and lasting" is a novel term, for which no case 
history is available, and which represents a major raising of the burden of proof. Further, its 
employment would reverse the onus of proof regarding impact found in the Protocol. For the 
purposes of this Annex, ASOC proposes that an impact be regarded as damage unless the 
impact upon the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is no more 
than minor OR transitory.

In 1(b), the qualifier "harmful" in square brackets should be deleted as an additional and 
unnecessary qualification. To open a defence that an effect is not harmful is to raise the 
burden of proof substantially.

Excluding from the definition of "damage" not only impacts identified as "unavoidable" in 
CEEs, but those so identified in IEEs would represent a very serious weakening of the annex, 
and is therefore opposed by ASOC. We note that the text at (aa)(i) and (ii) here is an 
improvement over that found in the Draft Seventh Offering, although "Initial" is still retained 
in square brackets.

IEEs are not subject to international scrutiny and Parties should not be allowed to insulate 
themselves against liability through this EIA process.

Further, the extremely limited guidance as to what an IEE should entail, provided in Article 
2 of Annex I, makes no reference to identification of unavoidable impacts.    
2
It is politically naive to suppose that other Parties, far less the CEP, would challenge the conclusion of an IEE in any but the most extreme instances. Accordingly, there must be some mechanism of effective scrutiny and authorisation for liability purposes IF Parties are to be allowed to employ them for liability insulation. Unless this can be agreed, ASOC continues to believe that references to IEEs in Paragraph 1(aa) should be excised.

A new defence against "damage" is presented in (bb). ASOC does not believe that IEEs should be included. We are also concerned that the effect of the new text may be to encourage less than rigorous examination of potential impacts during the preparation of the CEE, which might subsequently be asserted to demonstrate lack of scientific knowledge at that point, and thus a defence against liability for damage. Scrutiny by Parties of CEEs is not yet such that one can be confident that all avoidable gaps in knowledge will be identified and drawn to the proposing Party's attention.

ASOC has heard the case of the Vostok Lake presented as an example of supposed changes in scientific knowledge, which might have had significant consequences in terms of damage. The argument goes that until the past few years we were ignorant of the existence of the lake, and it could not have been considered in any EIA conducted. Scientifically important deep ice core drilling at the site could therefore have penetrated the lake, potentially damaging it. It is asserted that since there would have been no reasonable grounds for knowing that there was a lake, it would be inequitable for inadvertent damage to the lake to result in liability of the particular operator.

However, this model scenario does not bear comparison with the reality. The Vostok Lake was identified in the mid 1970s by airborne radio echo survey, and widely reported in major journals. What the past several years have provided is increased detail. Accordingly, ASOC would argue that here, as in most cases, there is likely to be sufficient information available to expect a reasonable level of care and caution. A failure to take this care which results in damage to the environment should certainly entail liability. We are concerned that extreme scenarios are not used to justify general rules here which provide "escape clauses" for those whose actions result in damage.

How highly technical and politically charged disputes about whether impacts could reasonably have been predicted could be settled in practice by Parties is an important question. We have serious doubts about the practicality, even were the desirability of such a clause obvious. ASOC favours the deletion of paragraph (bb).

Paragraph 4 excessively qualifies the measures taken. It may be taken to assign particular significance to the so-called "objective factors" listed. The corollary of this may be that other factors (such as a recognition of values or ethical considerations in Antarctica) are, by default, seen as subjective and thus of less importance. The "objective factors" also include the factors of technological and economic feasibility. Since the significance to it of these factors can only be determined by the Party whose activity caused the incident, a potential conflict of interest may arise.

ASOC believes that the concept of "reasonable" should either be broadened to encompass a wider range of factors, or left implicit for determination under the particular circumstance obtaining. 
3
In Paragraph 5, ASOC favours use of the term "damage".

ARTICLE 3 bis (Strict Liability)

The text is identical to the Sixth Offering and ASOC's remarks on that draft continue to apply:

"This brief new article is positive", ASOC Commentary on Chairman's Sixth Offering.

ARTICLE 3 ter (Joint and Several Liability)

The square bracketed text should be deleted. Otherwise, in any case where there might be more than one responsible Party or entity, each will try to assert that the damages are reasonably separable and refuse to pay damages until a determination has been made on severability. This language defeats the purpose of having joint and several liability.

ARTICLE 3 quarter (Obligation to Impose Liability on Operators)

This new Article is positive. Paragraph (a) has been slightly amended since the Draft Seventh Offering. "Activity" is a broader and preferable term to "expedition".

ARTICLE 4 (Preparedness and Response Action)

Remedial measures have been totally removed.

The qualification of "incidents" in Paragraph 1 is an improvement over the text in the Draft Seventh Offering. However, the concept of practicability which is still present as an alternative provides excessive escape clauses.

Paragraph 4 of the Draft Seventh Offering showed substantial improvement over earlier Offerings, recognising that where the responsible operator does not carry out response action, it is in the interests of the environment that another entity should do so. Here, however, is a reversion to the requirement for authorisation by a State Party. ASOC prefers the formulation in the Draft Offering.

ARTICLE 5 (Liability)

The text now deals only with response action, but still includes the requirement for prior
                                                                                                                         4
authorisation. Response action carried out by a State Party or entity should be reimbursed 
without this qualification. The new text at the end of Paragraph 1 may be an attempt to 
resolve the authorisation aspect, but its exact meaning is not clear.

ARTICLE 5 bis (Unrepaired damage)

The key limitation of this revised text is that there appears now to be no obligation to carry 
out remedial action as such, but merely to compensate for unrepaired damage. Remedial 
action becomes a discretionary alternative to providing compensation. ASOC sees this as an 
unhelpful approach which will not best serve the Antarctic environment.

Changes in Paragraph 3 to trigger liability within three months of the incident, rather than 
within three months of acceptance of liability are positive. The text in square brackets should 
be retained.

ARTICLE 5 ter (Disputes as to Liability)

The twin track approach to dispute resolution proposed in this Article is a sound approach, 
which ASOC supports.

ARTICLE 6 (Extent of Liability)

This Article is a considerable improvement over the text in the Sixth Offering. The changes 
to the text since the Draft Seventh Offering are positive, tightening the language of the 
paragraphs.

ARTICLE 7 (Liability of States Parties)

ASOC supports the addition of the German suggested wording from Note 38: "if that State 
Party has adopted laws and regulations and taken the necessary administrative measures, 
including enforcement for securing compliance of operators with the Protocol and its 
Annexes."

ARTICLE 8 (Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security)

Despite changes since the Draft Seventh Offering, the text is largely the same as the Fifth 
Offering.
                                                                                                                         5
This Article still represents a selective focus on non-state operators, and from an environmental security perspective it is difficult to see why state operators (who these days occur in a multiplicity of forms from Departments of Government to quasi commercial entities) should not be similarly bound to maintain insurance or "other financial security".

ASOC reiterates its belief that all who operate in Antarctica should be required to insure against all reasonable risks of causing damage.

ARTICLE 9 (Limits)

Notwithstanding the deletion of Paragraph 1, the preliminary nature of the text here does not warrant comment at this stage.

ARTICLE 10 (Environmental Protection Fund)

Significant redrafting of this article has occurred since the Draft Seventh Offering. The present text is encouraging and ASOC hopes that it will provide a useful starting point for substantive discussion in Christchurch.

ARTICLE 11 (Dispute Settlement)

The text is identical to the Sixth Offering and ASOC's remarks on that draft continue to apply:

"This new article replaces one named "Claims Tribunals" in the earlier Offerings. The judgement that disputes should simply be linked back to the pertinent Dispute Settlement articles (18-20) of the Protocol seems sensible at this stage." ASOC Commentary on Chairman's Sixth Offering.

ARTICLE 12 (Amendment or Modification)

The text is identical to all previous Offerings and existing Protocol Annexes. ASOC has no disagreement with the text as presently hitherto.

* As with ASOC's Commentary on the Draft Seventh Offering, this Commentary includes (within quotation marks "...")remarks provided in ASOC Commentaries on earlier Chairman's Offerings where Articles of the present Draft are unchanged. Copies of previous ASOC 

6
··
··
·
·
·
··
·
Commentaries are available to any delegation which requests them.

ASOC Southern Hemisphere Secretariat
Private Bag 92 507
Wellesley Street, Auckland
NEW ZEALAND
Tel: (64) (9) 630 6317
Fax: (64) (9) 630 7121

ASOC Northern Hemisphere Secretariat
424 C Street NE
Washington DC 20002
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Tel: (1) (202) 544 0226
Fax: (1) (202) 544 8483

 
   
 
 

 
·
 
:
 
   
 
 

 
 

 
   
 
7
 
 
 
·
:
