ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE    XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



OPENING ADDRESS BY HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF
POLAND




Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Poland

XXI ATCM/IP81
May, 1997
Original: English
Christchurch, 19.05.1997

Opening address by Dr. Waldemar Figaj, Head of the Delegation of Poland.

Mr. Chairman,

First of all I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Twenty 
First st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. On behalf of the delegation of Poland I 
would like to express our appreciation for the warm and cordial welcome given to us 
by the Government of New Zealand and by the official representatives of the city of 
Christchurch.

Mr Chairman,

● Poland attaches great importance to Antarctic issues. Our involvement in Antarctic 
matters is long and impressive for a country, which does not belong to the Southern 
hemisphere. Three months ago, we celebrated the centenary of the first Antarctic 
expedition to winter in Antarctica, in which two Polish explorers took part - Henryk 
Arctowski and Antoni Dobrowolski. They joined Adrian de Gerlache de Gomery , the 
famous organiser of the "Belgica" Antarctic Expedition.

Since 1977 Polish Antarctic research has been continuous in many fields, including 
climatology, oceanography, biology, ecology, geomorphology and geology. Research 
at our permanent station "Henryk Arctowski" is closely related to international 
programmes , co-ordinated by SCAR.

Our studies undertaken during the many cruises of the research vessel, “Profesor 
Siedlecki”, contributed to a better understanding of the whole Antarctic ecosystem.

● Henryk Arctowski station has been modernised recently and we hope that it will serve 
science for another twenty years. Poland and Brazil have initiated the first Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) at Admiralty Bay. Arctowski station is facing the 
challenge of admitting around three thousand tourists a year. It shows how important 
are our ATCM ‘ efforts to minimise environmental impacts of diverse human activities 
in Antarctica.

In this respect Poland is in favour of the prompt establishment of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection , which is required by the Environmental Protocol. We hope 
that the Protocol, after its ratification by all ATCP countries will improve the 
effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty and will give us a clear direction of further 
activities of the ATCM.

We are also pleased to see that the impact of human activities on the ecosystem is 
closely and effectively monitored by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources. In addition to CCAMLR efforts in this area, Poland arranges 
for additional, national inspections of fishing activities in the Convention area.
We have noted substantial progress in the work of the TEWG and the Group on Liability. In our opinion a liability regime should be effective and realistic, taking into account specific conditions of human activities in Antarctica.

With regard to the issue of the establishment of a permanent secretariat, our delegation is of the opinion that it is essential to have executive support for our activities.

Our delegation Mr Chairman, would like to express its willingness to actively cooperate with other ATCM delegations and we are looking forward to a fruitful meeting.
