ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                 XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
ANTARCTIC STRATOSPHERIC OZONE - CURRENT STATUS REPORT

 
Agenda item 12                 Submitted by WMO

XXI ATCM/IP44
May, 1997
Original: English
2

ANTARCTIC STRATOSPHERIC OZONE - CURRENT STATUS REPORT

Introduction

Ozone is a naturally occurring gas which is vital to the Earth because it protects all life it from ultraviolet radiation emitted by the Sun. Ozone is present as a trace gas throughout the earth's atmosphere but it is mostly concentrated in the stratosphere. The ozone layer absorbs solar ultraviolet radiation and converts it into heat that warms the surrounding atmosphere thus causing a thermal region in the atmosphere called the stratosphere which extends to an altitude of 50 kilometres. The base of the stratosphere is around an altitude of 13 km in the equatorial region and about 10 kilometres above mean sea level over Antarctica. All the ozone in the ozone layer above a particular point would form a layer of pure ozone only about 3 mm thick if the stratospheric ozone was compressed down to sea level pressure.

Scientists are focussing on what effects changes in stratospheric ozone might have on the balance of incoming and outgoing radiation that drives the Earth's climate. Also, the eruption of Mt Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991 has again illustrated how volcanically-induced changes in stratospheric aerosols can influence climate both through aerosol induced changes in the radiation balance and by changing stratospheric chemistry. It is finally becoming clearer that changes in the vertical profile of stratospheric temperature and ozone, resulting from increasing the concentration of anthropogenic gases, provide "fingerprints" of climate change which are large enough to be observed with a high degree of confidence. Scientists are seeking to understand stratospheric processes to correctly understand their influence on the total atmosphere. The atmosphere can be divided into several thermal layers as shown, each with its own characteristics. In Antarctica the troposphere extends from the polar ice cap to about 10km above sea level. The Antarctic stratosphere is found betweem 10km and 50km above sea level.

Vertical profiles

Observations are essential to satisfactorily define the vertical distribution of ozone. The use of balloon-borne ozone sondes is the only way, at present, of accurately measuring ozone concentration in the lower levels of the stratosphere, where the largest global-scale trends in ozone depletion are occuring. Ozone is also a major greenhouse gas and its three-dimensional distribution is a very important input for models which predict global warming.

Antarctic Continent

Antarctica is fairly well represented with vertical profiles of ozone being measured using balloon-borne sondes about weekly from South Pole, McMurdo, Dumont d'Urville, Syowa, Von Neumayer, Halley and Marambio.

It should be noted that the Auroral and Space Physics Group of Australian Antarctic Division is to install LIDAR (LIght Detection And Ranging) equipment at Davis in the summer of 1997/98. As part of the research strategy in middle and upper atmosphere physics it is
3

planned to install a Brewer or other spectrophotometer at Davis in the summer of 1998/99.
The Bureau of Meteorology has been requested to cooperate by commencing a weekly ozone
sonde routine at Davis in the summer of 1998/99, with the funds for purchase of ozone
sondes to be provided by the research community.

Sub-Antarctic Islands

International research is continuing to increase our understanding of the processes that control
ozone concentration. The Sub Antarctic islands have been identified as ideal locations for the
weekly release of ozone sondes and extra efforts should be made to establish ozone observing
routines on some of them.

The Bureau of Meteorology Observatory at Macquarie Island was involved in the Airborne
Southern Hemisphere Ozone Experiment (ASHOE), a NASA project examining midwinter
ozone depletion from Christchurch to the South Pole. During 1994, one balloon-borne ozone
sonde was released per week to measure the vertical profile of ozone and related
meteorological parameters. The frequency of soundings was increased to several balloon
releases per week during the intensive observing phases of ASHOE.

Australia commenced in November 1996 weekly release of balloon-borne ozone sondes from
Macquarie Island for the next four years. Principal Investigator, Prof David Karoly, Director,
Cooperative Research Centre for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology, Monash University,
plans to continue this project until 1999/2000.

Satellite remote sensing

National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration of the USA

A near-to-real time extraction routine and archive for Tiros Operational Vertical Sounder
(TOVS) total ozone data derived from the IR radiometers on the National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) series of satellites were put in place by Arthur Downey
Atkinson, Cooperative Research Centre for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology. The
NOAA/NESDIS TOVS data is used to give a complete polar view of the Southern
Hemisphere (see Figure 1).

There is no truly integrated space-based system for ozone monitoring; the last Total Ozone
Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) UV instrument is planned by NASA/NOAA for launch in
2000 and there are no plans by any nation for ozone instrument flights beyond 2007. Total
ozone and vertical profile measurements are achievable, there is an international commitment
that ozone needs to be monitored globally, WMO's Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) and
ICSU's International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP) are working towards
integrated plans; such a move would also raise the profile of atmospheric chemistry
monitoring which has been neglected in the past.
4

Earth resources satellites

Scientific investigators have been able to access to data from the GOME instrument on the 
Earth Resources Satellite (ERS-2) launched by the European Space Agency in April 1995. 
Public access to GOME data was made available in real time from May 1996. Japan's 
Advanced Earth Observations Satellite (ADEOS) was launched in August 1996. ADEOS 
carries a suite of ozone instruments including a TOMS type UV instrument. Access to data 
from the ADEOS satellite can be obtained by making application to the National Space 
Development Agency (NASDA) of Japan.

Earth observation is now widely recognised, in fields beyond meteorology, as essential for 
understanding the earth system. A wide variety of needs and requirements have been 
identified which have created a demand for a complex set of space borne instruments. The 
remedying of many of the deficiencies identified by the IPCC on issues such as 
environmental security and sustainable development, are crucially dependent on space-based 
observations. The best way of obtaining the necessary commitment from Government-
sponsored agencies (users and providers) is to define a pilot project which would clearly 
demonstrate the concept and would lead to evaluation of the costs and benefits of further 
expansion. The ideal project might be an integrated system for global ozone monitoring.

Polar Stratospheric Clouds and their role in Atmospheric Chemistry

The extremely cold temperatures within the polar vortex lead to formation of polar 
stratospheric clouds (PSCs) over large areas in early winter. These clouds are the key to the 
severe ozone depletion which has become known as the ozone "hole". PSCs form at the 
lower, colder altitudes (13-22 km). The clouds are a major factor in causing large total 
column ozone depletion in the springtime Antarctic stratosphere. The rapid photochemical 
destruction of ozone in the Antarctic stratosphere is due in part to heterogeneous (involving 
more than one state, i.e. solid and gas) chemical reactions occurring on the surface of ice 
crystals in PSCs, which release reactive chlorine species that destroy ozone. The chemical 
reactions are induced by the return of sunlight after the winter polar darkness.

Volcanic eruptions cause an increase in ozone depletion for a few years. The greatest source 
of cloud condensation nuclei in the stratosphere is volcanic eruptions. The large volcanic 
eruptions such as Mt Pinatubo in June 1991 can send significant amounts of sulphur dioxide 
and water vapour into the stratosphere, and sometimes smaller amounts of chlorine. There is 
debate how effective the polar vortex is in containing air on seasonal time scales. Detection 
and tracking of volcanic aerosols can help reveal circulation patterns. This is particularly 
useful for investigating transport within and across the circumpolar vortex. In 1991 the 
Antarctic vortex was effective in isolating polar air above 15 km, but at lower altitudes the 
vortex was easily penetrated by aerosols, leading to enhanced ozone depletion in September 
between 11 and 13 km.
5

Ozone depletion over Antarctica

The greatest destruction of ozone over any region of the world occurs over Antarctica during spring. Prior to the emergence of the ozone hole, the ozone layer over Antarctica in Spring was mainly concentrated in the altitude range 10 - 35 kilometres. Prior to the development of the ozone hole, the Spring ozone layer was at greatest concentration near the 17 kilometres level above sea level with a sharp maximum in the vertical profile at around this level, see Figure 2 showing the vertical profile of ozone measured by a balloon borne sonde above the USA station McMurdo (latitude 77°51'S, longitude 166°40'E) before and after the development of the ozone hole in 1986.

The so called ozone "hole" in the lower stratosphere over Antarctica is a large and rapid depletion, during early spring, of the ozone layer, with complete destruction occurring in August and September of recent years to that part of the ozone layer between 13 km and 22 km above sea level over Antarctica.

      The ozone within the ozone minimum (hole) has been reduced by early October of recent years by about 70% of the average total ozone in pre-ozone hole years. This region of enhanced ozone destruction is mainly confined to the area polewards of about latitude 60°S, being contained to some extent there in early Spring by the stratospheric circumpolar vortex. The vortex of strong westerly winds gradually forms during autumn and breaks down rapidly in late spring.

The dilution effect

The circumpolar vortex in the stratosphere slowly fills in and/or breaks up, usually in November, after the stratospheric winds surrounding and isolating the ozone hole suddenly weaken in late Spring. In some Springs the ozone hole is filled with ozone rich air from more northern latitudes, while the vortex is still over Antarctica. In Spring of other years, after only slight filling has occurred, the ozone hole can be torn apart by large amplitude planetary wave action in the general atmospheric circulation of the stratosphere. In this instance, remnants of the ozone hole can be seen in satellite imagery to be flung away from the Antarctic as they join the general westerly flow, before being completely dissolved into the ozone rich stratosphere of middle latitudes. Through either of these two processes, or a combination of both, ozone depleted air from the ozone hole mixes freely with stratospheric air in more northern locations - the dilution effect. For example, over Melbourne (latitude 38°S) in the months of December and January between 1985 and 1995 losses of between 5% and 9% were recorded in ozone levels, compared with average ozone levels for the same months during the period 1961-1971 (Dr. Paul Lehmann, 1995). Accordingly, the springtime depletion of ozone over Antarctica and early summer reduction of ozone at middle latitudes are closely linked to the meteorology of the stratosphere.

The most severe ozone holes of 1993 and 1994

The area of the ozone hole and the minimum ozone amounts have been observed via satellite imagery since 1978. The main trends have been an increase in area and decrease in minimum
6

value, especially between 1980 and 1992. The greatest depth was about 80 Dobson Units in 
1993. The greatest area observed to be covered by the ozone hole was 24 million square 
kilometres in 1994. (Australia has an area of 7.7 million square kilometres and Europe has an 
area of some 9 million square kilometres).

The 1995 ozone hole

The 1995 ozone hole was similar to the severe ones of the early 1990s, with stratospheric 
ozone over Antarctica dropping to about one third of pre 1980s amounts. The maximum area 
covered by the hole was about 22 million square kilometres (more than twice the area of 
Europe). The maximum extent of the hole is usually in the first week of October. The decay 
of the hole is noticeably affected by stratospheric circulation patterns, but it is usually well 
advanced by the start of December. The 1995 hole eroded slowly and the hole persisted well 
into December.

The 1996 ozone hole

The most distinguishing feature of this year's ozone hole was its early development. From 
satellite imagery it could be seen that the ozone hole of 1996 commenced to develop early in 
August, a week or so earlier than in previous years. The lowest value of total column ozone 
occurred in early October and the area of the ozone hole (as defined as ozone values of less 
than 220 Dobson Units) had peaked at 22 million square kilometres. In 1996 the number of 
days where the ozone hole covered an area of greater than 10 million square kilometres was 
about 80. This compares with 25 days in 1985. Vertical profiles taken using balloon-borne 
ozone sondes at Neumayer and Syowa showed almost complete annihilation of ozone 
between about 16 and 22 km in altitude. In this layer temperatures were about −80°C which 
favours maintenance of the circumpolar vortex and facilitates ozone destruction chemistry.

Stratospheric Cooling

Stratospheric temperatures at 100 hPa obtained by balloon-borne radiosonde ascents, near the 
peak of the ozone layer, can be used to reflect changes in ozone amounts. Stratospheric 
clouds, which are crucial to the mechanism of ozone depletion, are likely to be present when 
the 100 hPa temperature is below −80°C, and may persist while the temperature is below 
−75°C.

A regular programme of radiosonde flights has been maintained at Halley (75°36'S, 29°9'W) 
by British Antarctic Survey with support from the UK Meteorological Office. Balloon-borne 
instruments are launched at 1200 UTC each day; a procedure that they have carried out 
without interruption for 40 years at Halley. Dr J. D. Shanklin, British Antarctic Survey, 
reports that data from Halley show that the 100 hPa rose during October 1996 from −83°C to 
reach −73°C at the end of the month, which was still 8°C below the long term mean. The 
explosive stratospheric warming that normally occurs in Spring over Antarctica, accompanied 
by increasing stratospheric ozone, was a more subdued event in 1996 than has been usual in 
the past 40 years. The 100 hPa temperature increased slowly through November to reach -
73°C (some 25°C below the long term mean) above Halley. The final stratospheric warming
7

in 1996 occurred in December but the 100 hPa temperature remained substantially below the 
long term mean until it peaked at -38°C on 27 December 1996. In January 1997 the 100 hPa 
temperature was around -41°C, a little below the long term mean over Halley.

The future

The cause of the springtime polar ozone depletion is the large anthropogenic increase in 
stratospheric halogen levels in recent years. Stratospheric chlorine levels are expected to 
reach a maximum before the end of this decade, because tropospheric chlorine levels have 
already reached their maximum in 1992 and the impact of this should be seen in the 
stratosphere, with a lag of about five years. Tropospheric bromine levels are still rising, but 
the rate of rise has slowed. Assuming that, as appears likely, tropospheric bromine stops 
increasing by the end of this decade, then stratospheric bromine levels may not reach a 
maximum until as late as 2005. Altogether, total effective stratospheric chlorine (stratospheric 
chlorine plus stratospheric bromine weighted by ozone depletion effectiveness) should reach 
its maximum sometime during the years 2000-2005, provided strict adherence to the Madrid 
Protocol ensues for both developed and developing countries. (Roger Atkinson and Paul 
Fraser, Met Talk, The Newsletter of the CRC for Southern Hemisphere Meteorology, 
Volume1, Issue 2, November 1996).

Other factors, such as recent volcanic activity, the interannular variability of the meteorology 
of the stratosphere, also determine the time of formation, eventual depth and extent, and 
persistence of the ozone hole in a particular year, so it is not possible to accurately predict its 
year-by-year variability.

Since its discovery in 1985, by scientists of the British Antarctic Survey (Joe Farman, Brian 
Gardiner and Jonathan Shanklin, Nature, 315: 207-210), the so-called "Antarctic ozone 
hole", a sharp decline in the springtime ozone column over Antarctica, has been the subject of 
an urgent and intense research effort. The lowest October mean total column ozone above 
Halley Bay occurred in 1993 and there has been a slight increase in the October mean in 
subsequent years (see Figure 3). It is possible that the ozone hole is starting to decrease in 
severity on a long term basis. However, it is likely to be five years or more before a 
statistically significant trend in the weakening of the ozone hole may emerge.
Total Ozone Analysis
Valid 23UTC 19 Sep 1996

480
460
440
420
400
380
360
340
320
300
280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100

BoM/CRC-SHM Statistical Interpolation
of NOAA/NESDIS TOVS Retrievals

Figure 1
Figure 2 The vertical profile of ozone above McMurdo 
before and after the development of the 1986 
ozone 'hole'
October mean total ozone
Halley, 1956-1996
(Source: J.D. Shanklin, British Antarctic Survey)

350

300

250

200

150

100
1950       1960       1970       1980       1990       2000
                         Year

∆ Farman et al data
∆ Subseqent Data

Total Ozone (DU)

Figure 3
ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

                                
                                ANTARCTIC STRATOSPHERIC OZONE - CURRENT
                                STATUS REPORT

                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                Agenda item 12                  Submitted by WMO

                                XXI ATCM/IP44 Rev 1
                                May, 1997
                                Original: English
The only revision to IP44 is on page 7:

Madrid Protocol should read Montreal Protocol

•

•

•
