ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER




Agenda item 5ii                  Submitted by CCAMLR

XXI ATCM/IP77
May, 1997
Original: English
STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XXIst ATCM

CCAMLR welcomes the opportunity to inform the Consultative Parties of recent developments in its work.

2. Among recent important developments in the work of CCAMLR are the opening of a number of new fisheries in the Convention Area and the introduction of a common and integrated management approach for these fisheries, further improvements to the System of Inspection and the Scheme of International Scientific Observation, new initiatives aimed at reducing the incidental mortality of seabirds in longline fisheries and also in relation to monitoring marine debris in Antarctic waters. These and other activities are briefly described below.

MEMBERSHIP

3. Since the XXth ATCM Uruguay has become a full Member of the Commission. CCAMLR now comprises 23 Members and six Acceding States. The Republic of Namibia has expressed interest in participating in the work of CCAMLR, and its Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources is presently studying the prospect of Namibia's acceding to the Convention. A map of the CCAMLR Convention Area and a list of current CCAMLR Members and Acceding States are attached (Appendices A and B).

FISHERIES in the 1995/96 and 1996/97 seasons

Krill

4. The reported catch of krill (Euphausia superba) in the 1995/96 season totalled 95 053 tonnes, which represents an approximate decrease of 20% compared with the total taken in the 1994/95 season (118 714 tonnes). The 1995/96 catches were almost exclusively taken by Japan, Poland and Ukraine, for the most part in Subareas 48.1 and 48.3.

5. An acoustic survey of krill stocks in the Eastern Indian Ocean sector of the Convention Area (Division 58.4.1), carried out by Australia, gave a biomass estimate of 6.67 million tonnes. Based on this estimate, a precautionary annual catch limit of 775 000 tonnes of krill was established by the Commission for this division.

1
6.       In 1996/97, fishing for krill is also open in Area 48 (Atlantic Antarctic) and 
         Division 58.4.2 (Sodruzhestva Sea and Prydz Bay), with precautionary catch limits of 1.5 
         million and 445 thousand tonnes respectively.

Other Fisheries

7.       The total reported catch of finfish in the Convention Area in the 1995/96 season was 
         8 826 tonnes, which was less than that taken in the 1994/95 season. The catches comprised 
         mainly (99%) Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides). The majority of catches were 
         taken by Chile and France in Subarea 48.3 and Division 58.5.1 respectively. Six other 
         Members reported catches of Patagonian toothfish - Argentina, Bulgaria, Japan, Republic of 
         Korea, Russia, Ukraine and the United States. No catches were reported from the four 
         fisheries for other finfish species which were open and for which total allowable catches 
         (TACs) were allocated.

8.       Reported crab catches from the experimental fishery for Paralomis spinosissima in 
         Subarea 48.3 totalled 497 tonnes. The company involved in this fishery does not intend to 
         continue its operations during the 1996/97 season.

9.       A catch of 52 tonnes of squid, Martialia hyadesi, was reported from Subarea 48.3 
         during a seven-day experimental fishing survey. This represents the first significant catch of 
         squid in the Convention Area.

10.     Several notifications of intent to initiate new fisheries in the 1996/97 season were 
         received and considered by the Commission and the Scientific Committee. A set of 
         conservation measures establishing precautionary catch limits and other fishing regulations 
         was adopted by the Commission for the 1996/97 season in respect of new fisheries for:

           Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) in Statistical Division 58.4.3;

           Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) in Statistical Subarea 48.6;

           Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) in Statistical Subareas 88.1 and 88.2;

           Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) in Statistical Subareas 58.6 and 58.7 
             and in Statistical Division 58.4.4;

2
- Deep-water finfish species in Statistical Division 58.5.2; and
- Squid (Martialia hyadesi) in Subarea 48.3.

11. Some of these fisheries have already commenced and others are about to do so. The data which Members are required to submit from these fisheries include five-day or ten-day catch and effort reports and also monthly fine-scale effort and biological data reports.

MANAGEMENT OF NEW FISHERIES IN THE CONVENTION AREA

12. During the last few years the Commission has developed and implemented a number of conservation measures for new and exploratory fisheries.

13. The purpose of these measures is to obtain information from the very beginning of the fishery in order to evaluate its potential and geographical distribution, and its impact on target as well as dependent and related species. This information provides a basis for the development of data collection and research/fishery operation plans for the 'exploratory' stage of a fishery. The above-mentioned measures aim to prevent exploratory fishing from expanding faster than the acquisition of information necessary to ensure that the fishery can and will be conducted in accordance with precautionary principles for the conservation of resources.

14. For all areas where new fisheries will operate during the 1996/97 season, particularly those targeting Patagonian toothfish, a common and integrated approach to fisheries management is being developed. A new fishery shall be deemed to have demonstrated commercial potential if a total catch in this fishery reaches a certain limit. For Statistical Division 58.4.3 and Subareas 88.1 and 88.2 this limit is 1 980 tonnes, while for Statistical Subareas 58.6, 58.7 and Division 58.4.4 it is 2 200 tonnes. Once a total catch reaches the catch limit, the fishery for this subarea or division shall be closed. Any further management of this fishery will be conducted in accordance with regulations applied to exploratory fisheries.

15. As part of this development a new regulation, in addition to precautionary limits, was introduced for new fisheries for toothfish during the 1996/97 season. This regulation requires that fishing in any fine-scale rectangle (0.5° latitude by 1.0° longitude) shall cease when the reported catch reaches 100 tonnes. Fishing in any fine-scale rectangle is restricted to one 
3
vessel at any particular time. This ensures the distribution of catch and fishing effort over a 
wide geographic area in a way that should reduce the risk of localised over-fishing and 
augment the collection of data for stock assessment.

16. At last year's meeting, the Commission decided that the above-mentioned approach to 
new fisheries may require review in order to ensure effective management of new fisheries, 
and their subsequent development and the accrual of information from them during their 
exploratory phases. The need for regular scientific reviews of fisheries development was also 
recognised.

17. The Commission will continue the development of a common and integrated 
approach to new and exploratory fisheries as a matter of priority. The establishment of a 
procedure for resuming lapsed or closed fisheries would also be a part of this development.

CCAMLR SCHEME OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION

18. The placement of international scientific observers on board commercial fishing 
vessels of CCAMLR Members in the Convention Area has become a widely-used practice 
since the introduction of the Scheme of International Scientific Observation in 1993.

19. During the 1995/96 season, international scientific observers were placed on 16 
vessels which were fishing for Patagonian toothfish in Subarea 48.3. The data collected by 
the observers were submitted to CCAMLR.

20. The quantity and quality of data deriving from this scheme are extremely high and 
have enabled stock assessments to be improved considerably. The data also proved 
particularly useful in assessing the effectiveness of measures taken to mitigate seabird by-
catch in longline fisheries.

21. The Scheme operates on the basis of bilateral arrangements between Members 
designating and receiving observers. For the following fisheries several Conservation 
Measures require that a scientific observer designated under the Scheme or, in some cases, a 
national observer be placed on board of each fishing vessel:

- All longline fisheries for Patagonian toothfish, Dissostichus eleginoides;
- Fishery for grey rockcod, Lepidonotothen squamifrons in Statistical Division 58.4.4; and
- All new fisheries (i.e. those operating under Conservation Measure 31/X).

4
22. Following a decision at CCAMLR-XV, each Member nominated a technical coordinator 
for the national observer program who is responsible for advance notification to the 
Secretariat of all observers designated and the duration of their programs, the timeliness of 
the submission of reports on observations, and answering data queries from the Secretariat.

23. In order to assist national technical coordinators and scientific observers in planning 
observation programs and recording data, a new revised edition of the Scientific Observers 
Manual was prepared. In addition to guidelines for scientific observation, this edition 
contains a set of logbook forms with instructions for recording the results of observations. 
The Manual will be published in all four official languages of the Commission later this year.

ECOSYSTEM MONITORING PROGRAM

24. The work of the Scientific Committee on the conceptual model of ecosystem 
monitoring and management has mainly been focused this year on improving our 
understanding of the processes and linkages between harvested species, dependent species, 
the environment and the fishery.

25. Progress has been made on the analysis of biological indices, as part of the CCAMLR 
Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP), particularly regarding the identification of 
anomalies and trends. Work is continuing on the qualitative presentation of CEMP results and 
means of incorporating them into the CCAMLR management strategy for Antarctic marine 
living resources.

26. The Scientific Committee has approved a number of new standard techniques for 
CEMP which relate to the attachment of instruments, data collection using time-depth 
recorders and methods for monitoring petrels.

PREVENTION OF INCIDENTAL MORTALITY OF SEABIRDS DURING FISHING 
OPERATIONS

27. Over the past few years a significant decline has been recorded in populations of 
several species of seabirds, particularly albatrosses. This decline has been widely attributed to 
longline fishing operations. Seabirds feed on longline baits, become hooked and drown. 
CCAMLR has joined the worldwide effort to tackle this problem.

5
28. The Scheme of International Scientific Observation allows for the collection of data 
required to assess the problem of incidental mortality of seabirds and the effectiveness of 
CCAMLR's mitigation measures.

29. CCAMLR has initiated the exchange of information on incidental mortality with a 
number of international fisheries organisations. In particular, CCAMLR was pleased to note the 
establishment by the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) of 
the Working Group on Ecologically Related Species (ERSWG), whose terms of reference 
include investigating interactions between tuna longline fisheries and seabirds. CCAMLR has 
encouraged other international organisations with similar responsibilities to follow this 
example.

30. As part of its continuing efforts to minimise seabird mortality in longline fisheries, in 
1996 CCAMLR published an educational book for fishermen, Fish the Sea not the Sky, which 
explains how to avoid by-catch of seabirds when fishing with bottom longlines. Funds were 
provided for this purpose by the Australian Antarctic Foundation.

31. CCAMLR Members have undertaken to make every possible effort to ensure that this 
book will be made available on board every vessel fishing under their flags in the Southern 
Ocean. The book is also being widely distributed to many international fisheries 
organisations as well as international and national agencies with a vested interest in the 
protection of seabirds and fisheries management.

32. The CCAMLR Co-ordinating Group on Incidental Mortality of Seabirds Arising from 
Longline Fisheries (WG-IMALF) continues to work intersessionally.

MARINE DEBRIS

33. The results of several surveys aimed at monitoring the incidence of marine debris in 
the Convention Area have been reported. At the last year's meeting, the Commission 
expressed its concern that current survey data indicate an increase in the amount of marine 
debris in the Southern Ocean and that fishing vessels may well be the main source of such 
pollution.

34. The Commission has decided to undertake an educational initiative to counteract this 
trend. The Secretariat was requested to prepare, in consultation with its Members,

6
appropriate materials to form the basis of a campaign to reduce marine debris in the area. An 
ad hoc working group has been established to undertake this task by correspondence, and the 
Secretariat has also approached other international and national organisations with similar 
interests to request for assistance.

SYSTEM OF INSPECTION

35.  In the 1995/96 season, thirty-two inspectors were designated by Members in 
accordance with the CCAMLR System of Inspection, and five inspections were carried out. 
All five inspections demonstrated general compliance with conservation measures, although 
some infringements were noted.

36.  The Commission also considered information provided by Members in accordance 
with Articles X and XXII of the Convention. This information included Members' reports on 
vessels of Contracting Parties and States which are not Party to the Convention being sighted 
in the Convention Area.

37.  Of extreme concern to the Commission was further evidence of illegal fishing 
activities in the Convention Area. In accordance with Members' reports received in 1996 and 
1997, the extent of illegal fishing activities in the Convention Area poses a serious problem. 
The reports received from Members also indicated another potentially serious problem, that 
of the reflagging of vessels.

38.  The presence of vessels of non-Members of CCAMLR fishing in the Convention Area 
has also been considered by the Commission. These vessels are not necessarily bound by 
CCAMLR Conservation Measures, such as those which provide for the submission of data on 
catches. As agreed by the Commission, its Chairman has written to the Governments of the 
Flag States of such vessels to convey a firm message that such activities undermine the 
effectiveness of CCAMLR's conservation approach.

39.  In order to increase the effectiveness of the CCAMLR System of Inspection, Members 
have been requested by the Commission to provide information on all fishing vessels 
(i) which are on its register and have been renamed; (ii) which have assumed its registration; 
or (iii) which have left their registration and have been reflagged elsewhere.

40.  The Commission has also recognised that the effectiveness of the System of 
Inspection can be improved by obtaining information on the position of vessels as well as on 
7
their movements in and out of the Convention Area and between CCAMLR Statistical Areas.

41. Several CCAMLR Members have already established satellite-based monitoring of their 
vessels in waters under their own national jurisdictions or conducted pilot studies on the 
evaluation of different vessel monitoring systems (VMS). Some have decided to use their 
own national VMS to monitor their flag vessels in the Convention Area and to communicate 
during the intersessional period on the operation of these systems.

42. Further progress was made this year towards increasing the ability of Inspectors to 
exercise their duties. The Commission adopted two amendments to the System of Inspection 
dealing with the submission of supplementary information and reports by inspectors, and also 
with 'indicators of fishing' covering all methods of fishing currently in use in the Convention 
Area.

COOPERATION WITHIN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

43. The report of the CCAMLR Observer at the XXth ATCM was discussed by the 
Commission. The Scientific Committee also considered the report of its observer at the 
XXIVth meetings of SCAR. In reviewing the numerous items of interest to CCAMLR presented 
in these reports, the following observations were made:

    (i)     The Commission is awaiting for the ATCM's advice on the precise definition of 
            'marine area' as referred to in Annex V of the Protocol on the Environmental 
            Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; and

   (ii)     The disbandment of the SCAR/SCOR Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean 
            Ecology could substantially reduce the scope of collaboration work between 
            SCAR scientists and the CCAMLR Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring 
            and Management (WG-EMM).

44. It was noted that SCAR made a formal request to CCAMLR for information on planned 
research cruises involving harvested commercial species (Recommendation SCAR XXIV-2). 
The CCAMLR Secretariat has arranged for the required information to be sent to SCAR via 
e-mail for incorporation into its planned electronic bulletin board.

45. The Commission also noted a draft proposal of SCAR to ATCM-XXI on the preparation 
of the state-of-the-environment report to the Antarctic Treaty's Committee for Environmental

8
Protection. The Commission considered that no action on this matter should be taken until it 
had been clarified by the ATCM. It was decided, however, that the Commission should consult 
with the Scientific Committee before any CCAMLR involvement in the compilation of such a 
report is agreed.

46.  In the 1996/97 intersessional period, CCAMLR Members did not make any further 
proposals for protecting CEMP sites. At present, two CEMP sites located on the South Shetland 
Islands (Seal Islands and Cape Shirreff) are protected in accordance with CCAMLR's existing 
procedures. In accordance with CCAMLR regulations, the management plan for the Seal 
Islands CEMP Sites is to be reviewed this year.

COOPERATION WITH OTHER ORGANISATIONS

47.  CCAMLR continues to be active in promoting wider awareness of its objectives and 
work within relevant international organisations and forums. During the 1995/96 and 1996/97 
intersessional periods CCAMLR was represented at meetings of a number of international 
organisations. In addition to SCAR, observers from ASOC, CCSBT, FAO, IOC, IUCN, IWC and 
SCOR also attended the Fifteenth Meeting of CCAMLR.

48.  At its Fifteenth Meeting, the Scientific Committee proposed that closer links be 
developed between the CCAMLR Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) and 
CCSBT's Working Group on Ecologically Related Species (ERSWG) in relation to issues of 
fishery-seabird interactions. As the result of this initiative, a reciprocal arrangement is being 
put in place for representatives from both organisations to participate in the meetings of WG-
FSA and ERSWG.

49.  Cooperation with IWC and IUCN was further strengthened by inviting these 
organisations to send observers to the 1997 meeting of the CCAMLR Working Group on 
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM).

9
CCAMLR

Boundaries of the 
Statistical Reporting 
Area to the 
Southern Ocean

LEGEND
- STATISTICAL AREA
 ZONE STATISTIQUE
 CTATUCTUHECKUII PAIIOH
 AREA ESTADISTICA

..... STATISTICAL SUBAREA
 SOUS ZONE STATISTIQUE
 CYATUCTUHECKUII PODPAIIOH
 SUBAREA ESTADISTICA

- ANTARCTIC CONVERGENCE
 CONVERGENCE ANTARCTIQUE
 AHTAPKTUHECKAfl KOHBEPrEHTHfl
 CONVERGENCIA ANTARTICA

- CONTINENT, ISLAND
 CONTINENT, ILE
 MATEPIK, OCTPOB
 CONTINENTE, ISLA

..... INTEGRATED STUDY REGION
 ZONE D'ETUDE INTEGREE
 PAffOH KOMnJEKCHOrO HCCJIEnOBAHHfl
 REGION DE ESTUDIO INTEGRADO

MAP OF THE CCAMLR CONVENTION AREA                  Appendix A
Appendix B

MEMBERS OF CCAMLR
(as of April, 1997)

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
European Community
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea, Republic of
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Uruguay

STATES PARTY TO THE CONVENTION
BUT NOT MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION

Bulgaria
Canada
Finland
Greece
Netherlands
Peru
