ANTARCTIC TREATY
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

OPENING ADDRESS BY THE REPRESENTATIVE
OF CANADA

Agenda item 3                                  Submitted by Canada

XXI ATCM/IP30
May, 1997
Original: English
.   04/18/97   17:05   0819 997 5813        E.F. ROOTS          603


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Christchurch, New Zealand 19-30 May 1997

OPENING ADDRESS
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA

Mr. Chairman:

On behalf of Canada I am pleased to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this meeting 
of the Antarctic Treaty. My country also expresses its gratitude to the Government of New Zealand for its 
hospitality in hosting this meeting, for thorough arrangements and communications in preparation for our 
discussions, and for the excellent facilities that have been provided. It is fitting, also, that the practice of 
holding ATCM meetings in the countries of the Consultative Parties in succession brings us once again to 
one of the countries closest to Antarctica, in a city which has been the departure point for many historical 
explorations and present-day activities in Antarctica, and the site of a significant centre for Antarctic scientific 
information obtained through the efforts of many countries.

Canada continues its modest but, we hope, constructive involvement in Antarctic affairs, through 
the participation of Canadian scientists in subject areas where our north polar scientific expertise can be 
particularly useful, and in the policy and international relations area where the Antarctic Treaty System and 
its evolution is not only an example of international cooperation and environmental protection important to 
Canadian principles and objectives but also of value in ensuring the growth of knowledge about the polar 
regions that has particular importance to Canada. In that regard, we are pleased to note that the agenda of 
the ATCM meetings now include as a regular item "relevance of developments in the Arctic and the 
Antarctic". An increasing number of the issues and topics important to international governance and 
scientific activities in Antarctica have bi-polar and global relevance; Canada looks forward to these 
discussions and hopes to participate constructively in them.

A development during the past year which will have significance to inter-governmental activities in 
the polar regions has been the formal establishment of the Arctic Council, in which governments of all 
nations with territories north of the Arctic Circle are members. The Arctic Council will facilitate internationa: 
cooperation in northern circumpolar regions, and in some subjects will be the appropriate body to provide 
liaison with the Antarctic Treaty on matters of bi-polar significance. Canada has agreed to chair the Arctic 
Council for the first two years.

Mr. Chairman, Canada wishes you and all delegates success in our forthcoming discussions. The 
Antarctic Treaty System has responsibility for management of a large and important part of the planet, in 
the interests of all humankind and natural ecosystems. The Treaty System is also a successful example, 
although not without difficulties, of the development of consensus-based international policy to carry out a 
shared responsibility and foster a sense of caring for all parts of our planetary home. Canada is pleased 
to be part of this growth and this sense of caring.
