ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIE REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
                          ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY:
                  SUMMARY OF PROGRESS - 1994 to 1997

 
Agenda item 9                  Submitted by United States/United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/IP114
May, 1997
Original: English
ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY:
SUMMARY OF PROGRESS - 1994 to 1997

by
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc.

(Submitted by the United States and the United Kingdom)

This paper reports the results Oceanites, Inc. has achieved 
on the Antarctic Site Inventory during the project's first 
three seasons of work in the Antarctic Peninsula.

Principal objectives of the Antarctic Site Inventory are:
  to determine whether periodic short visits by trained 
investigators transported by tourist expedition 
vessels and other platforms-of-opportunity might 
provide a cost-effective means to characterize and 
detect changes in the flora, fauna, and other features 
of Antarctic Peninsula sites subject to frequent 
visits by tourists; and
  to begin compiling baseline data and information 
necessary to assess and determine how best to minimize 
the environmental impacts of tourism and non-
governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula 
area.

  The methodology for the project and results from previous 
field seasons have been described and discussed in XIX 
ATCM/INF 47, XX ATCM/INF 102, and XX ATCM/INF 100.

Data Categories. Project personnel collect three broad 
categories of data and information on Peninsula visitor sites:
  Basic Site Information: descriptions of key physical 
and topographical characteristics; latitude and 
longitude; distribution of flora, seal haul-out and 
wallow locations, and discrete groups of breeding 
penguins and flying birds; 
  1
- Variable Site Information and Data: weather and other environmental conditions (sea ice extent, cloud cover, snow cover, temperature, wind direction and speed); biological variables (e.g. number of breeding birds, nest counts, numbers and ages of chicks); and the nature and extent of visitor impacts (e.g. footprints or paths, cigarette butts, film canisters, litter); and
    - Maps and Photodocumentation: portraying the major features of each site, particularly the locations of the principal colonies and assemblages of fauna and flora.

The biological parameters relating to the breeding chronologies of penguins and flying birds are chosen with reference to standard methods described in the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. At each site, investigators attempt to select and establish prospective control (seldom disturbed) colonies and experimental (frequently disturbed) colonies to census. The intent is to repeat censuses regularly both near and far from landing beaches where visitors access a site, allowing comparisons over time between areas that have much human activity and those without such activity. As standard practice, investigators count seals at the landing beaches of all survey sites visited, and all southern elephant seal wallows that are found. Orientation maps generated for these purposes are updated and upgraded during and after each field season.

Basic Site Information and Variable Site Information and Data will help to establish geological, glacial, and floral profiles of each site, as well as baselines concerning the numbers and breeding chronologies of penguins and flying birds nesting at each site. Ultimately, these data will help design cost-effective research and monitoring programs to insure that 
2
tourism and other non-governmental activities do not harm the 
Antarctic environment.

The project's aerial photodocumentation results from 
cooperation between Oceanites, Inc. and the UK's ice patrol 
vessel HMS ENDURANCE.

Overall progress. In three field seasons of effort between 
November 1994 and February 1997, Inventory personnel have done 
186 survey visits at 51 visitor sites in the Antarctic 
Peninsula. In addition, project investigators have established 
290 census locations at these 51 sites, 60 of which represent 
prospective control colonies that potentially may allow future 
comparisons of key biological parameters between visited and 
unvisited colonies.

The Inventory includes 39 of the 43 sites (exclusive of 
stations) that were most heavily visited in the seven-year 
period from 1989-1996. The cooperative work with HMS ENDURANCE 
has generated aerial photography for 23 of these 39 sites, and 
27 of these 39 sites have been mapped or sketched. The 
Inventory includes all 21 of the most heavily visited sites in 
the Peninsula.

International Cooperation. The cooperative program of work 
with HMS ENDURANCE is one example of the international 
cooperation the project has generated. Oceanites has 
coordinated with: Instituto Antártico Argentina regarding 
ongoing studies of the fauna and flora at Hope Bay (Esperanza 
Station), Half Moon Island, and Jubany Station; the 
Universidad de Chile regarding ongoing census and survey work 
at Gonzales Videla Station, Paradise Bay; and with the British 
Antarctic Survey regarding mapping and censusing at Port 
Lockroy. Flora photodocumentation produced by the Inventory is 
identified in collaboration with the British Antarctic Survey.

Publications. In June 1996 Oceanites submitted a draft 
report to the US National Science Foundation, Office of Polar 
3
Programs (OPP), regarding the original purposes for which the 
Inventory was initiated. This report, a final version of which 
will be submitted this July, concludes that: (a) it is 
feasible to use expedition tour ships and other vessels 
opportunistically to characterize Antarctic Peninsula visitor 
sites and (b) the project's logistics enabled investigators to 
reach the most heavily visited sites, and to reach these sites 
repeatedly and at key times for collecting relevant biological 
information. The report concludes that data collected during 
Inventory survey visits were sufficient to begin 
characterizing these sites for future assessment purposes.

In November 1996 Oceanites completed a draft report for the 
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Polar Regions Section, 
South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, which represents a 
site-by-site compilation of information collected by the 
Inventory. The draft is under review and a final report will 
be available when this review is completed. The draft report 
examines which Peninsula sites are visited most frequently and 
how visits are distributed in six subareas of the Peninsula. 
The report examines which Inventory sites are most attractive 
to visitors, which have the most diverse fauna and flora, and 
which are potentially sensitive to adverse environmental 
consequences from visiting tourists. The report contains a 
statistical analysis concluding that, in accordance with CEMP 
Working Group standards, the Inventory's census methodology is 
adequate to detect requisite levels of change in the 
parameters being monitored.

The project's methodology is described in "Human Activity 
and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory," an 
article published in Foundations for Ecological Research West 
of the Antarctic Peninsula (American Geophysical Union, 
Washington, 1996). The article summarizes the history of human 
activity in the Peninsula, the potential for impacts from such 
activity, and how the Inventory contributes to creating a 
                                                                4
database of information to assist the preparation and
assessment of such activity.

Plans for the 1997-98 field season. The Inventory's fourth
field season is expected to begin in November 1997 and
continue through mid-February 1998. Again, the project hopes
to place two-person research teams aboard various expedition
ships at key times to collect relevant biological data and
information, to continue the updating and refinement of the
project's site-specific orientation maps, and continue
coordinating efforts with other national Antarctic programs
and their researchers.

References.
• Croxall, J. P. & E. D. Kirkwood, The Distribution of
Penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and Islands of the
Scotia Sea, 1979;
• Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources, CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring
Program (CEMP) Standard Methods for Monitoring
Studies, 1992; and
• Woehler, E. J., The Distribution and Abundance of
Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins, 1993.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Field work for the Antarctic Site Inventory and resulting
reports and publication efforts have been funded by the US
National Science Foundation Office of Polar Programs, the US
Environmental Protection Agency, and the UK Foreign and
Commonwealth Office. The Inventory received logistic support
from: HMS ENDURANCE; the Secretariat of the International
Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO); Quark
Expeditions; Adventure Network; Society Expeditions and the
expedition staff, officers, and crew of MV WORLD DISCOVERER;
Abercrombje & Kent and the expedition staff, officers, and
crew of MV EXPLORER; and Marine Expeditions.
 
5
