ANTARCTIC TREATY
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANNOTATED AGENDA

Agenda item 4                                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP73
May, 1997
Original: English
XXI
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

ANNOTATED AGENDA

1.    Opening of Meeting

The Meeting will be opened at 0900 hours on Monday 19 May 1997

2.    Election of Officers

a)    Following the opening of the meeting, the Plenary will elect Chairs for the 
      Meeting, TEWG and the Working Groups I and II.

b)    In accordance with established practice New Zealand, as Host, will 
      provide the Chair for the Plenary for ATCM XXI.

c)    New Zealand has nominated Dr Olav Orheim as Chair of the TEWG. This 
      nomination is in accordance with the practice which has seen the original 
      nominees for this position take a turn as Chair on a rotational basis (ie Dr 
      Pietro Giuliani in 1995, Ambassador Vincente Sanchez in 1996).

d)    Nominees for the Chairs of Working Groups I and II are requested.

3.    Opening Addresses

Following the pattern established at previous ATCMs, Opening Statements should be 
submitted to the Secretariat for circulation in written form, preferably by the end of the 
first week to facilitate translation.

4.    Adoption of Agenda

a)    A preliminary agenda for ATCM XXI was prepared and circulated at the 
      conclusion of ATCM XX in accordance with Rule 37. A provisional 
      annotated agenda was prepared, taking account of Parties' additions and 
      comments, and was distributed on 19 January, in accordance with Rule 37.

b)    In accordance with the decision of ATCM XIX, experts will be asked to 
      withdraw for the discussion of this item (Rule 41 refers).

ANNAGN1.DOC                                  Annotated Agenda                                  Page 1
19 May 1:46 PM
MoFA
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a) Under Recommendation XIII-2, the following Reports will be received by the Plenary:

i) the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America (as the Representative of the Depository Government of the Antarctic Treaty)

This Report will provide the Plenary with, inter alia, new accessions to the Antarctic Treaty, further ratifications of the Environmental Protocol and the status of Measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, including that relating to Annex V.

ii) the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

The Chairman, or his representative, will report, inter alia, on CCAMLR activities since ATCM XX.

iii) the Head of the Delegation of Australia (as the Representative of the Depository Government for the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

This Report will, inter alia, update the Plenary on new accessions to the Convention.

iv) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom (as the Representative of the Depository Government for the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS))

Information will be provided, inter alia, on the number of seals killed and/or captured as required by this Convention.

v) the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)

The President will report, inter alia, on SCAR activities since ATCM XX.

vi) the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National AntarcticProgrammes (COMNAP)

The Chairman will report, inter alia, on COMNAP activities since ATCM XX.

19 May 1:46 PM                  Annotated Agenda                  Page 2
b) in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

Experts attending ATCM XXI in accordance with Rule 20 will be invited 
to present their Reports to the Plenary. Representatives from ASOC, 
IAATO, IOC, IHO, IMO, IUCN, PATA, UNEP, WMO and WTO have 
been invited to attend ATCM XXI.

6. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) General Matters and Implementation by ATCPs

As of the time of distribution 23 of the 26 Consultative Parties required to 
ratify the Environmental Protocol had done so. The remaining Parties are 
Japan, Russia and the United States of America. In the case of the latter 
Party it is understood that full ratification will be concluded shortly.

Article 13 of the Environmental Protocol requests that Parties should 
notify all other Parties of the measures they have taken to implement the 
Protocol, such as the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative 
actions and enforcement measures. Reports on the activities of Parties in 
this respect would be welcome.

Discussion on the start-up procedures for the CEP was noted as Agenda 
Item 15 bis. It is expected that this matter will be taken up, initially by 
Heads of Delegations but that further discussions on the establishment of 
the CEP will take place under this agenda item.

b) Matters covered by Annex I (EIAs)

i) At ATCM XX New Zealand offered to coordinate intersessional 
work on developing a further understanding of the terms "minor" and 
"transitory" and on enhancing a mutual understanding of EIA 
processes (paragraph 140 of the Final Report from ATCM XX 
refers). New Zealand will submit a Working Paper for Parties' 
consideration detailing work to date on these issues.

ii) As a result of the work on EIA processes, Parties will be asked to 
consider practical methods to provide a coordinated and consistent 
standard for all Parties in the application and implementation of EIA 
procedures. Papers on this theme would be welcome.

iii) In compliance with Resolution 6 (1995) Parties are asked to submit 
papers listing the IEEs and CEEs prepared in the year up to ATCM 
XXI.

19 May 1:46 PM          Annotated Agenda          Page 3
c) Matters covered by Annex II (fauna and flora)

The introduction of non-native species in Antarctica has been brought to the attention of Parties at both ATCM XIX and ATCM XX.  The identification of solutions for safer operations were recommended. Papers on this would be welcome (paragraph 125 of the Final Report from ATCM XX refers).

d) Matters covered by Annex III (waste management)

Parties are encouraged to submit papers on their waste management practices in Antarctica. In particular information on the development of waste management plans as required in Articles 8 and 9 of this Annex would be welcome.

e) Matters covered by Annex IV (marine pollution)

Article 12 of this Annex requires that Parties develop contingency plans for marine pollution response in the Antarctic Treaty area. Article 15 of the Protocol itself also requires that emergency response action plans be developed by Parties to respond to environmental emergencies in Antarctica.  This Article seeks that Parties cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such plans. Papers from Parties on progress on this would be welcome.

f) Matters covered by Annex V (areas, sites, monuments)

i)     Parties will be asked to adopt five revised or new management plans for various protected areas in Antarctica. In this context SCAR will update Parties on progress on the development of the Management Plan Handbook which will also include guidelines on the preparation of maps for protected areas. In this context it would be helpful if Parties could advise on progress towards the adaption of Annex V.

ii)    Parties may also submit proposals nominating sites and artefacts as Historic Sites and Monuments.  New Zealand will submit a recommendation that the cross erected in memory to those who lost their lives in the 1979 Mt Erebus air disaster be designated as an Historic Monument under Recommendation I-9.

g) Matters related to Article 16 of the Environment Protocol (Liability)

The Chair of the Group of Legal Experts on Liability, Professor Rudiger Wolfrum (Germany) will report to the ATCM on the intersessional progress of this Group. At the conclusion of the Group's meeting during the week of 19-23 May, he will provide a report to the ATCM.

19 May 1:46 PM                  Annotated Agenda                  Page 4
7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

a) The establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection will 
   provide an opportunity for Parties to reflect on a range of administrative 
   and support questions not solely for the CEP but for the Treaty in general. 
   For example, the exchange of information within the Antarctic Treaty 
   system is in need of thorough review. The establishment of the CEP and 
   the additional Protocol-related reporting requirements could necessitate 
   some rationalistion and streamlining of reports. Consideration might also 
   be given to use of electronic means to assist with information exchange 
   and document circulation. Discussion might also include the issue of 
   working papers and information papers.

b) It is expected that Heads of Delegations will take up other organisational 
   aspects of the Antarctic Treaty system - such as secretariat support during 
   the course of ATCM XXI. Discussion of this and administrative issues in 
   general might also be discussed by the Plenary or Working Group I.

c) France will submit a paper proposing that the agreed document submission 
   guidelines be adopted as part of the Rules of Procedure for ATCMs.

c) In accordance with the decision of ATCM XIX, experts will be asked to 
   withdraw for the discussion of agenda item 7 (Rule 41 refers).

8. Relevance of Developments in the Arctic and Antarctica

At ATCM XX Parties agreed on a procedure for ensuring the timely exchange 
of information on Arctic and Antarctic issues. Accordingly, the Host 
Government of the AEPS (and subequently the Arctic Council) will provide an 
information conduit to ensure that information relevant to both groups is 
circulated and available.

9. Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

Information on Parties' experience in managing tourism activity in Antarctica 
would be welcome. Of particular interest would be progress made in respect of 
ensuring compliance with the Guidelines adopted at ATCM XVIII.

10. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

a) Parties who have undertaken inspections under Article VII of the 
   Antarctic Treaty during the 1996-97 season will be invited to report to the 
   ATCM on the outcome of these. Parties planning inspections for the 
   following season might also advise the ATCM of their intentions.

b) Comments and suggestions regarding the use and value of inspection 
   checklists would be welcome.

19 May 1:46 PM          Annotated Agenda          Page 5
11. Operations Issues

Information on Parties’ experience in relation to operational issues would be welcome. Particularly suggestions or examples of national practice that might prove to be useful for other Parties. Suggestions to rationalise operational practices among Parties would be welcome.

12. Science Issues

Information on Parties’ proposed collaborative scientific activity in Antarctica would be welcome. This should focus on new projects involving other Parties or international scientific programmes.

13. Education Issues

Follow-up action plans from the IUCN/SCAR Education Workshop in Gorizia will be submitted for consideration by Parties. This will include a draft “Layperson’s Guide to the Protocol”. Belgium will submit a paper on the history of the Gerlache family’s contribution to Antarctica.

14. Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic Environment

Article 12 (1) (j) of the Protocol requires the CEP to provide advice on the state of the Antarctic environment. It will be important for the CEP to establish a framework under which it can do this. New Zealand intends to submit a working paper on an Antarctic State of the Environment Report to ATCM XXI. A SOE Report would provide the CEP with the necessary benchmarks from which it could develop baselines for monitoring and which it could use to check the effectiveness of the implementation of the Protocol. SCAR will also report on this and submit a proposal to ATCM XXI on how such a report might be prepared.

15. Specific Environmental Protection Measures

16. Preparation of the XXII Consultative Meeting

a) Date and place of ATCM XXII

ATCM XXII will take place in 1998 in Tromsø, Norway.

b) Invitations of International and Non-Governmental Organisations

In accordance with established practice the following organisations have been invited to send Experts to attend ATCMs. These are ASOC, IAATO, IOC, IHO, IMO, IUCN, PATA, UNEP, WMO and WTO. These invitations need to be confirmed by the Plenary.

c) Preparation of the Agenda for ATCM XXII

19 May 1:46 PM          Annotated Agenda          Page 6
i)     A preliminary agenda for ATCM XXII will be prepared and circulated 
       at the conclusion of ATCM XXI.

ii)   In accordance with the decision of ATCM XIX, experts will be asked 
       to withdraw for the discussion of this item (Rule 41 refers).

17.  Any Other Business

At this stage there are no other matters for discussion under this item.

18.  Adoption of the Report

The draft Report of ATCM XXI will be considered and adopted.

19.  Closing of the Meeting

The Meeting is scheduled to close at 1600 hours on Friday 30 May 1997.


19 May 1:46 PM                            Annotated Agenda                            Page 7
ALLOCATIONS OF AGENDA ITEMS

1.  Opening of Meeting                                  Plenary
2.  Election of Officers                                Plenary
3.  Opening Addresses                                   Plenary
4.  Adoption of Agenda                                  Plenary
5.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports   Plenary
6.  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

    a)  General Matters and Implementation by ATCPs     WGI
    b)  Matters covered by Annex I (EIAs)               TEWG
    c)  Matters covered by Annex II (fauna and flora)   TEWG
    d)  Matters covered by Annex III (waste management) TEWG
    e)  Matters covered by Annex IV (marine pollution)  TEWG
    f)  Matters covered by Annex V (areas, sites, monuments) TEWG
    g)  Matters related to Article 16 of the Environment Protocol WGI
        (Liability)

7.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System          WGI
8.  Relevance of Developments in the Arctic and Antarctica WGI
9.  Tourism and NGO Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area WGII
10. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty             WGII
11. Operations Issues                                  WGII
12. Science Issues                                     WGII
13. Education Issues                                   WGII
14. Environmental Monitoring & State of the Antarctic Environment TEWG
15. Specific Environmental Protection: Measures, decisions and resolutions Plenary

16. Preparation of the XXII Consultative Meeting       Plenary
17. Any Other Business                                 Plenary
18. Adoption of the Report                             Plenary
19. Closing of the Meeting                             Plenary

19 May 1:46 PM          Annotated Agenda          Page 8
