ANTARCTIC TREATY          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING  XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


THE MEASURES BEING ADOPTED FOR ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION BY CHINESE ANTARCTIC
AND ARCTIC ADMINISTRATION (CAAA)


Agenda item 6b                  Submitted by China

XXI ATCM/IP89
May, 1997
Original: English
The measures being adopted for Antarctic environmental protection 
by Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration (CAAA)

In accordance with the purposes of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on the Antarctic Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration have consistently been persisting in and paying attention to protecting the natural and ecological environments during their Antarctic scientific activities, have been taking many-sided measures and have achieved good results, which could be concluded as follows:

—. Strengthening the environmental protection education and training among 
the Antarctic expeditioners

1. For the purpose of enhancing expeditioner’s consciousness of Antarctic envionmental protection, Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration defined 1990-1992 as the Antarctic Environmental Protection Year, and according to this prescription, adheres to educating Chinese Antarctic expeditioners.

2. Chinese Antarctic Research Expeditioner’s Manual has been drawn up and strictly implemented on research ships and at research stations, as well as during the field scientific pursuits.

3. There are special courses concerning the Antarctic environmental protection in the annual training which is conducted for Chinese Antarctic expeditioners to suit the polar circumstances.

4. An official in charge of environmental protection is appointed in annual expedition team whose duties are to manage the concrete protective work in the Antarctic activities and to carry out the environmental protection education among expeditioners.

—. Formulating the regulations and methods related to intensify Antarctic 
environmental protection

1. On the basis of the twelfth item of the Appendix IV of the Protocol on the Antarctic Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Chinese Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station have respectively worked out their oil spill contingency plans for both stations.

2. In accordance with the Appendix I (EIA) of the Protocol on the Antarctic Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the sixth resolution of 1995 Seoul ATCM, EIA have been made for 1996/1997 scientific activities of Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition.

3. For the year 1993-1994, Chinese Great Wall Station and other nine stations of different countries located at the South Shetlands Islands together signed a plan of mutual support which is oil spill contingency plan at the South Shetlands Islands and its adjacent sea waters.
三. Establishing equipment for the waste disposal

1. In accordance with the eighth and ninth item of the Appendix III of the Protocol on the Antarctic Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Chinese Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station have respectively set up their biochemical sewage treatment equipment.

2. The refuse incineration furnaces have been built at Chinese Great Wall Station and Zhongshan Station respectively.

3. The waste disposal facilities have been installed on board the vessel, XUELONG of Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition according to the International Convention for the Protection of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL).

4. The waste and garbage derived from the ships, stations and field scientific activities are classified and dealt with in their properties and conditions in obedience to demands of the Protocol on the Antarctic Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Chinese Antarctic and Arctic Administration
April 8, 1997
