ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



                         MAJOR INITIATIVES IN AUSTRALIAN 
                         ANTARCTIC SCIENCE, 1994-97



Agenda item 12              Submitted by Australia

XXI ATCM/IP50
May, 1997
Original: English
MAJOR INITIATIVES IN AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC SCIENCE

This paper outlines the structure and direction of Australian research in 
Antarctica, as outlined in the strategic science plans to the year 2000 and beyond.

Overview

Australia's Antarctic science community has developed a framework for 
conducting Antarctic research. The strategic science plans, which are 
progressively being put into effect, consist of six core discipline areas, each 
having a government agency with lead responsibility but with input from 
other agencies and universities:

1 Atmospheric Sciences (lead agency: Bureau of Meteorology)—This program 
investigates the Antarctic atmosphere from the ground to its boundary with 
space, looking at its role in Southern Hemisphere weather systems, its 
relationship with the Southern Ocean, its trace constituents and the physics 
and chemistry of its upper levels (including stratospheric ozone depletion), 
its role in the global carbon budget, and its function as a barometer of 
atmospheric pollution.

2 Biological Sciences (lead agency: Australian Antarctic Division)—The 
globally-important life forms and systems of the Antarctic region, in 
particular those of the Southern Ocean, are the principal concern of this 
program. Besides addressing global change including the role of organisms 
in influencing the physical environment and the carbon cycle, its research 
helps in developing conservation measures for marine species. It also 
studies continental and sub-Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems. Much is 
related to the needs of international programs such as CCAMLR.

3 Geological sciences (lead agency: Australian Geological Survey 
Organisation)—Covering the disciplines of geology, geophysics and geodesy, 
this program is concerned with Earth's crust (terrestrial and marine) in the 
Antarctic region. It aims to improve understanding of geological processes 
and documenting the role and amplitude of natural global changes, dynamics 
and evolution of the modern environment of the Antarctic and sea level 
change.

4 Glaciology (lead agency: Australian Antarctic Division)—Research in this 
program aims at establishing the linkages over different time scales 
between the Antarctic ice (continental and marine), global and regional 
climate, and sea level. Field work includes studies of the ice sheet and 
outlet glaciers, ice coring and ship-based sea ice investigations. Ice studies 
are a vital component of sea level and global warming research. Its palaeo-
environment component overlaps with the geological sciences.

5 Human Impacts (lead agency, Australian Antarctic Division)—This 
research program provides the scientific basis for Australia to meet 
international obligations concerning the Antarctic environment near 
occupied areas. The program draws on scientific, cultural and technological 
research in looking at Antarctic values and threats to these values, 
characteristics of the Antarctic environment, the efficiency of human 
Antarctic activities, and procedures to limit adverse impacts.

                    CTO      
ANTARCTIC DIV 
51252315 FAX 03 
14/05/87  WED 10:39
6 Oceanography (lead agency, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation Division of Marine Research) - The physical and 
chemical processes of the Southern Ocean, including the powerful Antarctic 
Circumpolar Current, and the complex processes resulting from interaction 
between the ocean, atmosphere and sea ice are the subject of this program. 
The research also covers physical, chemical and biological factors 
controlling the productivity of the Southern Ocean and the Southern 
Ocean's role in cycling of carbon dioxide, and in particular the uptake of 
anthropogenic carbon dioxide by the ocean.

In addition to the six strategic discipline based programs, research continues 
into cosmic ray physics and human biology and medicine.

Within the parameters of the plans created for each of these Strategic Science 
Programs, Australia has embarked on a range of significant initiatives. Some of 
these have international associations, within the umbrella of international 
programs or as part of agreements with other countries; some programs are 
undertaken unilaterally. Major initiatives are listed below under the respective 
strategic programs.

Strategic Science Program 1: Atmospheric Sciences

• LIDAR-aided middle atmosphere studies: A complex Light Detection and 
Ranging (LIDAR) instrument has been developed to begin a long term 
study of the middle atmosphere meteorology above Davis in 1998 to address 
climate change concerns. The aim is to obtain high quality data over at least 
one solar cycle. The LIDAR remotely senses basic atmospheric parameters 
by transmitting pulses of green laser light into the sky and analysing the 
light scattered back from molecules and aerosols.

• The FROST Project: The First Regional (Antarctic) Observing Study of the 
Troposphere (FROST) is organised by the Physics and Chemistry of the 
Atmosphere Working Group of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR). The main contributors to FROST are the British Antarctic 
Survey, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, the Antarctic CRC at the 
University of Tasmania, the Meteorological Institute at Bonn University in 
Germany and the Byrd Polar Research Center at Ohio State University in 
USA. It is anticipated that FROST will lead to improvement in the weather 
services provided for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean south of latitude 
50° S.

• The ACE-1 Project: A major Aerosol Characterisation Experiment (ACE - 1) 
was conducted in November and December 1995 over the Southern Ocean, 
with focus on natural aerosols produced from dimethylsulphide and sea 
spray. This research is a contribution to the International Global 
Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) core project of the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and is part of the IGAC Aerosol 
Characterization Experiments (ACE). The objectives of this series of process 
studies are to provide the necessary data to incorporate aerosols into global 
climate models and to reduce the overall uncertainty in the calculation of 
climate forcing by aerosols. Its results will be particularly important in 
estimating future cloud cover under various "greenhouse" scenarios.
Strategic Science Program 2: Biological Sciences
- Biological effects of UV radiation: Collection of ecological and biochemical 
  data in the inshore marine area near Australia's Davis station seeks to 
  improve our understanding of the impact of ultraviolet light on micro-
  organisms, and of the latter's role in climate change processes. Studies have 
  confirmed the deleterious impact of ultraviolet light on phytoplankton and 
  bacteria. The project also examines the role of various microbial organisms 
  in the carbon cycle.

- Krill biomass survey: A multi-disciplinary research voyage over a vast 
  region of the Southern Ocean, along a fifth of Antarctica's coastline from 
  80°E to 150°E, early in 1996 had among its major objectives a survey of the 
  biomass of krill. Krill abundance and distribution estimates from the 
  voyage have enabled CCAMLR for the first time to set a precautionary catch 
  limit of 775,000 tonnes for the region's krill fishery, taking account of the 
  needs of the whole ecosystem.

- Pack ice seals study: Over the past two Austral summers, as part of 
  Australia's contribution to the international Antarctic Pack-Ice Seals 
  Program (APIS), Australian biologists have surveyed the abundance, 
  distribution and behaviour of seals (mainly crabeaters) in the pack-ice zone. 
  These studies, using the icebreaker Aurora Australis and ship-based 
  helicopters, were conducted along north-south transect routes from the 
  edge of the pack ice to the Antarctic coast.

Strategic Science Program 3: Geological Sciences

- Ocean sediment research: A major marine geoscience program used the 
  Australian research ship Aurora Australis to collect sediment cores and 
  seismic and near-bed current data from Prydz Bay and Mac Robertson Shelf, 
  off Antarctica, and the adjacent Kerguelen Plateau to support palaeo-
  environmental studies of ice sheet and ocean circulation changes over five 
  million years. Australian scientists also participated in complementary 
  coring and seismic studies in the South Tasman Rise region and in 
  biogeochemical cycling studies measuring dissolved trace metals in 
  subantarctic and Antarctic waters.

- Evolution of East Antarctica: Extensive geological and geophysical studies 
  in the Prince Charles Mountains are now providing evidence of the 
  interaction of geological, glacial and tectonic processes on the Antarctic ice 
  sheet over extended periods, as well as the structural revolution of the 
  Antarctic continent.

- Onshore sediment studies: Sedimentary studies are undertaken to examine 
  the extent of the Antarctic ice sheet during the last glacial maximum and to 
  document changes in the Antarctic environment and biota over the last 
  five million years.

- Tide gauge establishment: A system of tide gauges at Australian stations 
  and near Heard Island have allowed work to start on defining a tidal regime 
  linked with studies of Antarctic basement rocks. These studies will aid 
  measuring changing sea levels.

14/05/97  10:41 WED FAX 03 6223515  ANTARCTIC DIV      
STO[?]
Strategic Science Program 4: Glaciology

- Lambert Glacier mass budget: A precise digital elevation model of the Lambert Glacier has been derived from ERS satellite altimeter data and, on the Amery Ice Shelf, validated against a GPS elevation survey to better than 0.5 metre. This, together with other satellite data and results from the Lambert Glacier basin traverse program, airborne ice thickness measurements, and other field studies, is being used to determine the mass budget of the various components of this large drainage basin. Recent results show that the Amery Ice Shelf is grounded more than 200 km further upstream (inland) than some earlier suggestions, and that basal melt under this section of the shelf accounts for nearly 50% of the total mass loss from the Lambert system.

- East Antarctic sea ice characteristics : Ten years of shipboard observations and drifting buoy data, together with some recent data from upward looking sonars (ULS), are providing a comprehensive picture of the regional and seasonal characteristics of sea ice in the Indian and Western Pacific sectors of the Southern Ocean. Sea ice observations and samplings are made on several cruises each season, and approximately six drifting data buoys are deployed in the pack ice zone each year. A climatology of ice characteristics is being determined, including the snow and ice thickness distributions, the relative importance of different ice formation processes, the mean ice drift and definition of the regions of meridional ice transport. This study forms a major contribution to the SCAR-ASPeCt programme (Antarctic Sea-ice Processes and Climate).

- Sea ice-ocean interaction : A multi-disciplinary field study of ice-ocean interaction in a coastal polynya is planned for the winter of 1998. This experiment from RSV Aurora Australis, and possibly in conjunction with a US research vessel, will investigate the role of one of the persistent polynyas along the coast of Wilkes and Adelie Lands as "ice factories", in air-sea heat exchange, and in the modification of water masses and the formation of Antarctic Bottom Water.

- Law Dome ice core studies: Analysis of ice cores from the Law Dome summit has provided evidence of changes in the climate seasonality over the last 700 years of the Holocene. Summer temperatures have generally decreased from a maximum in the early fourteenth century to a minimum in the first part of this century, with a subsequent increase; while winter temperatures have shown larger fluctuations. Using seasonality in the Holocene record it has been possible to derive a new calibration for the isotope ratio proxy temperature record. Measurements of the 14C "bomb spike" in firn and ice have been used to determine the age spread in trapped gas, and hence to interpret the past atmospheric composition record. Further firn air sampling will be undertaken on the Law Dome in 1997/98 to determine precisely changes in carbon dioxide and methane composition in the atmosphere over the past century.

Strategic Science Program 5: Human Impacts

- GIS for the Larsemann Hills: A Geographic Information System (GIS) of the natural values of the Antarctic, including fauna, flora, geological features, wilderness and aesthetic values, is being developed to assist with area 

ANTARCTIC DIV                              1/05/98   WED 28   10:1[?]   FAX 03 6232 5215
                                                   910D
management and to provide a baseline from which changes due to human 
activity can be detected. Information is currently being gathered for the 
Larsemann Hills, southwest of Davis, where Russian, Chinese and 
Australian bases in close proximity to each other have resulted in a high 
level of human activity. Similar geographic information systems are to be 
developed for the other ice-free areas of the Australian Antarctic Territory.

• Impact of Helicopters: Experiments on the effect of disturbance of wildlife by 
helicopters are being used to develop guidelines for helicopter operations in 
the Antarctic.

• Impact of Human Activity: the levels of contamination and eutrophication 
arising from human activity are being measured and compared with natural 
inputs to determine their environmental significance. Mechanisms of 
physical dispersion and biological uptake of contaminants are being studied 
to determine whether they behave differently in the Antarctic than in 
temperate areas. Toxicity tests using Antarctic organisms will indicate 
whether the response of Antarctic organisms to pollution is similar to that 
of temperate organisms. This information will contribute to ensuring that 
environmental standards for the Antarctic are appropriate to the local 
conditions.

Strategic Science Program 6: Oceanography

• Large-scale ocean transports: This program has focussed on the tranport of 
the large-scale currents, particularly the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. A 
number of World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) sections were 
completed with the transect between Tasmania and Antarctica repeated six 
times. A large USA/Australian array of instruments was moored along this 
line from March 1995 to March 1997. These observations are now complete 
with analysis of the data set proceeding. The in situ observations are 
supported by the development of numerical models and the analysis of 
satellite data. Observations in a joint USA/France/Australia activity to 
monitor the temperatures and currents of the upper 800 m of the water 
column between Tasmania and Antarctic are continuing.

• Antarctic Bottom Water Formation: Completion of a survey in early 1996 of 
ocean waters along the length of the Antarctic coast between 80°E and 150°E, 
covering the region from the coast to well beyond the Antarctic continental 
shelf. This was a joint physical and biological voyage with foci of estimating 
the rate of formation of Antarctic Bottom Water and setting catch limits for 
krill.

• Air/sea/ice interactions: A process study examining the complex air/sea/ice 
interactions was completed in August 1995. A joint USA/Australian study 
of a coastal latent heat polynya is planned for August 1998 (see also 
Glaciology Program).

• The Ocean's Role in Biogeochemical Cycles: Observations of carbon 
parameters, including stable carbon isotopes, dissolved and particulate 
organic carbon and productivity measurements, have been undertaken 
onboard WOCE and other transects to estimate the Southern Ocean's role in 
the carbon cycle. Measurements have also been made of dimethyl sulphide.

14/05   18:07 WED 10:42 FAX 03 6233 5219    ANTARCTIC DIV    017[?]
An intensive process study planned for the sub-Antarctic Zone in March 
1998 will include the deployment of three sediment trap moorings.

- Tide gauge network: Installation of the Casey tide gauge in early 1995 
completed the first phase of the East Antarctic tide gauge network, enabling 
for the first time continuing sea-level data to be collected regularly at all 
Australia's Antarctic and subantarctic stations (see also Geological Sciences 
Program).





                    
                    


1/4/15  28/7/96  WED 10:43 FAX 03 62323219  ANTARCTIC DIV 
018[?]S
