ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE ROBERTS IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA
UPDATE OF ACTIVITIES

Agenda item 12          Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP4
April, 1997
Original: English
Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts
in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica

Update of Activities

New Zealand
(Agenda Item 12)

1. Background to the Cape Roberts Project

The Cape Roberts Project is a cooperative venture between Antarctic scientists, 
administrators and support personnel from six countries - Australia, Britain, 
Germany, Italy, New Zealand and the United States of America. The purpose of the 
project is to drill for cores offshore at Cape Roberts that record tectonic and climatic 
history of the region from around 30 to 100 million years ago.

In 1986, CIROS-1 was drilled 700 metres beneath the floor of western McMurdo 
Sound coring strata 22 to 36 million years old. These strata contained indications of 
ice on land beyond 34 million years. This is the time when most scientists now agree 
that Antarctica cooled to form the first large ice sheets due to shifting ocean circulation 
after the northward drift of Australasia. These and older strata were subsequently 
traced north to Cape Roberts. Seismic and magnetic surveys show a gently tilted 
sequence of strata more than 1500 metres thick exposed at the sea floor.

Holes will be drilled off Cape Roberts to obtain continuous cores into the oldest 
strata. Two holes 400 metres deep will be drilled in the first season and one 700 
metres deep in the second season.

2. Logistics and Science Organisation

Antarctica New Zealand were appointed as logistics managers for the project with 
responsibility for the organisation of all operations, including the drilling system. An 
Operations/Logistics Management Group, in which participating countries are 
represented, has oversight of this aspect of the project. Contributions to the $US4.3 
million budget were negotiated in both cash and resources. Each country is entitled to 
a share of the science proportional to their contribution.

Science funding remains the responsibility of science management within each of the 
countries involved. The overall direction of the project is set by the International 
Steering Committee (ISC) and includes one representative from each of the 
participating countries. ISC has met yearly since 1994 to review the nature and 
balance of science participation from the various countries and other issues such as 
core repositories, sampling and means of publication.

The project has provided significant challenges for technology and management as 
well as science. The camp (a collection of buildings housing 35 personnel), 
laboratories and drill rig have been constructed from insulated standard ISO 
containers for ease of movement on and off the sea ice. A new system has been 
developed for supporting the drill string in water up to 500 metres deep, along with 
50 tonnes of drilling equipment on sea-ice 1.5 metres thick. The Ocean Drilling 
Program will send a drilling engineer to view the system, which has yielded very high 
core recovery in the past.
Scientific preparations for the project have stimulated a range of activities enhancing 
knowledge of the geological history of the region. These include a review of 
biostratigraphic correlation for the Antarctic-Australia-New Zealand region and a 
review of procedures for core description and interpretation of glacial and related 
sediments.

3. First Drilling Planned for October 1997

First drilling was scheduled for October 1996. However, plans were frustrated in 
early July last year by the break-out of fast sea-ice off Cape Roberts. A stable frozen 
sea surface had not formed by the end of July and project managers decided in early 
August to postpone the drilling for a year. The delay has been used by the project 
team to trial the drilling system and fine tune the camp and laboratory facilities at Cape 
Roberts and McMurdo. The delay has also allowed the 50 scientists and assistants 
involved in the project to improve procedures and plans for collaboration over the 
wide range of studies to be undertaken on the core.

Sea ice development will be monitored daily by satellite throughout the winter. 
Logistics and science personnel are now looking forward to the start of drilling in 
early October 1997.
