ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE    XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY


Agenda item 6a                          Submitted by Finland

XXI ATCM/IP101
May, 1997
Original: English
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Finland completed the internal procedures necessary for the acceptance of the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on 18 October 1996. On the same 
day, a national Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica was issued and the 
Penal Code was amended in order to ensure compliance with the Protocol.

Bearing in mind Article 13, paragraph 3, of the Protocol which calls upon the Parties 
to notify all other Parties of the measures taken to ensure compliance with the 
Protocol, unofficial English translations of both the Act on the Environmental 
Protection of Antarctica and of the Act on Amendment of the Penal Code are annexed 
to this Information Paper.

According to certain Sections of the Act on the Environmental Protection of 
Antarctica more detailed provisions on the issues dealt with in those Sections shall be 
issued by decree. A proposal for such a Decree is also annexed to this Information 
Paper.
UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

Act
on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica

Chapter 1
General Provisions

Section 1
Purpose of the Act

The purpose of this Act is to accord comprehensive protection to
the environment of the Antarctic area and its dependent and
associated ecosystems.

Section 2
Scope

This Act applies to:

1)      a Finnish natural person;
2)      a Finnish juridical person, vessel or aircraft;
3)      a foreign natural person maintaining a permanent
residence in Finland; and
4)      a foreign natural person, juridical person, vessel or
aircraft participating in an activity in the Antarctic
area within the meaning of this Act which is organised
within the territory of Finland or which proceeds from
the territory of Finland.

Section 3
Definitions

For the purposes of this Act:

1)      "Antarctic area" means the area south of latitude 60
degrees south;
2)      "Protocol" means the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Finnish Treaty
Series 31/84), which was done at Madrid on 4 October
1991;
3)      "Activity" means travel for research or other purposes
in the Antarctic area, logistics supply and maintenance
procedures, scientific undertakings, installation,
modification, removal or use of research stations and
fixed field camps or equipment for these as well as any 
other activity taking place in the Antarctic area;

4)	"Harmful interference to animals, plants or 
invertebrates native to the Antarctic area" means:

	a)	using an aircraft, vessel, vehicle, explosive or 
firearm in a manner that disturbs concentrations of 
birds or seals;

	b)	wilful disturbance of breeding or moulting birds or 
concentrations of birds or seals by persons on foot;

	c)	significantly damaging concentrations of native 
terrestrial plants; and

	d)	any other activity which results in significant adverse 
modification of habitats of any species or population 
of animal, plant or invertebrate native to the 
Antarctic area; and

5)	"Mineral resources" means all inanimate and 
non-renewable natural resources.

                  Section 4
               Prohibited Activity

The following activities are prohibited in the Antarctic area:

1)	detonating nuclear explosives and disposal of 
radioactive waste materials;

2)	exploring for mineral resources, investigating or 
utilising mineral resources, or any other activity 
directed at these which is not scientific research;

3)	discharging oil, oily mixture, noxious liquid 
substance, sewage and garbage from a vessel into the 
sea, as specified in the provisions in Chapter 6 of 
this Act;

4)	damaging, removing or destroying of historical sites or 
monuments entered in the register in accordance with 
Annex V of the Protocol; and

5)	open burning of waste.

The following may not be introduced into the Antarctic area:

1)	a species of animal, plant or invertebrate not native 
to the Antarctic area, with the exception of food, 
household plants and laboratory animals, plants and 
invertebrates;

2)	non-sterile soil originating from elsewhere than the 
Antarctic area; and
3)     products specified by a decree.

Section 5
Activity Requiring a Permit

A permit is needed for an activity in the Antarctic area other 
than a prohibited activity referred to in Section 4 or 
introduction of non-native species referred to in Section 23, if 
Section 6 does not apply.

Section 6
Exception to Obligation to Apply for a Permit

A permit under the provisions of this Act is not required for:

1)     an activity for which a valid permit has been granted 
by a competent authority of another State Party to the 
Protocol;

2)     passage of a vessel through waters within the Antarctic 
area, if the destination of the vessel is not in the 
Antarctic area; and

3)     an activity referred to in the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(Finnish Treaty Series 64/89).

Section 7
Permit Granting Authority

The permit granting authority for the purposes of this Act is 
the Ministry of the Environment.

Chapter 2
Environmental Impact Assessment

Section 8
Initial Environmental Evaluation

If an activity may have a minor or transitory impact on the 
environment of the Antarctic area, an Initial Environmental 
Evaluation shall be prepared by the person or body in charge of 
the activity.

Section 9
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation

If the Initial Environmental Evaluation indicates, or it is 
otherwise to be expected, that an activity may have more than a
minor or transitory impact on the environment of the Antarctic 
area, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation shall be prepared 
by the person or body in charge of the activity.

Section 10
Point of Time for Assessment

An Environmental Impact Assessment shall be prepared before the 
granting of a permit under the provisions of this Act.

Section 11
Assessment Report

The person or body in charge of the activity shall identify the 
impacts of the activity and compile an Assessment Report.

More detailed provisions on the preparation and contents of an 
Assessment Report shall be issued by decree.

Section 12
Possibility of Making Comments on an Assessment Report

The Ministry of the Environment shall request the necessary 
comments on an Assessment Report or on a draft of it. If 
necessary, the Ministry of the Environment may also request 
comments from foreign authorities and expert institutions.

The Ministry of the Environment reserves for the meeting 
referred to in Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty and for the 
other States Parties to the Protocol the possibility to make 
comments on an Assessment Report of a Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation or on a draft of it.

The Ministry of the Environment reserves for natural persons and 
for societies and foundations whose primary purpose according to 
their regulations is to promote environmental protection the 
possibility to express an opinion on an Assessment Report or on 
a draft of it.

Section 13
Availability of an Assessment Report

An Assessment Report, or a draft of it, appended to an 
application for a permit shall be made available for public 
viewing at the Registry of the Ministry of the Environment for 
at least 90 days from the date of its receipt.

The provisions of subsection 1 apply also to Assessment Reports 
or drafts of them submitted to Finland for information by other 
States Parties to the Protocol.
Chapter 3 
Procedure for Permits 

 Section 14 
Application for a Permit 

As stipulated in more detail by decree, a report of the 
activity, necessary for considering the granting of a permit, as 
well as an Environmental Impact Assessment Report, or a draft of 
it, in compliance with Chapter 2, shall be appended to the 
application for a permit.

 Section 15 
Possibility of Making Comments on an Application for a Permit 

The Ministry of the Environment shall request comments necessary 
for ruling on the matter. The Ministry may, if necessary, also 
request comments from foreign authorities and expert 
institutions.

 Section 16 
General Requirements for Granting of a Permit 

A permit for an activity within the meaning of this Act shall be 
granted if the activity does not cause:

1)      adverse effects on climate or weather patterns;
2)      significant adverse effects on air or water quality;
3)      significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial, 
        aquatic, glacial or marine environments;
4)      detrimental changes in the distribution, abundance or 
        productivity of species or populations of species of 
        animals, plants or invertebrates;
5)      further jeopardy to endangered or threatened species or 
        populations of such species;
6)      degradation of areas of biological, scientific, 
        historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance; or
7)      any other comparable significant detriment to the 
        environment of the Antarctic area and its dependent and 
        associated ecosystems.
Section 17
Granting of a Permit and International Consideration of an Assessment Report

If an activity requires a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation, a permit may not be granted for an activity before 
the meeting referred to in subsection 2 of Section 12 has had 
the opportunity to consider the Assessment Report, or a draft of 
it, appended to the application for a permit, as stipulated by 
decree.

A permit may, however, be granted for an activity if the meeting 
referred to in subsection 2 of Section 12 will not be convened 
within fifteen months of the date on which the Assessment Report 
has been submitted for the information of the Committee referred 
to in Article 11 of the Protocol.

Section 18
Ruling on a Permit

A ruling on a permit shall contain the regulations necessary for 
the protection of the environment of the Antarctic area. In the 
ruling, the permit granting authority shall specify the 
authorised activity, including when, where and by whom it is to 
be conducted.

A ruling on a permit shall indicate how the Environmental Impact 
Assessment referred to in Chapter 2 has been taken into account 
in considering the application for the permit.

A ruling on a permit is issued after public notice, whereupon 
it is deemed to have come to the notice of the appropriate 
person or body on the date of its issuance. The ruling is sent 
to the applicant and, for information, to the authorities who 
submitted comments.

Section 19
Public Availability 
of a Ruling and International Distribution 
of a Ruling on a Permit and Related Documents

A ruling on a permit and the documents related to it shall be 
made available for public viewing at the Registry of the 
Ministry of the Environment. The ruling and documents shall 
remain on display for at least 60 days before the commencement 
of the activity in the Antarctic area.

Final rulings on permits and documents related to them shall be 
submitted to other States Parties to the Protocol for their 
information.

The provisions in subsection 1 above apply also to rulings on 
permits and documents related to them, submitted to Finland for 
information by other States Parties to the Protocol.
Section 20
Amendment or Revocation of a Ruling on a Permit

A ruling on a permit, or the regulations in it, may be amended
or the permit may be revoked on the basis of an application by
the permit holder or ex officio.

A ruling on a permit may be amended by the Ministry ex officio
if:

1)      circumstances have substantially changed after granting
        the permit;

2)      the grounds for granting the permit or stipulating the
        regulations in the permit are later determined to have
        been otherwise substantially different from those
        required for granting the permit; or

3)      it is necessary for the execution of sufficiently
        specified provisions in international agreements
        binding on Finland.

The Ministry may revoke a permit ex officio if:

1)      the applicant has submitted incorrect information which
        significantly affected the requirements for granting
        the permit; or

2)      the regulations in the permit have been breached to the
        extent that caused substantial hazard or detriment to
        human health or to the environment of the Antarctic
        area.

Chapter 4
Conservation of Nature

Section 21
Conservation of Native Animals, Plants and Invertebrates

A permit is needed for harmful interference with animals, plants
and invertebrates native to the Antarctic area and for killing,
injuring, capturing, handling or molesting a mammal or a bird
native to the Antarctic area.

A permit for an activity referred to in subsection 1 above may
be granted:

1)      to provide specimens for scientific study;

2)      to provide specimens for a museum, zoo, botanical
        garden, or other comparable institution or use; or

3)      for any other scientific activity, or for construction
        or operation of support facilities required by such
scientific activity, or to provide for the unavoidable 
consequences of the activity.

The Ministry shall ensure before granting the permit that:

1)    no more mammals, birds or plants native to the 
Antarctic area are taken than is strictly necessary to 
meet the purpose referred to in subsection 2 above;

2)    only small numbers of mammals or birds native to the 
Antarctic area are killed and no more native mammals or 
birds are killed from local populations than can, in 
combination with other permitted takings, normally be 
replaced by natural reproduction in one season;

3)    the diversity of species, as well as the habitats 
essential to their existence, and the balance of the 
ecological systems existing within the Antarctic area 
are maintained; and

4)    all killing, injuring, capturing, handling or molesting 
of a mammal or bird native to the Antarctic area shall 
be done in the manner that involves the least degree of 
pain and suffering practicable.

Section 22
Specially Protected Species

By decree, a species of animal, plant or invertebrate native to 
the Antarctic area may be designated a specially protected 
species.

A permit for injuring, capturing, handling or molesting of an 
animal, plant or invertebrate belonging to a specially protected 
species may be granted if the activity:

1)    is for a compelling scientific purpose;

2)    will not jeopardize the survival or recovery of that 
species or local population; and

3)    is conducted in a manner that causes the animal the 
least degree of pain and suffering practicable.

A permit for killing of an animal, plant or invertebrate 
belonging to a specially protected species may be granted in 
accordance with the requirements set out in subsection 2 above 
if use of other than lethal techniques is not appropriate.

Section 23
Introduction of Non-native Species

A permit is required for introducing a household plant or 
laboratory animal, plant or invertebrate into the Antarctic 
area.
9

The following shall be specified in the permit:

1)      the species that may be introduced and, as far as practicable, the numbers of animals, plants or invertebrates belonging to the species and, if appropriate, their age and sex;

2)      the precautions to be taken to prevent escape or contact with native fauna and flora.

The provisions in subsection 1 above do not apply to introducing food into the Antarctic area provided that the food is kept and handled under supervised conditions and that poultry products are inspected beforehand to detect disease.

Section 24
Removal and Disposal of Non-native Species

The permit holder shall, prior to expiration of the permit, remove from the Antarctic area any plant, animal or invertebrate introduced by him or her into the Antarctic area or dispose of it by incineration or other equally effective means.

Every individual shall without delay dispose of by incineration or other equally effective means any such animal, plant or invertebrate which has been introduced into the Antarctic area without a permit and which may pose a risk to an animal, plant or invertebrate native to the Antarctic area, or remove it from the Antarctic area.

Section 25
Specially Protected Areas

A permit to enter, and engage in activities in, an area designated as a Specially Protected Area under Annex V of the Protocol may be granted only if the activity meets the requirements set for the area in a Management Plan approved in compliance with Annex V of the Protocol.

The Ministry shall:

1)      append to the ruling on the permit the relevant sections of the Management Plan for the area;

2)      specify in the ruling on the permit the extent and location of the area; and

3)      specify in the ruling on the permit the authorised activities, when and where they may be conducted and name the permit holder.

If no Management Plan exists for an area designated as a Specially Protected Area, a permit may be granted provided that
the activity is for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot 
be served elsewhere. A permit may, however, not be granted, if 
the activity will jeopardise the functioning or conservation of 
the natural ecological system in the area.

The Ministry shall maintain a register of Antarctic Specially 
Protected Areas and Specially Managed Areas as well as of 
historical sites and monuments.

Chapter 5
Waste Disposal and Waste Management

Section 26
General Obligations

In all activities in the Antarctic area care shall be taken that 
the amount of waste produced is reduced as far as practicable 
and the waste does not to pose a risk to or jeopardise health, 
the environment or scientific activities.

Section 27
Waste Management in the Antarctic area

The generator or possessor of wastes shall remove from the 
Antarctic area or store, utilize or treat wastes which are under 
his or her control or produced by him or her in the Antarctic 
area. He or she shall also plan and implement waste management 
in a manner stipulated by decree and defined in a waste 
management plan which has been approved in compliance with 
Section 28.

Section 28
Waste Management Plan

The Ministry of the Environment shall approve a waste management 
plan for a fixed base, work site and field camp.

The Ministry shall review and, if necessary, update the plans 
annually. The contents of a waste management plan shall be 
stipulated in more detail by decree.

The provisions of subsection 1 above apply also, where 
appropriate, to vessels whose destination is in the Antarctic 
area.

Section 29
Removal of Waste from the Antarctic area

Wastes removed from the Antarctic area shall be returned to 
Finland.
More detailed provisions on the removal of wastes to another 
State may be stipulated by decree.

                          Section 30
                    Provision on Authorization

The Ministry of the Environment may adopt general provisions and 
guidelines on the limit values for the impurities contained in 
discharges from incinerators for burning waste in the Antarctic 
area and on the technical requirements for equipment used for 
this purpose as well as on other treatment of waste.

                                Chapter 6

                Prevention of Marine Pollution by Vessels

                          Section 31
                      Other Legislation

The Act on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Vessels 
(Statutes of Finland no. 300/79), and the provisions and 
regulations given under its authorization, apply to the 
prevention of marine pollution by vessels in the Antarctic area 
unless otherwise stipulated in this Chapter.

                         Section 32
                Discharge of Noxious Liquid Substances

The discharge of the following into the sea in the Antarctic 
area is prohibited:

1)      a noxious liquid substance; and

2)      a chemical or other liquid substance, in quantities or 
        with a content harmful to the marine environment.

                         Section 33
                    Garbage and Sewage

The discharge of garbage and sewage into the sea in the 
Antarctic area is prohibited as stipulated by decree.

                         Section 34
Provisions Concerning the Structure and 
Reception Facilities of Vessels

The Ministry shall ensure, prior to granting a permit, that a 
Finnish vessel, and a foreign vessel referred to in paragraph 4 
of subsection 1 of Section 2, has on board tanks of sufficient 
capacity for the retention of the following wastes and 
substances:
1)     sludge, oily ballast water, tank washing water and 
other oil residues and mixtures;
2)     garbage; and
3)     noxious liquid substances.

The wastes and substances referred to in subsection 1 above 
shall be discharged at a reception facility outside the 
Antarctic area.

Section 35
Entries in the Ship's Log

More detailed provisions regarding entries in the records or in 
the Ship's Log concerning discharge into the sea of garbage and 
sewage may be issued by decree.

Chapter 7
Other Regulations

Section 36
Cases of Emergency

This Act, and the provisions and regulations given under its 
authorization shall not apply in cases of emergency, such as 
immediate danger to the safety of human life or health, 
immediate risk of destruction of or damage to vessels, aircraft 
or equipment and facilities of high value, where disregarding 
this Act and the provisions and regulations given under its 
authorization is the only apparent means to overcome the threat 
or to minimise the damage to the largest extent possible.

Actions taken in cases of emergency shall always be such as to 
minimise to the largest extent possible the adverse impact on 
the environment of the Antarctic area.

The Ministry of the Environment shall be notified without delay 
of a case of emergency referred to in subsection 1 above.

The Ministry shall notify, in accordance with the provisions of 
the Protocol, all States Parties to the Protocol and the 
Committee referred to in Article 11 of the Protocol of actions 
taken in a case of emergency.

Section 37
Appeal

An appeal against a ruling on a permit and a decision concerning 
a waste management plan referred to in Section 28 taken by the 
Ministry under the provisions of this Act shall be submitted to
the Supreme Administrative Court under the provisions for appeal 
in the Administrative Procedures Act (Statutes of Finland no. 
586/96).

Section 38
Reference to the Provisions of the Penal Code

The penalty for detonating a nuclear explosive in contravention 
of the prohibition in paragraph 1 of subsection 1 of Section 4 
is stipulated in Section 6 of Chapter 34 of the Penal Code. The 
penalty for damaging the environment otherwise in contravention 
of the prohibition in paragraph 1 of subsection 1 of Section 4 
and in contravention of the prohibitions in Section 32 or in 
Section 33 is stipulated in Sections 1 to 4 of Chapter 48 of the 
Penal Code.

Section 39
Illegal Interference with Mineral Resources

Whoever wilfully or through gross negligence breaches the 
prohibition in paragraph 2 of subsection 1 of Section 4 shall be 
sentenced to a fine or to a maximum of two years imprisonment 
for illegal interference with mineral resources.

Section 40
Breach of Obligation to Protect the Antarctic area

Whoever wilfully or through gross negligence:

1)   contravenes the prohibition in paragraph 5 of 
     subsection 1 of Section 4 or subsection 2 of Section 4, or

2)   neglects the obligation in Section 5, Section 24, 
     Section 26, Section 27, subsection 2 of Section 34, 
     Section 35, subsection 2 of Section 36 or the 
     provisions or regulations given under the authorization 
     of those provisions, or

3)   removes wastes in contravention of Section 29

shall be sentenced to a fine for breach of the obligation to 
protect the Antarctic area, unless a more severe penalty is 
stipulated in law.

Finnish law is applied to the breach of the obligation to 
protect the Antarctic area notwithstanding the provisions of 
subsection 1 of Section 6 of Chapter 1 of the Penal Code.
Section 41
Competent Court

Legal proceedings concerning breaches against this Act shall be 
instituted at Helsinki District Court.

Section 42
Supervising Authority

The Ministry of the Environment shall supervise compliance with 
this Act and with the provisions and regulations given under its 
authorization.

Section 43
Fees

A fee shall be charged for a permit referred to in this Act. The 
amount of the fee is determined in accordance with the Act on 
Grounds for Fees collected by the State (Statutes of Finland no. 
150/92).

Section 44
Entry into Force

This Act enters into force on a date stipulated by decree.

This Act shall not apply to an activity which has been 
undertaken before the entry into force of the Act.

The measures necessary for the enforcement of this Act may be 
initiated before the entry into force of the Act.

Helsinki 18 October 1996
15
Act 
on Amendment of the Penal Code 

In accordance with a decision by the Parliament the following 
shall be added to the Penal Code

a new subsection 2 to Section 6 of Chapter 34, due to which the 
present subsection 2 becomes subsection 3, a new subsection 3 to 
Section 5 of Chapter 48, due to which the present subsection 3 
becomes subsection 4 and the present subsection 4 becomes 
subsection 5, as well as a new subsection 3 to Section 6 of 
Chapter 48, due to which the present subsection 3 becomes 
subsection 4, as follows:

      Chapter 34 
   On Offences Endangering the Public

      Section 6 
   Nuclear Explosive Offence

Whoever detonates a nuclear explosive in the Antarctic area 
shall be sentenced for committing a nuclear explosive offence.

      Chapter 48 
   On Environmental Offences

      Section 5 
   Environmental Offence

Whoever wilfully or through gross negligence causes damage to an 
animal, plant or invertebrate native to the Antarctic area by 
contravening the prohibition referred to in subsection 2 of 
Section 4 of the Act on the Environmental Protection of 
Antarctica (Statutes of Finland no. /96), or by undertaking an 
activity without a permit required by the Act, or in a manner 
which is in conflict with the conditions attached to the permit, 
as referred to in subsection 1 of Section 21, in subsection 1 of 
Section 23 or in subsection 1 of Section 25 of the Act, shall be 
sentenced for committing an environmental offence.

      Section 6 
   Offence in respect of Protected Buildings

Whoever wilfully or through gross negligence damages, removes or 
destroys a historical site or monument referred to in paragraph 
4 of subsection 1 of Section 4 of the Act on the Environmental 
Protection of Antarctica shall be sentenced for committing an 
offence in respect of protected buildings.

This Act enters into force on a date stipulated by decree.

Helsinki 18 October 1996
1.6
UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

Proposal for a Decree 
on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica

Chapter 1
Environmental Impact Assessment

Section 1

An Assessment Report relating to an Initial Environmental 
Evaluation shall, to the extent necessary, include:

1)      information about the proposed activity, including its 
        purpose, location, duration and intensity; as well as

2)      consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity 
        and of any impacts these may have.

Section 2

In addition to the information required in Section 1, an 
Assessment Report relating to a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation shall, to the extent necessary, include:

1)      a description of the initial environmental reference 
        state of the area concerned and a forecast of its 
        future environmental reference state in the absence of 
        the proposed activity as well as an estimation of the 
        direct, indirect, cumulative or unavoidable impacts of 
        the proposed activity on the future development of the 
        environment of the area;

2)      the most important material used in the evaluation, the 
        methods used to acquire the material, and the 
        information and assumptions contained in it;

3)      a specification and report on measures to prevent or 
        mitigate adverse impacts of the proposed activity and 
        to promote prompt action in cases of emergency;

4)      consideration of the impacts of the proposed activity 
        on scientific research;

5)      an identification of gaps in knowledge and 
        uncertainties encountered in evaluating environmental 
        impacts;

6)      the name and address of the person or body which 
        prepared the evaluation; and
7)     a summary of the information acquired in the 
evaluation.

Section 3

An Assessment Report relating to a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation, or a draft of it, shall be submitted to the permit 
granting authority at least 150 days before the next meeting 
referred to in subsection 2 of Section 12 of the Act on the 
Environmental Protection of Antarctica (Statutes of Finland no. 
/96).

Chapter 2
Procedure for Permits

Section 4

An application for a permit shall include:

1)     the names or organisations of the applicant or 
applicants, their domiciles and their nationalities;

2)     the date of commencement of the proposed activity and 
its duration;

3)     a description of the proposed activity; and

4)     information about measures and equipment to minimise, 
prevent and monitor the environmental impacts of the 
proposed activity.

A Finnish vessel shall have a certificate issued by the National 
Board of Navigation certifying that the vessel meets the 
requirements referred to in Section 34 of the Act on the 
Environmental Protection of Antarctica.

A vessel referred to in paragraph 4 of subsection 1 of Section 2 
of the Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica shall 
have a certificate issued by the competent authority of the flag 
State certifying that the vessel meets the requirements referred 
to in Section 34 of the Act.
Chapter 3                                                
Conservation of Nature                                                

Section 5                                                          
Specially protected species are:                                     
All species of the genus Arctocephalus (Fur Seals); and              
Ommatophoca rossii (Ross Seal).                                      

Section 6                                                          
The following substances may not be introduced into the              
Antarctic area:                                                      
1)      polychlorinated biphenyls;                                   
2)      polystyrene beads, chips or comparable forms of              
packaging; or                                                        
3)      pesticides other than those needed for scientific or         
hygienic purposes.                                                   

Section 7                                                          
The register referred to in subsection 4 of Section 25 of the        
Act on the Environmental Protection of Antarctica shall indicate     
the location of each area or historical site, the exact borders      
of the area and the regulations in a valid Management Plan.          

The Ministry of the Environment shall maintain a register of         
locations where an activity is being undertaken or has been          
undertaken under a permit granted in compliance with the Act on      
the Environmental Protection of Antarctica.                          

Chapter 4                                                        
Waste and Waste Management                                           

Section 8                                                          
The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic area by     
the generator of such wastes:                                        

1)      radioactive materials no longer in use;                     
2)      electrical batteries no longer in use;                       
3)      liquid and solid fuels, and lubricants no longer in
4)     wastes containing harmful levels of heavy metals or 
       acutely toxic or harmful persistent compounds;

5)     fuel drums no longer in use;

6)     other solid, non-combustible wastes;

7)     polyvinyl chloride, polyurethane foam, polystyrene 
       foam, rubber and (chemically) treated timbers no longer 
       in use as well as discarded other products which 
       contain additives that could produce harmful emissions 
       if incinerated; and

8)     all other plastic wastes, except low density 
       polyethylene containers provided that such containers 
       shall be burnt in incinerators;

9)     the solid waste generated by the incineration of wastes 
       referred to in Section 9 below;

10)    residues of carcasses of animals introduced into the 
       Antarctic area;

11)    laboratory cultures of micro-organisms and plant 
       pathogens;

12)    unused avian products introduced into the Antarctic 
       area.

Instead of being removed, the wastes referred to in paragraphs 
10 to 12 above may also be incinerated or disposed of by other 
equally effective means.

Section 9

Wastes other than those referred to in Section 8 shall, if 
combustible, be burnt in incinerators which reduce harmful 
emissions to the maximum extent possible.

Section 10

Wastes not removed from the Antarctic area or disposed of in 
accordance with Section 8 or Section 9 shall not be disposed of 
in ice-free areas or into fresh water systems. Wastes generated 
at a field camp shall be removed to a base station or a vessel 
so that they can be dealt with in a manner stipulated in this 
decree.

Section 11

The generator of waste shall remove from the Antarctic area 
liquid waste, sewage and domestic liquid waste other than those 
referred to in Section 8. The discharge of such wastes onto sea
ice, ice shelves or a grounded ice-sheet shall be avoided.

Sewage and domestic liquid wastes generated in the Antarctic 
area may be discharged into the sea taking into account the 
assimilative capacity of the receiving marine environment. If 
the discharge takes place from a vessel, the provisions in 
Section 15 below for the discharge of sewage and domestic liquid 
waste shall be followed.

Section 12

All wastes in the Antarctic area shall be stored in a manner 
that prevents their dispersal into the environment.

Section 13

A Waste Management Plan referred to in Section 28 of the Act on 
the Environmental Protection of Antarctica shall include:

1)  programmes for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites 
and abandoned work sites;

2)  a description of waste management arrangements;

3)  plans for analysing environmental impacts of waste and 
waste management;

4)  a description of measures for preventing and minimising 
environmental impacts of wastes and waste management.

The following classification of wastes shall be followed in a 
Waste Management Plan:

1)  sewage and domestic liquid wastes;

2)  other liquid wastes and chemicals no longer in use, 
including fuels and lubricants;

3)  combustible solid wastes;

4)  other solid wastes; and

5)  radioactive materials no longer in use.

Chapter 5

Prevention of Marine Pollution

Section 14

The discharge of plastic and other garbage from a vessel into 
the sea is prohibited.
21

Without prejudice to the provisions in subsection 1 above, the discharge from a vessel into the sea of food wastes is permitted if it takes place as far as possible from land and ice shelves and in no case less than 12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice shelf. Such food wastes shall be passed through a comminuter or grinder so that they are capable of passing through a screen with openings no greater than 25 millimetres.

The provisions in subsection 1 above do not apply to synthetic fishing nets accidentally dropped into the sea, provided that all reasonable precautions have been taken to prevent their falling into the sea.

Section 15

The discharge into the sea from a vessel of sewage generated on board a vessel is prohibited, with the following exceptions:

1)      treated sewage may be discharged into the sea through sewage treatment equipment approved by the National Board of Navigation;

2)      treated sewage may be discharged into the sea through sewage treatment equipment which is approved by the National Board of Navigation and which disintegrates and disinfects sewage if the discharge takes place at least 4 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice shelf;

3)      sewage which has not been treated may be discharged into the sea if the discharge takes place at a distance exceeding 12 nautical miles from the nearest land and if sewage stored in a holding tank is not discharged instantaneously but at a moderate rate while the ship is en route at a speed of no less than 4 knots.

The provisions in subsection 1 above do not apply to a vessel certified to carry not more than 10 persons.

Section 16

This decree enters into force on ..... 199 .
