ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF
NORWAY




Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Norway

XXI ATCM/IP84
May, 1997
Original: English
Mr. Chairman,

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the Government of New Zealand for providing such excellent facilities for the XXI ATCM and to the city of Christchurch for its generous hospitality. As hosts for the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, we have much to learn from the way this year’s meeting has been planned and arranged.

We look forward to significant progress on many important issues on the agenda, particularly in relation to the Environmental Protocol and the establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP). We have noted with great satisfaction that virtually all Consultative Parties have ratified the Protocol. We are confident that the Protocol will be in force shortly, and that all parties will give full legal and practical effect to the Protocol and live up to the principles contained in it. But much still remains to be done in developing the Protocol as a practical and dynamic instrument for the protection of the Antarctic environment.

We believe that progress can also be made at this meeting as regards i.a. tourism, environmental impact assessment, environmental monitoring, protected areas and exchange of scientific data.

We would also like to see significant progress on the liability regime to which we committed ourselves when then Protocol was adopted in 1991. Despite the substantial progress made by the working group under the very able chairmanship of professor Wolfrum we still do not have agreement on rules for liablity. It should be appreciated that while the question of liability is a most difficult an complex one and an issue that depends on the work of the legal experts, it is an issue we all have to address. We should now look for constructive and pragmatic ways to advance this work further, possibly by reducing the items to be settled now. Much time and effort has already been spent on this one issue, and we should try to finish the work on the liability regime within reasonable time.
Mr. Chairman,

The Norwegian delegation believes that the establishment of a 
permanent Secretariat is essential both to the functioning of the Madrid 
Protocol and to the Antarctic Treaty System in general. Secretarial 
services are essential to give the ATS and the CEP the necessary 
support. It is therefore of vital importance that the Secretariat is in 
place by the time the Protocol enters into force. The one remaining 
issue concerns the location of such a Secretariat. Renewed constructive 
and pragmatic efforts are needed to achieve a consensus decision as 
regards the site for the Secretariat. If the present impasse prevails at 
this meeting, maybe the time has come to start afresh in looking for 
alternative locations that can be acceptable to all consultative parties. 
The lack of a permanent secretariat causes considerable problems for 
our work and hampers progress on many issues. In practical terms I am 
afraid that the time is coming near where some of the Consultative 
Parties may have to renounce the resposibility of arranging an ATCM for 
lack of resources and expertise and the support and advice of a 
permanent secretariat. This is a situation we should try to avoid and it 
is therefore imperative that a solution to the secretariat issue is found 
immediately. We can not allow this issue to drag on indefinitety.

Mr. Chairman,

Antarctica is a continet dedicated to peace, enviromental protection 
and science. Impressive progress has been made in many areas in 
research in different parts of Antarctica, thus proving the Continent's 
importance in many scientific fields. Norway, together with Sweden and 
Finland, has been pleased to take active part in these activities through 
the latest Nordic Antarctic Research Expedition in Dronning Maud Land 
from December 1996 to March 1997. In this connection, Norway carried 
out an inspection which gave me first hard insight into how well the 
Antarctic cooperation is functioning.

Let me in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, assure you of our committment to 
ensuring the success of this meeting and our pleasure of seeing you in 
the chair. In this connection, we are happy to offer the services of 
professor Olav Orheim as chair of the TEWG. We look forward to working 
with you and your colleagues.
