ANTARCTIC TREATY                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



FOLLOW-UP TO THE FINAL COMPREHENSIVE
ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE
ROBERTS IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA
(1996/97 ACTIVITIES)


Agenda item 6b                  Submitted by New Zealand

XXI ATCM/IP5
April, 1997
Original: English
Follow-up to the Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation

Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts 
in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica
(1996/97 Activities)

New Zealand
(Agenda Item 6(b))

1. The Cape Roberts Project

The Cape Roberts Project is a scientific drilling project being undertaken jointly 
between Italy, New Zealand, the United States of America, Germany, Australia, and 
the United Kingdom. Antarctica New Zealand (New Zealand's Antarctic Institute) 
were appointed logistics managers and have responsibility for implementation of the 
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE). Activities 
commenced in January 1995. Drilling was originally planned to commence off Cape 
Roberts in October 1996. However due to unfavourable sea ice conditions drilling - 
was postponed for a year.

The final (CEE) for the project was completed in January 1994 (XVIII ATCM Info 
21). At the XX ATCM New Zealand tabled a paper reporting on changes made to the 
CEE since 1994 (XX ATCM WP1). This paper reports on activities completed 
during 1996/97 and provides an update on changes to the CEE.

The presentation of this report is consistent with the approach on CEE follow-up 
procedures outlined in Information Paper No. 63 tabled by New Zealand and South 
Africa at the XIX ATCM.

2. Summary of Activities Completed in 1996/97

The Cape Roberts field huts were occupied by up to ten persons over two periods 
during the 1996/97 season (November and part of December 1996 and mid-January 
1997). The main activities completed during this time were as follows:

(a)    Deployment of the main camp buildings onto the sea ice 500 metres out from 
Cape Roberts and erection of a cold porch, mess and recreation tents;

(b)    Deployment of the drill rig and associated buildings onto the sea ice about 
one kilometre north west of Cape Roberts and a trial of the drilling system;

(c)    Construction of three fuel racks for storage of drummed fuel off the 
ground.

A number of other field parties also visited Cape Roberts over the 1996/97 season.

Environmental procedures, based on CEE requirements, were prepared to cover 
activities prior to the commencement of drilling. A monitoring programme has 
covered activities during 1995/96 and 1996/97. Antarctica New Zealand's 
Environmental Manager visited Cape Roberts for four days in November 1997. A 
brief inspection was also conducted by New Zealand's independent Environmental 
Assessment and Review Panel, in December 1997.
3. Update on Compliance with the CEE

Due to unfavourable sea ice conditions, the first drilling season has been delayed a further year. The delay has added an additional year of activities at Cape Roberts with the potential for increased cumulative impacts. However the level of activity has been minimal and monitoring activities are continuing in accordance with CEE requirements. The trial of the drilling system in waters just off Cape Roberts allowed for the testing of safety and emergency equipment essential to ensuring significant environmental impacts are avoided or minimised during the drilling phase.

At the XX ATCM (WP1), New Zealand identified a number of areas of non compliance with the CEE. These items of non compliance have been addressed by the project manages during the 1996/97 season as follows.

- Storage area - boundary markers will be installed on Cape Roberts during the drill seasons. A map showing the boundaries of the storage area has been completed, and will be displayed at the sea ice camp. It is also included in the Operations Plan.

- Contingency planning during set up and construction phases - contingency plans have now been included in the Operations Plan.

- Sewage maceration - non maceration of sewage during the construction and set up phase on Cape Roberts is in accordance with Antarctica New Zealand procedures.

- Helicopter operations - designated helicopter landing areas have been established at Cape Roberts.

- Fuel storage - all fuel drums at Cape Roberts are now stored above ground, on three specially designed racks.

- Walking access at Cape Roberts - walking routes have been identified and mapped. Maps will be displayed in the sea ice camp, at the Cape Roberts huts and will be included in the Operations Plan.

- Restricted areas - restricted/off limits areas have been identified and mapped. Maps will be displayed in the sea ice camp, at the Cape Roberts huts and will be included in the Operations Plan.

- Sea ice flagged route - flags will be placed between Cape Roberts and Marble Point to mark significant sea ice cracks and other hazards.

- Drip trays - trays are now available.

- Fire safety controls - fire systems and procedures have been developed and all staff will receive specific fire training.

- Ground disturbance in storage area - an additional requirement aimed at assessing ground disturbance at Cape Roberts has been added to the monitoring programme.

2
4. Proposed Changes to the CEE

Working Paper No. 1 (XX ATCM) identified three changes to the CEE made since it was finalised in January 1994. These were:

(a)    The disposal of non macerated sewage into holes drilled in the sea ice;

(b)    The use of explosives for down-hole logging and for cutting the outer drill casing at the completion of each of the four proposed drill holes; and

(c)    No containment provided for drummed fuel.

Environmental evaluations have been completed for the revised sewage disposal method and for the use of explosives for down-hole logging. Both evaluations have subsequently been approved by New Zealand's Environmental Assessment and Review Panel. The Panel concluded that the impacts of the changes would have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment.

The need for explosives to cut the drill casing has only just been confirmed by the project managers and an environmental evaluation for this change will soon be completed and submitted to the Panel.

Drummed fuel at Cape Roberts has now been stored on above ground racks aimed at preventing snow build up and the potential for drums to be iced in or damaged through vehicle impacts. Issues surrounding containment requirements are currently being addressed with the Panel.

The process adopted by New Zealand to assess these changes is in accordance with the approach of assessing the level of impact of changes to CEEs by Protocol requirements, as outlined in Information Paper No. 63, XIX ATCM.

5. Monitoring and Audit

Monitoring activities continued during the 1996/97 season in accordance with CEE requirements. Following commencement of drilling in October 1997, an independent observer will visit Cape Roberts and the drill site, and carry out a full environmental review of activities. The aim of the review will be to assess compliance with CEE requirements and associated environmental procedures.

Any additional issues raised by the Environmental Assessment and Review Panel following their December 1997 visit will also be addressed prior to the commencement of activities for the 1997/98 season.

3
