ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          
XXIIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  16

CONCORDIA


Agenda item 12                  Submitted by France and Italy

XXI ATCM/IP16
May 1997
English
Original: French
CONCORDIA

A document had been submitted to the XX ATCM by France and Italy. It related to the activities carried out by the Institut Français pour la Recherche et la Technologie Polaires (IFRTP) and the Ente per le Nuove Energia, Tecnologia e l'Ambiente (ENEA - Progetto Antartide) on the Antarctic plateau, stemming from the agreement signed by these two partners for the construction and operation of a new "Concordia" station. Both the statutory framework of this program and its link with the European Programme for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) at Dôme C have been described. That description is to be found in a separate information paper.

The logistics of both programs is extremely intertwined. Although most of the cargo transported during the 1996/1997 summer campaign belonged to the EPICA ice-coring program, almost 100 tons of equipment for the future Concordia station were shipped thanks to two raids. A ten-people logistics team, made up of French and Italian nationals, was able to install the various infrastructure elements. These include, among others, a temporary camp used by the ice-coring team during the summer campaign and which will eventually be used for setting up the Concordia station. Besides the sleeping tents, this camp consists of a container housing the power station, a workshop container and a medical booth. Another container holds the scientific equipment used in a preliminary astrophysics campaign. The telecommunications gear has also been put into service. It is to become a backup unit for the future station.

All of these operations took place between early December and early February. The staff was flown to the site in Twin-Otters from the Italian base at Terra Nova Bay. Dôme C operations were successfully carried out thanks to the other tasks performed at the Italian Terra Nova Bay and French Dumont d'Urville bases. As is known, the profile of the basement rocks located below Dôme C was traced during the 1995/1996 summer campaign, thanks to the Italian teams and to the radar probing they undertook. The exact location of the ice coring was also established. Its coordinates are 75°06.11' S and 123°23.71' E.

Further activities were carried out by the French and Italian operators in order to provide a more comprehensive picture of the existence of the "Concordia" Project to the scientific community at large and to generate participation projects to ensure a better utilization of the future station. A maximum of scientific results would thus be achieved with minimum disturbance to the environment.

To this end, a seminar was organized in Sienna (Italy), from June 3 to 6, 1996, hailing over 100 participants from more than six countries.

This seminar extended the scope of scientific collaboration between scientists from various countries and helped define the data recording and analysis techniques to be used in order to achieve a better scientific exploitation of the experiments carried out at Dôme C. This led to new cooperation schemes to implement certain techniques or to share responsibilities relating to data analysis.

The main scientific fields to be studied are: astronomy/astrophysics (large observatory specifically devoted to observations in the millimetric and infrared fields), atmospheric sciences (stratospheric ozone monitoring within the framework of the NDSC(1), UV-B flow, dynamics of the troposphere, tropospheric chemistry), glaciology (EPICA, physical and chemical properties

(1) Network for the Detection of Stratospheric Changes.
2

of the névé and ice), earth sciences (seismologic station linked to the GEOSCOPE and MEDNET 
networks, magnetic observatory of the INTERMAGNET network), human biology (study of 
human factors under extreme conditions, human physiology, telemedicine), polar technology 
(technology applied both to daily and scientific activities).

Preliminary campaigns had already been carried out during the Southern summer 
(astronomy in 1995/1996, astronomy and tropospheric studies in 1996/1997) confirming the 
importance of the site. Further campaigns have been scheduled for the coming years.

The Concordia station is intended to host international scientific programs. The decision 
to accept a program at the Concordia station is taken by the Steering Committee (a French/Italian 
Joint Committee representing the Polar agencies and experts in the particular fields) after 
examination of the applications by the French and Italian Scientific Committees.

It is up to this Steering Committee to set the financial conditions underlying these 
experiments and to suggest a time schedule for their implementation. All national and 
international projects for which the Antarctic plateau environment is essential are eligible. It is 
recommended to seek cooperation from one or more French or Italian teams.

The international use of the Concordia station is now guaranteed. Such use stems, on the 
one hand, from the need for additional funding to keep it operating under the best conditions, 
and on the other hand, from the legitimate request of the international community for this station 
to be used according to the best "quality of scientific results/environmental impact" ratio.
