ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN
ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION AND MANAGEMENT


Agenda item 6b, c, f, 11, 15                     Submitted by IUCN

XXI ATCM/IP61
May, 1997
Original: English
CUMULATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS
IN ANTARCTICA: MINIMISATION
AND MANAGEMENT

Information Paper presented to the XXI ATCM
Christchurch, New Zealand
May 1997

Relevant to agenda items 6(b,c,f),7,11,15

Based on the Report of the IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Cumulative Environmental
Impacts held in Washington DC, USA, 18 - 21 September 1996.

IUCN
The World Conservation Union
1 INTRODUCTION

1.1 Rationale for the workshop on cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol), signed in 
1991, designates Antarctica a "natural reserve, dedicated to peace and science". Its main 
principle (Article 3) states that the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems, and the intrinsic values of Antarctica (including wilderness, 
aesthetic, and scientific values) shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and 
conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

The Protocol makes several references to cumulative impact, and its implementation 
requires a better understanding of this concept and its ramifications for environmental 
management in the Antarctic context.

In order to encourage thought and discussion on the subject of cumulative impact in the 
Antarctic context, the World Conservation Union (IUCN), through its Antarctic Advisory 
Committee (AAC) organised an international workshop of invited experts. The main aim 
of the workshop was to discuss and stimulate progress on practical aspects of minimisation 
and management of cumulative environmental impact in Antarctica. A high priority was 
placed on the generation of ideas and recommendations that would be of direct use to 
Antarctic operators, policy makers and scientists, rather than on conducting a highly 
theoretical discussion of concepts. It was also seen as important to take advantage of 
existing knowledge and experience from non-Antarctic regions

"We're not here to reinvent the wheel, but to put chains on it so it works on 
the ice" (Martin Riddle, workshop participant, September 1996)

1.2 Geographical coverage of the workshop

IUCN's Antarctic Conservation Strategy has a geographic coverage of the Antarctic 
continent and surrounding iceshelves, the Antarctic maritime zone, the ocean out to the 
Antarctic Polar Front (Antarctic Convergence), and the subantarctic islands within that 
zone. The Antarctic Convergence is the ecological boundary created in the region where 
cold surface waters spreading outward from the continent meet warmer surface seas in a 
frontal zone. For the purpose of this workshop, the same boundary was adopted. While 
this area is larger than the Antarctic Treaty Area, it makes sense as an ecological entity. 
Moreover, the Protocol refers specifically to the need to include "dependent and associated 
ecosystems" in considerations of environmental management of activities within the 
Protocol area
2 CUMULATIVE IMPACT

Changes to the environment, caused by human activities, are not simply the product of individual impacts occurring independently of each other, but the consequence of many interacting factors, the combined effects of which are not always well understood [Cocklin (1989)] . Human activities, can well produce environmental impacts that are considered insignificant by themselves, but the interaction and combination of these impacts over time and place may well be significant. This has sometimes been referred to as "the nibbling effect" or " destruction by insignificant increments" [Dupuis (1997)]. The existence of such cumulative impacts means that dealing only with individual environmental impacts will not result in adequate environmental management.

When conceptualising cumulative impact points several points must be borne in mind:
  • Small actions whose impacts seem "insignificant" when viewed alone, can have significant cumulative impacts when viewed along with other past, present or foreseeable future actions.
  • Larger-scale activities can produce a "stream" of impacts, and the totality of impact from actions that needs to be considered includes indirect and secondary impacts and any activities or impacts which may be induced by the original activity. [Dames et al (1981) quoted in Martin (1991)]
  • The interaction of impacts can be additive or interactive (e.g synergism, antagonism, biomagnification)
  • In considering the totality of impacts, it needs to be kept in mind that impacts may spread in time and/or space.
  • Several different operators may be involved

Although the existence of cumulative environmental impact has long been acknowledged, the formal study of it is relatively recent [Cocklin (1989), Damman et al(1995)] . The earliest Antarctic study specifically focussing on cumulative impact did not take place till the early nineties [Martin (1991)].
3 DEFINITION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE
ANTARCTIC CONTEXT

Based on literature and the discussions during the Workshop,  the participants arrived at
the following definition  in the Antarctic context:

DEFINITION OF CUMULATIVE IMPACT IN THE ANTARCTIC CONTEXT

A cumulative impact is the impact of combined past, present and reasonably
foreseeable activities. These activities may occur over time and space.

Clarifying notes:

A cumulative impact may, for example be the result of
  • the repetitive occurrence of a single activity
  • the combined effect of multiple activities by one or several Agents
  • individually minor but collectively significant activities

Cumulative impact may be additive or interactive (e.g synergism, antagonism,
biomagnification)
4 WORKSHOP CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The participants in the workshop agreed on conclusions and recommendations to be offered for consideration to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting (ATCM), IUCN, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the scientific community in general, the governments concerned and all Antarctic operators. These workshop conclusions and recommendations have been endorsed by IUCN at the World Conservation Congress, October 1996.

While some conclusions and recommendations may be restatements or clarifications of what the workshop participants felt were legal requirements under the Protocol, several go beyond the Protocol. The intention of the workshop was to come up with recommendations that would in practice, provide better coverage of cumulative impacts in environmental management.

4.1     Assessment of Environmental Impact

4.1.1 Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures specified in the Protocol

The Environmental Protocol sets out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) requirements and procedures for prior assessment of the impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica.. These requirements apply to "scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities" (Article 8 (2)).

In Annex I of the Protocol, a three level approach is taken to EIA, depending on the magnitude and duration of the predicted likely impact.
  · If a proposed activity is deemed to have less than a minor or transitory impact it may proceed without further assessment.  The Protocol Annex I specifies that this determination is entirely left to national procedures. Some Parties require a Preliminary Assessment (PA) or Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) at this level. Whatever the national procedure, it is clear that the decision has to be based on the expected predicted environmental impact, and that hence in some way or other, this impact has been assessed. This stage is referred to here as Preliminary Stage (of assessment).
  · If a proposed activity is likely to have a minor or transitory impact an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is required
  · IF a proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is required.

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations
- Joint EIAs can be an effective tool for managing and/or preventing cumulative impacts when activities of different operators are known or predicted to overlap. Such joint assessments could be developed across many levels or combinations of operations, including within and between programmes, states, and government and non-government operators. In some cases this is already occurring.
- The need to address cumulative impacts should be drawn to the attention of the regulatory authorities (who make the decisions regarding activities, based on the EIA) as well as to the proponent (who has the responsibility of preparing the EIA).
- In dealing with cumulative impact there is a need for a more holistic and ecosystem-based approach than might otherwise be required for environmental assessment.
- Concerns identified included:
  - The EIA process does not require prior exchange of information of minor activities, yet their impacts may contribute to cumulative impacts.
  - There is concern that the time frames for exchange of information for CEE is so long that other activities which may contribute to cumulative impacts may have been initiated during the process.
  - Current systems of information exchange about planned activities, both formal and informal, may not always provide enough information, at the right time, to allow informed decisions about the potential for cumulative impact assessment.
- There is no explicit requirement in the Protocol Annex I (Art 1) to consider cumulative impact at the Preliminary stage level, however, cumulative impacts are a sub-set of impacts and where ever "impacts" are referred to it is assumed that this includes "cumulative impacts".
- Even though Annex I (Arts. 2&3) specifically mentions only existing and (other) known planned activities as elements that need to be taken into account when assessing cumulative impacts of a proposed activity, past activities should also be included in this assessment.

Recommendations

(1) Consideration of cumulative impact should include all relevant past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities.

(2) Wherever obligations regarding environmental impact are identified, it should be taken that this includes cumulative impacts.

4.1.2 Audits/reviews/monitoring and assessment of impacts

Where EIA is a prior assessment in the planning phase, and is required by the Protocol, an Audit or review is an assessment carried out for present or past activities, and it is not a specific Protocol requirement. However, it is seen as a useful tool in environmental management [ GOSEAC (1994)]. It focuses on compliance with international, national or programmatic requirements or policies. Assessment of impacts of past activities through
monitoring , and assessment of predicted future impacts of existing activities can all 
contribute to knowledge about, and minimisation of impacts, including cumulative ones. 
As such, while they may not be required under Annex I, they are possible tools that can be 
used to comply with Article 3 of the Protocol. In any case, they need to be considered for 
sensible environmental management.

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

•  The Protocol requires that activities shall be planned and conducted on the basis 
of sufficient information about their impacts (Art 3 of protocol) This should 
include assessment of cumulative impacts. However, EIA procedures under 
Article 8 and Annex I are usually interpreted as relating specifically to proposed 
activities or changes to existing activities. However, to accommodate 
assessment of cumulative impact, existing activities (and their impact) need to be taken into account as well. Some operators have 
produced "programmatic EIAs" which extend the EIA procedure to existing 
operations.
•  There also is a role for environmental audits/reviews and appropriate 
monitoring when dealing with past and/or existing activities.

Recommendation

(3) Environmental audits/reviews and monitoring, particularly 
for past and/or existing activities, should be used as a further tool in the 
assessment of cumulative impact.

4.2  Specially Protected Species under the Environmental 
Protocol

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

•  The Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex II (Art. 3(4)) may have utility 
for preventing or managing cumulative impacts. This is qualified by some because 
Annex II (Article 3) of the Protocol already accords protection. However, 
according to others, designation as a Specially Protected Species would raise the 
level of protection required, as well as the profile and awareness of the 
protected status
•  The only Specially Protected Species designated under Annex II Appendix A are 
the Fur seals (Arctocephalus spp.) and the Ross seal (Ommatophoca rossii).
Recommendation

(4) Consideration should be given to a review of the Specially
Protected Species in Appendix A to Annex II with a view to examining
its utility for the protection of species whose decline may be the
consequence of, inter alia, cumulative impact (e.g southern giant petrel,
Macronectes giganteus).

4.3  Area Protection under the Environmental Protocol

Annex V of the Protocol specifies the objectives and provides the measures for area
protection and management. Among its features are provision for two categories of areas:
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
(ASMAs), allowing strict protection and multiple use management; it also includes criteria
for establishing a geographically extensive and ecologically representative series of areas to
protect a wide range of natural and human conservation values [Smith et al (1994)].

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

•	The ASMA/ASPA mechanism of Annex V of the Protocol is adequate for
managing cumulative impacts so long as it is approached in an open minded way.
The framework is in place but it has not yet been applied in respect to some values
nor has it been used explicitly for the purposes of protecting against cumulative
impacts. Specific ways in which the ASMA/ASPA mechnism can be used for the
minimisation and management of cumulative impacts include:
	•	for the protection of the environmental integrity of remote areas (Annex V
Art. 3(2a) and Art 4(2a)), the area designated may have to be much larger
than for previously designated ASMA/ASPAs;
	•	for the protection of marine areas - a marine ASMA/ASPA would have to
take account of other international agreements such as CCAMLR, CCAS or
the IWC - however this may not preclude their designation or potential use
for management;
	•	to designate a short-term (5-10 year) ASMA/ASPA to provide interim
protection whilst long-term management options are assessed (a
precautionary approach allowing site management, when sufficient
information is not yet available to demonstrate conclusively whether a value
is being impacted or at risk of being impacted. This is particularly
applicable to cumulative impacts because of the complexity of interacting
factors such as different operators and activities)
	•	to allow time for possible recovery for areas that have been degraded in the
past.
•	The designation of an ASMA/ASPA may not be sufficient to prevent cumulative
impacts unless there is effective cooperation and communication between parties.
- A mechanism for joint management by parties is needed when interactions of operators and activities of different states may occur in ASMA/ASPAs.
- Whilst there is explicit reference in the Protocol to prevention of environmental impacts as a reason for designating an ASMA, there is no explicit reference to prevention of environmental impacts as a reason for designating an ASPA - although this might be implied in Annex V Art. 3(1, 2a & 2i).
- The permitting and reporting procedures, including site inspections required within ASPAs represents an important procedural tool for tracking human activities within these areas, thereby allowing more effective identification and assessment of cumulative environmental impacts.
- Protected Areas, by virtue of their natural qualities or availability of scientific data, may attract further scientific activities and thus actually lead to increased risk of cumulative impact. This needs to be addressed in management.

Recommendations

(5) The use of ASMAs and ASPAs under Annex V (Area Protection and Management) should be encouraged as a tool for the management of cumulative impacts.

(6) International cooperation is essential and should be strongly encouraged in the establishment and management of protected areas.

(7) In the management of these areas, steps should be taken to avoid or minimise the increased risk of cumulative impacts from the possibility that Protected Areas attract further scientific activities.

(8) "Pristine" areas should be identified for a site register, and consideration should be given to the use of designations under Annex V to achieve the appropriate level of protection (which could include exclusion of activities) of such sites where appropriate.

4.4   Information exchange under the ATS

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- There is a need for readily available information on past activities (NB: the Protocol includes a requirement (Annex III, Art. 8(3)) to prepare an inventory of locations of past activities before the information is lost).
- There is a possible role for intermediary and experienced coordination of information relevant to the assessment of cumulative impacts (such as the Canadian
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), who may return EIAs to the proponent with advice to consider other activities that might interact with the proposed activity). With respect to this point:

- it needs to be decided who has the onus to provide/collect information about possible interacting activities;
- there would be a role for the CEP to advise on how this is achieved.
- Information exchange may include information on available technologies

Recommendations

(9) Antarctic Treaty Parties should review elements of information exchange under the ATS to see whether the format, timeliness and content of current exchanges are adequate to meet the obligations under Annex I of the Protocol to consider cumulative impacts in environmental impact assessment. Particular emphasis should be placed on geographic precision and standardised reporting.

(10) In order to facilitate assessment of cumulative impact, timely and frequent distribution of:
- lists of completed, and notification of planned, IEES including summaries and contact details; and
- lists of permits issued under Annexes II and V should be considered.

4.5    Tools for Assessing Compliance with Protocol obligations

Compliance assessment can be carried out at several levels: the ATS (e.g. ATS inspections), the national level (e.g carried out by national authority on its nationals), or the programmatic level (e.g an operator commissioning or carrying out an audit /review ).

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- Inspections under the ATS (under the Antarctic Treaty provisions or under Protocol provisions) are not an appropriate mechanism for checking predictions of cumulative impact because of their infrequent and ad hoc nature.
- Similar problems occur with non ATS observers.
- Although there are no provisions in the Protocol that specifically require reviews/audits of operational and management procedures, such reviews have value in identifying whether appropriate procedures are in place to identify and manage cumulative impacts, including consideration of cumulative impacts in the EIA process.
- If this type of review/audit were undertaken, there would be an educational benefit from making it available. Other parties would then know what management procedures are possible and in place.
- Treaty Parties are required by the Protocol (Article 13) to draw the attention of other Treaty Parties to activities that affect the implementation of the Protocol and the attention of non-Treaty countries to activities by that State that affect the implementation of the Protocol. Although applying to all impacts these requirements have particular relevance to cumulative impacts.

Recommendation:

(11) Mechanism should be developed to assess whether cumulative impact has been adequately addressed in EIAs, and to evaluate effectiveness and/or compliance in general with requirements relating to cumulative impact.

4.6 Technology

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- Use of Best Available Technology (BAT), (terminology as used by SCAR/COMNAP and Best Existing Procedure (BEP) can contribute to reducing the risk of impacts, including cumulative impacts.
- Appropriate technology should be shared and encouraged, noting that:
  - this happens already through COMNAP/SCALOP (eg SCALOP Symposiums); and
  - both the actual BA technology and information about such technology should be shared if practical.
- The Antarctic community can learn from experiences elsewhere in the world and select the best environmental management practice, appropriate to Antarctic conditions.

4.7 Education and Training

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- Education and training to increase awareness of cumulative impacts can decrease the risk of them occurring.
- There needs to be greater recognition and education about sensitive species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts (e.g sensitivity of giant petrels and the lack of knowledge by many people that approaches should be avoided)
- It is important to educate the public about cumulative effects of global human activities on Antarctica, through the links in global environmental systems, including:: climate change, ozone depletion, long-range transport of contaminants.
Recommendations

(12) Training programmes should include the notion that minor impacts by individuals can, when taken together, have cumulative impacts.

(13) Training programmes  should include education about sensitive species and areas, which may be particularly susceptible to cumulative impacts.

4.8  Information Management

Workshop Conclusions and recommendations

- Effective procedures for information management are crucial to managing cumulative impacts.
- It will not be possible to meet cumulative impact obligations without an effective data management system. Issues that need to be considered in this respect include:
      - links with national Antarctic programme data systems;
      - links with SCAR/COMNAP data entries (eg. monitoring/AMEN);
      - consistency of data for comparability;
      - cost and cost effectiveness;
      - how to ensure public access.
      - GIS systems
- For cumulative impact management, access to several types of data and databases (eg. scientific, monitoring, operational, past surveys ) is required.
- In areas with multiple operator activities (eg multiple stations) a common database, including information from all past surveys or monitoring in the area, may facilitate the management of cumulative impacts.
- Circulation of information on past as well as planned surveys or monitoring programmes could help avoid unnecessary duplication in areas with multiple operators.
- GIS is an information, analysis and management tool that may assist and facilitate cooperation and coordination in areas subject to potential cumulative impact, particularly in multi-national situations, through its ability to combine data from a variety of disciplinary and national sources into an integrated framework for handling environmental information.
- There appears to be a gap in current arrangements for exchange and access to operational data (eg records of spills, types of activities undertaken) which may be important for the identification of cumulative impact.
- Useful information for assessment of cumulative impact may be accessed through CCAMLR.
Recommendations

(14) The development of common databases containing comprehensive data on all activities and other relevant variables should be considered in multiple operator areas.

(15)COMNAP and SCAR should examine the feasibility and means of including references to operational databases in the ADDS.

(16) Data or other information should where possible be provided with lat/long coordinates (using GPS).

4.9    International Cooperation

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

• Sharing of logistics operations and/or facilities may reduce cumulative impacts.
• Duplication of logistics/facilities can increase cumulative impacts.
• Assessment and management of cumulative impact is more difficult if activities are being undertaken outside the ATS framework, because there is no mechanism to integrate information about those activities and because there can be further confounding of the problems associated with overlapping regimes.

Recommendations

(17) Logistics/facilities should be shared where practicable and effective in order to reduce cumulative impact.

(18) Any non-Treaty Party operator in the Antarctic should be encouraged to conduct activities in accordance with Antarctic Treaty System procedures and practices, including exchanging information with other operators, to allow cumulative impacts to be addressed.

(19) International collaboration and exchange of ideas, and appropriate meetings should be used to foster standardisation of approaches to research methods and management procedures that will assist in the recognition and reduction of cumulative impacts.
4.10 Monitoring

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- Monitoring is an appropriate tool for checking predictions about cumulative impacts
- The requirements noted as essential in the design of monitoring programs (eg. 
hypotheses, replication, controls) by the SCAR/COMNAP monitoring workshops, 
also apply in the context of cumulative impacts.
- Monitoring programmes in multiple operator areas are likely to benefit from the 
establishment of mechanisms or procedures to integrate the studies from different 
operators.

Recommendation

(20) The outcomes of the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on 
environmental monitoring should be supported as key to effective 
management of cumulative impact.

4.11 Further research:

Workshop Conclusions and Recommendations

- Further research necessary for managing cumulative impacts includes the 
mechanisms (pathways, processes etc) by which impacts accumulate.
- For wildlife, changes in population levels seem obvious parameters to study, but 
studies at other levels (individual, colony) are likely also important (in penguins 
for example: habituation or physiological or behavioural changes in individuals, 
long term patterns of recruitment at colonies and potential impacts on small 
colonies, age distribution within a population). In general, questions that need to be 
addressed further include:
  - What parameters of flora and fauna (and other values) should be studied?
  - Which parameters should be selected with respect to types of activities?
- The understanding of cumulative impact, especially in areas where there are 
multiple activities or operators, would benefit from research into the "footprint" or 
"sphere of influence" of impact. Specific aspects to be addressed include the size 
of the "footprint" on different environmental components; and the overlap of 
footprints.
- Spatially and temporally distant impacts need further study (for example the 
reduction in breeding success of a colony of antarctic petrels caused by chronic 
exposure of individuals to hydrocarbons in another location, and potential 
subsequent secondary effects on microbial populations or flora due to changes in 
guano production (nutrient input) ) .
- Another issue to be addressed is whether it is better to concentrate or to spread 
activities.
• The genetic structure of populations (eg relatedness within and between colonies) is often unknown and may be a significant factor in determining the significance of cumulative effects.

• One potential cumulative impact of concern is the translocation of organisms within the Antarctic as well as from outside the Antarctic (for example micro-organisms, diseases and birds which follow ships beyond their usual areas).

• Natural variability complicates impact studies and needs to be controlled for with suitable randomly selected replicates.

• There is a need for knowledge of the location of "untouched" or "pristine" areas. However, care needs to be taken because the act of gaining this information may in itself compromise the "environmental integrity" of these areas. In addition, visits to these areas may be difficult to document or control.

Recommendations

(21) Further research should be carried out on:
      • the processes and full extent of cumulative impact in different environments;
      • the development of methods applicable to assessment and monitoring for cumulative impact;
      • the procedures for managing cumulative impact;

(22) Suitable control areas should be established relevant to stations or other activities as a tool for determining the impact of those activities.

(23) Potential translocation of species within Antarctica should be addressed through precautionary management measures and through further research.
5. LITERATURE

Cocklin C.,1989. Methodological Approaches to the Assessment of Cumulative 
Environmental Change. Environmental Science Occasional Publication. CEC-01. University 
of Auckland New Zealand.
Damman D.C., D.R. Cressman and M.H. Sadar, 1995.Cumulative Effects Assessment: the 
Development of Practical frameworks. Impact Assessment, Vol 13, 433-454.
Dupuis S. ,1997. Concept of Cumulative Impact. Report of the IUCN Workshop on 
Antarctic cumulative environmental impacts, Washington DC, USA, 18 - 21 September 
1996. Published by IUCN, April 1997.
GOSEAC, 1994. Report of the sixth meeting of the Group of Specialists on 
Environmental Affairs and Conservation, April 1994, Santiago, Chile.
Martin L.M.,1991. Cumulative Impacts at Cape Royds, Ross Sea, Antarctica. Msc Thesis, 
University of Auckland.
Smith R.I, Lewis, Walton D.H. and P.R. Dingwall Eds (1994). Developing the Antarctic 
Protected Area System. IUCN, Gland and Cambridge. x + 137 pp.
NOTES

1) IUCN gratefully acknowledged the generous financial contribution made by the Tinker
Foundation (USA) which made the Workshop on Antarctic Cumulative Environmental
Impacts possible.

2) The full report of the IUCN workshop on Antarctic Cumulative Environmental Impact
is presented elsewhere.

3) The designations of geographical entities in this paper and the presentation of the
material, do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IUCN
concerning the legal status of any country, territory or area, nor of its authorities or
delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

Paper prepared by
Dr Maj De Poorter
(IUCN Antarctic Advisory Committee member)
11 Okura River Road
RD2 Albany
New Zealand
ph/fx +64 9 4730872
