ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


CHILEAN ANTARCTIC NAVY PATROL


Agenda item 11              Submitted by Chile

XXI ATCM/IP69
May 1997
English
Original: Spanish
CHILEAN ANTARCTIC NAVY PATROL

The Chilean Antarctic Navy Patrol represents an important step in Chile's presence in 
Antarctic waters. The main purpose of this patrol is to carry out salvage operations at sea, as it 
is on alert in the Antarctic throughout the summer, ready to provide assistance should an accident 
occur.

One of the tasks to be carried out is to help in thwarting any attempt to pollute the marine 
environment by dumping oil (petroleum or its by-products) into the sea. To do so, the ships have 
the required and skilled human resources, and are equipped with the necessary chemicals to 
recover the dumped oil, thus minimizing its impact on the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

Other tasks which may be carried out by the ships relate to sea patrolling, evacuating ill 
people, providing safety and assistance to water sports (boat races passing through the area) and 
rescuing damaged ships. They are also equipped with the necessary tools to assist in underwater 
repairs, towing other ships, supplying drinking water, fuel, unloading components and generating 
electric power. They can also supply the necessary elements to prevent pollution by oil.

Since it was established in 1990, the Antarctic Navy Patrol consists of two sea salvage 
operations ships - offshore towing vessels conveniently refurbished to carry out the above-
mentioned tasks. One of them is based in Port Foster while the other one is based in Discovery 
Bay (Greenwich Islands, belonging to the South Shetland Islands).

In their respective areas of responsibility, the ships operate from late November until the 
middle of March. That is when the largest number of ships concentrates around the Antarctic 
Peninsula and the Drake Passage area. These ships regularly swap their operating areas. This 
safety assistance service for navigation purposes is unique.

On January 4, 1997, during the Antarctic summer campaign of 1996/1997, the Antarctic 
Navy Patrol provided assistance during a beaching emergency of the Russian vessel "Professor 
Khromov" in the Gerlache strait, Neumayer canal, northern access, 225 nautical miles off 
Discovery Bay, at a latitude of 6434.5 S and a longitude of 6308.4 W.

The "Professor Khromov", with 36 passengers of different nationalities and a crew of 26 
on board, was grounded on a rock bed located close to the "Arturo Prat" Chilean station, and 
the staff sent an SOS signal to the ATF "Galvarino" to head towards that location and assist in 
unbeaching the ship. After a lengthy and intense work, the navy staff was able to verify that the 
ship's structure had not suffered any damages, hence it was allowed to be towed by the ATF 
"Galvarino" to a safe place.

Meanwhile, in order to protect the crew it was decided that all 36 passengers of the 
"Professor Khromov" be transferred to the Russian ship "Alla Tarasova", which sailed to the 
area in order to assist in the rescue. Canadian, German, American and Russian scientists were 
on board that ship. There were also some tourists. None of them was injured.

Assistance was also provided to the Chilean offshore towing vessel "Laurel" which ran 
aground on March 4, 1997 close to Deception Island.

Both beached boats were assisted and refloated by units belonging to the patrol; then they 
sailed to the Punta Arenas shipyards, in Chile, for repairs.
