ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ


SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME (SCARGCP)

Agenda item 12              Submitted by SCAR

XXI ATCM/IP32
May, 1997
Original: English
01 MAY '97 17:01 FROM SCAR              01233 336549     TO 9006444729596   P.04

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME
(SCAR GCP)

Information Paper submitted by SCAR to XXI ATCM
Agenda Item 12

SUMMARY

The on-going components of the SCAR Global Change Programme (SCAR GCP) related to Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores (PICE) and Ice-Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS) have focused recently on data matters. The major focus for PICE in the near future, now that it has published a bipolar science plan, will be the development of a data bank of deep ice-core records and an analysis of palaeoenvironmental trends, whereas ISMASS is working towards a digital compilation of all existing ice-surface and bed-rock elevation data available for Antarctica. Additionally, the SCAR GCP has expanded in 1996 to accommodate research topics that were not being adequately covered in the global change programmes of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), and the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR). One new programme, on sea-ice processes and climate, will examine the broad climatology of sea-ice physical characteristics, various physical and chemical processes that characterize the sea-ice zone, and how to represent sea-ice processes in numerical models on both regional and global scales. Another new initiative will be on circumpolar palaeo-environmental research, with a particular emphasis on the last 20,000 years, to provide, in combination with ice-core records, a solid basis for the understanding of present and future variability in the Antarctic. A third new programme is aimed at establishing and understanding the record of the last 200 years of the atmospheric environment (climate and atmospheric composition) as it is represented in the upper layers of the Antarctic ice sheet. In addition to these new scientific foci, SCAR has reached an agreement with START (the System for Analysis, Research and Training, an activity of IGBP, WCRP, and the International Human Dimensions of the Global Environmental Change Programme) for SCAR's Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic to serve also as the START Regional Committee for the Antarctic. The membership of the Group of Specialists has been modified accordingly.
01 MAY '97 17:01 FROM SCAR                     TO 9006444729596      P. 05

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

1. On-going SCAR GCP Programmes

A. Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores (PICE)

The programme on Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores (PICE), jointly sponsored by IGBP PAGES, has focused on the bipolar aspect of ice cores by updating information about the major drilling projects in Antarctica and Greenland and developing a bipolar science plan:

    An international strategy for ice-coring in Antarctica and Greenland:
    reducing uncertainty in global environmental change

the purpose of which is to establish the inter-relationships between the different ice-core-drilling projects. The major focus for PICE during 1997-98 will be the development of a data bank of deep ice-core records and an analysis of palaeoenvironmental trends, which will be coordinated by the SCAR Global Change Programme Office in Hobart.

B. Ice-Sheet Mass Balance and Sea-Level (ISMASS)

The programme on Ice-Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS) is currently focused on the coordination of radar sounding of ice thickness along the grounding zones of the entire ice sheet and the evaluation of plans for measurements of surface mass balance and ice velocities. The members of the programme strongly endorse the proposed laser-altimeter mission of NASA in the United States, which is designed to produce accurate surface elevations over the entire ice sheet north of 86° S.

The determination of surface mass balance is a particularly difficult task because it must be extended over the entire surface of the ice sheet, not just around the perimeter. Over the last few years there have been significant advances in the modelling of moisture fluxes across the Antarctic continent from satellite-derived and ground-based meteorological data and a diagnostic circulation model; values for small-scale average accumulation rates with an accuracy of ± 10% are now attainable.

As an aid to the ice-sheet-modelling projects and mass-balance determinations, ISMASS is working towards a digital compilation of all existing ice-surface and bed-rock elevation data available for Antarctica. In this work they are cooperating closely with a European Science Foundation group concerned with ice-sheet modelling.

2. SCAR GCP developments in 1996

Four areas have been identified where SCAR has been encouraged to develop contributions to the large international programmes in global-change research: the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), and the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR). These are:

  • Antarctic sea-ice processes, climate variability, and ecosystem interactions with the Southern Ocean;
  • High resolution Antarctic palaeoenvironmental and palaeoclimatic records from ice cores covering the last 200 years;
  • Circum-Antarctic palaeoenvironmental and palaeoclimatic records from sediments covering the last 200,000 years;
  • Training and coordination of research programmes through cooperation with START (System for Analysis, Research and Training, an activity of IGBP, WCRP, and the International Human Dimensions of the Global Environmental Change Programme).

The SCAR Delegates, at their 1996 meeting, approved the recommendation from the Group of Specialists on Global Change and the Antarctic (GoS/GLOCHANT) for the establishment of three programmes to address these research areas. They are: Antarctic Sea Ice Processes and Climate (ASPECT), International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE), and the Late Quaternary Sedimentary Record of the Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution (ANTIME). In addition, the Delegates approved an arrangement with START. These programmes are discussed in turn below. The component programmes of the SCAR Global Change Programme and their relationship to the international programmes is shown in Appendix 1.

2
01 MAY '97 17:02 FROM SCAR                  TO 9006444729596        P. 06

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

3. A new Programme on Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPECT)

Information on the Antarctic sea-ice zone is required for the development and validation of both 
coupled climate models and biogeochemical models, which currently do not include all 
important sea-ice processes. Important problems not adequately covered by existing Antarctic 
research programmes include:
     • The broad climatology of sea-ice physical characteristics. Satellite-derived data provide 
       large-scale estimates of ice extent and concentration, but not of the thickness of ice and 
       snow, which are the primary variables affecting many physical and climatic processes.
     • Processes such as ice formation, water-mass modification, the maintenance of 
       polynyas, ice-edge and coastal fronts, gas exchange, and air-sea interaction.
     • Modelling sea-ice processes in coupled atmosphere-ice-upper-ocean models and 
       interlinking local, regional, and global scale models.

To address the key identified deficiencies in our understanding of the sea-ice zone, the SCAR 
GCP has established a programme of Antarctic sea-ice-zone research known as Antarctic Sea-
Ice Processes and Climate (ASPECT). Because a major thrust of the SCAR GCP is its multi-
disciplinary focus, the ASPECT programme, with its emphasis on physical sea-ice processes 
and ocean-atmosphere interactions, will cooperate closely with the existing SCAR programme 
that is concerned with the ecological aspects of the sea-ice zone.

Many elements of ASPECT will contribute to the objectives of the WCRP Climate Variability 
and Predictability Programme, which involves investigations of atmosphere, ocean, and land at 
a variety of time scales -- ASPECT will be particularly relevant to the decadal-to-centennial 
component of that programme. The ASPECT programme will implement portions of the 
WCRP sea-ice-zone research and will collaborate closely with the WCRP to ensure the 
essential global integration of Antarctic regional research.

The ASPECT programme will build on existing and proposed research programmes and the 
shipping activities of national Antarctic operators. The implementation plan includes some 
components that can be undertaken as part of normal re-supply voyages; for example a system 
of simple but quantified shipboard observations, based on a standard international classification 
for ice types, has been shown to provide statistical ice- and snow-thickness distributions 
similar to those obtained from more sophisticated techniques. ASPECT will also include a 
component of data rescue of valuable historical sea-ice-zone information.

4. A new workshop initiative on the Late Quaternary Sedimentary Record of 
Antarctic Ice-Margin Evolution (ANTIME)

The Antarctic sedimentary record has already yielded high-resolution information on 
palaeoenvironmental and palaeoclimatic changes, particularly on fluctuations of ice margins and 
outlet glaciers and in lacustrine and marine ecology and biogeochemistry. A coordinated 
SCAR initiative on circumpolar palaeoenvironmental research, with a particular emphasis on 
the last 20,000 years including the very-high-resolution Holocene records, would provide a 
solid basis for the understanding of present and future variability in the Antarctic when 
combined with the ice-core records. It is important that the palaeoenvironmental data from ice 
cores (the concern of SCAR's PICE programme, discussed below) and the sedimentary record 
be correlated to allow the optimal understanding of past circumpolar changes.  It is 
recommended that the ANTIME focus on environmental, climatic, and ice-sheet 
variability in two streams: Stream 1 (the last 20,000 years), the last deglaciation and the present 
interglacial epoch, and Stream 2 (the last 250,000 years), which includes two glacial-
interglacial cycles. It will also facilitate the identification of geographic regions and field and 
analysis tasks that would benefit from a multi-national approach.

The proposed ANTIME initiative, which is being developed in cooperation with the IGBP 
programme on Past Global Changes (IGBP PAGES), will address the following key topics:
     • The extent, timing, and regional differences of the Last Glacial Maximum in Antarctica;
     • What rapid or episodic events occurred during the Late Quaternary?

3
01 MAY '97 17:03 FROM SCAR                  ▲      TO 9006444729596      P. 07

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

• What are the key forcings and feedbacks that influence the retreat and re-advance of the 
Antarctic ice sheet?
• What changes have occurred to the ice shelves and outlet glaciers during the Holocene?
• Technology coordination;
• Correlation of Late Quaternary Antarctic environmental history and deep-ocean 
sedimentary records.

5. The Programme on the International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition 
(ITASE) - 200 Years of Past Antarctic Climate and Environmental Change

The broad aim of ITASE is to establish how the modern atmospheric environment (climate and 
atmospheric composition) is represented in the upper layers of the Antarctic ice sheet. Primary 
emphasis is placed on the last 200 years of the record. This time period was chosen for study 
because it is relatively simple to recover many ice cores covering this period and so to develop 
a spatially significant study. Even more important, this time period covers the onset of major 
anthropogenic involvement in the atmosphere and the end of the Little Ice Age.

Specific ITASE objectives are:
• To determine the spatial variability of Antarctic climate (eg snowfall rates and 
atmospheric temperature and circulation) over the last 200 years;
• To determine the environmental variability in Antarctica over the last 200 years.

Spatial variations include extreme events such as volcanic eruptions, dust storms, droughts, 
major atmospheric phenomena (eg. the El Niño Southern Oscillation), and fluctuations in 
snowfall rate. The record of environmental variability could include proxies for sea-ice 
variation, ocean productivity, anthropogenic impacts, and other, extra-Antarctic continental 
influences. Because of the remoteness of the continent, Antarctica is an ideal location in which 
to monitor biogeochemical cycles and global-scale changes.

In fulfilling these objectives ITASE will produce continental scale "environmental maps," 
elucidate transfer functions between components of the atmosphere and the underlying snow 
and ice, verify atmospheric models, and interpolate spatial time-series by satellite remote 
sensing. Some ITASE traverses already have been completed by national programmes, 
including those of China, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.

This programme also is being jointly supported by IGBP PAGES.

6. START Regional Research Committee for the Antarctic

At the 1994 meeting of SCAR it was agreed that a formal interaction with START should be 
undertaken; the purpose is to arrange for SCAR to be the agent for START activities in the 
Antarctic.

After discussion with the START Secretariat it was agreed that the interaction should be dealt 
with at 2 levels:

1. at the institutional level, between SCAR, START, and its parent programmes, and
2. at the core programme level, between the core projects of IGBP and WCRP and related 
programmes within SCAR.

The institutional-level linkage that has been worked out between SCAR and START is that 
SCAR's GoS/GLOCHANT will assume the role of the START Regional Committee for the 
Antarctic to promote and coordinate the principal programmes of IGBP and WCRP in the 
Antarctic. That arrangement has now been approved by both SCAR and START. Meanwhile, 
the SCAR Global Change Programme Office and the corresponding programme offices in 
IGBP and WCRP are actively forming the appropriate inter-programme links.

4
01 MAY '97 17:03 FROM SCAR              TO 9006444729596      P. 08

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

7. Future role of the GLOCHANT Group of Specialists

Since the establishment of the GLOCHANT Group of Specialists four years ago the role of the
GoS has changed substantially. Its principal purpose in the future will be to serve as the focus
for internal and external coordination for all aspects of SCAR research related to global change
and as the START Regional Committee for the Antarctic.

The revised composition of GoS/GLOCHANT is as follows:
  • An independent chair;
  • The Chief Officer of each of the SCAR programmes that has an important global-
    change component;
  • Scientific representatives from other key international programmes;
  • A small number of scientific experts chosen from important global-change research
    areas not otherwise covered; for example, Arctic research, atmospheric science,
    numerical modelling, higher-trophic-level biology, data matters, and policy or
    management fields such as the Antarctic Treaty.

The final membership of GLOCHANT is awaiting approval of the START Scientific Steering
Committee.

                                  Appendix 1

                  SCAR Global Change Programme Linkages

A. Palaeoenvironments from Ice Cores (PICE)
   Late Quaternary Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution (ANTIME)
   International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE)

   SCAR-GLOCHANT              SCAR-GLOCHANT              SCAR-GLOCHANT
   and IGBP-PAGES             and IGBP-PAGES              ANTIME
   ITASE                      PICE                        Sedimentary Record
   200 Year Climate Record    Ice Core Record

   WCRP/CLIVAR                IGBP/IOC-JGOFS              IGBP/IGAC                   IGBP/PAGES
   Ice Core Data for          Ice Core Data for           PASC                        Palaeoclimate Focus 2
   Climate Modelling          Biogeochemical Modelling    Air/snow processes          PEP, PANASH

B. Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea-Level Contributions (ISMASS)

   SCAR, IASC                 SCAR-GLOCHANT              SCAR-GLOCHANT
   IGBP/PAGES, ICSI and       ISMASS                      and IGBP/PAGES
   WCRP                       ITASE
   GISSL                      Ice Core Record
   Glaciers, Ice Sheets
   and Sea Level

   WCRP                       IGBP/LOICZ                  IGBP/PAGES                  IGBP/IGAC
   CLIVAR                     Activity 6                  Focus 2 Antarctic           PASC
   Antarctic precipitation    Rates, causes and impacts  Temporal stream 1          Snow chemistry
   and surface climatology    of sea-level change         last 2,000 years

5
01 MAY '97 17:04 FROM SCAR         TO 9006444729596  P.09

SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

C.  Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPECT)
    Coastal and Shelf Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ)

    SCOR WG-86           SCAR-GLOCHANT            SCAR
    Sea-Ice Biology      ASPECT                   CS-EASIZ
    (iANZONE)

    WCRP                 WCRP                     IGBP               IGBP
    ANITRP               CLIVAR                   JGOFS/LOICZ        SO-GLOBEC
    Sea-ice Thickness    DecCen                   Continental Margin
    Monitoring                                      Task Team

D.  Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Ecosystems (BIOTAS)

                        SCAR
                        BIOTAS

    SCOPE                IGBP/GCTE                IGBP/GCTE
    Scientific Committee Focus 4                  Focus 1
    on problems of       Ecological               Ecological
    the Environment      Complexity               Physiology

E.  SCAR and START Linkages

    SCAR-GLOCHANT        START                    START
    Group of Specialists Regional Committee        Standing Committee
    on Global Change     for the Antarctic

                         SCAR                    START
                         Global Change           Secretariat
                         Programme Office

                         SCAR-START
                         Antarctic Regional
                         Research Centre
                         ANT

6
