ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE    XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                  AN ENVIRONMENTAL OVERVIEW OF THE ITALIAN
                       TERRA NOVA STATION


Agenda item 6b          Submitted by Italy

XXI ATCM/IP21
May, 1997
Original: English
XXI ATCM
Christchurch, New Zealand
19-30 May, 1997

Information Paper submitted by Italy

AN ENVIRONMENTAL OVERVIEW OF
THE ITALIAN TERRA NOVA STATION

1. Foreword

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in its Article 8 states that
"proposed activities shall be subjected to the procedure set in Annex I for prior assessment
of the impact of those activities on the Antarctic environment". In para. 2 of the same article
it is also stated that "each party shall ensure that the assessment procedures set out in Annex
I are applied in the planning processes leading to decisions about any activity undertaken in
the Antarctic Treaty area...."
This document is deals with an activity which began in 1985/86 and is still going on. The
activity is the construction of an Antarctic research station, its operation, its enlargement,
the implementation of a large research programme and its associated logistics. A part of the
activity, the construction of the station and part of its operation has already been
accomplished. Its continuing operation is still in the future.

This document is not a formal EIA but an environmental overview of this activity, both
what has been done from its beginning to the present and the future continuation of an
important Antarctic research programme.

2. Introduction

Italy signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1981 and the Italian Antarctic Research Programme
(PNRA) was started in 1985, with the first expedition in the austral summer 1985/86.
Italy then became a Consultative Party to the Treaty in 1987.

The actual site of the base was selected during that first expedition and its construction
began during the second campaign in 1986/87. The base is called Terra Nova Station, from
the name of the area where it is located (fig. 1, 2, 3)

At the time of the beginning of the Italian activities in Antarctica no environmental impact
assessment was prepared. Neither the Italian legislation at the time nor the Antarctic Treaty
required it. The Madrid Protocol to the Treaty did not yet exist and, when it was finally
1
prepared and signed in 1991, it did not require environmental impact assessment for existing 
facilities or activities.
Nevertheless, several impact assessment evaluations were prepared by the Italian 
Programme for specific activities, such as the installation of a seismographic station; but no 
comprehensive EIA was performed.

The Terra Nova Station (TN) was built and was operated from the very beginning in such a 
way as to keep the environmental impact to a minimum. It is however a rather large station, 
hub to a major and diversified scientific programme, supported by complex logistics.

Several actions, aimed at minimising the environmental impact have been implemented 
since the establishment of the station.

In particular, a strict waste management plan has been enforced and most wastes are 
retrograded out of the Antarctic Treaty area, a sewage treatment plant has been installed, a 
comprehensive monitoring programme has been organised and has been in operation since 
the second year of antarctic activity.

 
3. Description of the activity

The activity described in this document is the construction of a research station in 
Antarctica, its operation during the last eleven years, the scientific research activities which 
have been implemented by the PNRA using the TN station as a base and the logistic 
activities in support of the research programme.

Terra Nova Station

The Terra Nova Station is located on the coast of Terra Nova Bay, on a North-South 
oriented peninsula on the coast of the Northern Foothills in Victoria Land, in the Ross Sea 
region.

The coordinates of the site are 74°41'42"S; 16407'23"E. The mean elevation of the site is 
about 10m.

The site is easily accessible both from the East and the West side. The East side is towards 
the open sea of the Terra Nova Bay, while the West side overlooks Thetys Bay. (fig. 3.). 
Both sides are accessible by ship when there is no sea ice.

Thetys bay remains iced up until the end of December: this allows the preparation of an 
airstrip on sea ice, which can be used between the second half of October and the first part 
of December.

This airstrip has made possible the early opening of the Station in the last four years, thus 
allowing a much better utilisation of the research facilities. An Italian Air Force C-130 has 
been used in the last five seasons. In the last two seasons a chartered Twin Otter light plane 
has also been used.

 
9
2
Site

This site has a number of desirable characteristics:

- it lies in a deglaciated area, with a good surface of very large granite boulders, therefore providing a good foundation for the buildings;

- it provides good access from the sea, having favourable bathymetry that allows mooring close to the coast;

- the general area is rather flat, with gentle slopes;

- there is an good research potential in the area and in the region in general;

- there was very little activity in the area in the past: the closest research station is a small German station at about 6 km, Gondwana, which is not always in operation.

The US Station of McMurdo and the New Zealand Station of Scott are at about 350 km to the South.

The general layout of the TN Station and its general area are shown in fig. 4..

There was very little fauna and flora at the TN site when it was first investigated in the 1985/85 season. The nearest penguin rookery is at Adelie Cove, about five km to the south, with another larger rookery at Edmonson Point, about 40 km to the north of the station site. This rookery has been studied for a number of years by an Australian-Italian tem of biologists. The little pebbly beaches in the area did not host stable colonies of seals. The skuas were and still are the most abundant local animals, with no local nesting area.

The TN site is extremely windy: the two main types of winds are the katabatic winds, sometime extremely violent, blowing from the Plateau to the sea and the barrier winds, less violent, blowing from the Southern Ross Sea in direction parallel to the coast. Katabatic wind may reach velocities up to 100 kn, with faster gusts. The wind regime at the site may produce very sudden changes in the local air temperature.

From a bathymetric point of view the Terra Nova Bay has considerable depths: very close to the coast there are depths of the order of 500 m and a depth of 1000 m is reached not very far from the TN site.

An extremely interesting characteristic of the area is the formation of a polynya, i.e., an ice free sea area, during the winter. This formation is due to the interplay of the barrier wind and the ocean currents partially blocked by the Drygalski ice tongue, located to the south of Terra Nova Bay. The presence of this ice-free area has given excellent research opportunities to marine biologists and oceanographers.

TN has been designed as a permanent station. However, at the beginning of the Italian Antarctic Programme it was decided to implement only summer activities. This has been the
3
case up to now (1996). The station could however be used in winter with minor modifications, should the PNRA so decide.

Structure of the station

The construction of the station began in 1986/87 and the construction was completed in the next few seasons. Only minor modifications and improvements are performed at this stage. The basic functions are:

- provide accommodation for logistic and research personnel operating out from the station;

- provide a coordination centre for logistic support, communication and technical and science support;

- provide the headquarters for the management and the general coordination of the expedition .

TN station houses a communication and control centre, fuel storage facilities, helipads, electric power plant, water production plant, sewage treatment plant. There are also hangars for the storage of vehicles and equipment, various workshops, science laboratories, emergency accommodation.

The station can accommodate about 80 persons.

The basic element in the construction of the station has been a module, the ISO20 steel container (2.4x6x2.5 m). The station is made up of a number of these modules, connected together and supported by a steel structure kept at an height of 1.5 m from the site surface by steel supports fixed in concrete plinths. This arrangement has been adopted in order to avoid the accumulation of wind-driven snow against the upwind sides of the station.

The general layout of the station, as indicated in fig. 4., is the following:

- two main structures forming a T for personnel accommodation, office, laboratories, for a total area of about 1.500 sqm. This T-shaped structure has two floors, with accommodation on the lower one and offices, communication centre, control room, meteorological office and some laboratories on the upper floor. The lower floor, apart from sleeping quarters, also houses the dining area and kitchen, food storage and infirmary.

- apart from the main T-shaped building, other modules not structurally connected with it are in the station. They are formed by varying numbers of the basic modules and host the desalting system for water production, the diesel generators, the fuel tanks for the generators, the incinerator, the sewage treatment plant, the fuel tanks for vehicles, a number of laboratories; among the latter, the largest is the OASI Astronomical Laboratory.

TN station has three hangars, having a total floor area of about 2.000sqm, used for storing stores and equipment, as well as for electric, mechanical and carpentry workshops; in the hangars there are also about 620 sqm of floor space for vehicles.
Electricity is produced by two main diesel-electric generators (Isotta-Fraschini, 350kVA 
each, connected in parallel), with two emergency generators (Mercedes, 175 kVA each) 
available if needed. The average fuel use for electricity production is 1.600 l/day.

A cogeneration system has been used for many years in order to reduce fuel consumption. It 
recovers heat from the main diesel generators and uses it for space heating in the station. 
The capacity of this cogeneration system is 320.000 Kcal/h.

Fire protection

TN station is equipped with a fire and smoke detection system. The system sensors are 
installed in all station buildings. Fire estinguishers of the appropriate types are distributed 
in all areas of the station; they are routinely verified and taken back to Italy for recharging at 
the end of the season when prescribed.

The station is also equipped with mobile fire fighting equipment to be used in case of fires 
outdoors. This equipment is deployed at the airstrip or at the helipads during flight 
operations with the C-130, the Twin Otter and the helicopters.

Fire-fighting training is given to all Antarctic personnel as part of their pre-expedition 
training. An increasing number of the logistic personnel is trained specifically in Italy by the 
National Fire Fighting Corps or by the Italian Air Force.

In fig. 5., 6., 7., 8., 9., 10., 11., the locations of fire estinguishers, smoke detectors, alarm 
buttons, mobile fire fighting equipment, are indicated.

Fuel storage

The main fuel tanks are located at about 300 m from the main body of the station. They are 
welded steel, double-skinned cylindric tanks, with all welds X-rayed. Each tank has a 
capacity of 600.000 l. At present there are two of them and in the next season 1997/98 a 
third tank will be installed, thus making it possible to refuel the station every second year, 
reducing the possibility of oil spills during the refueling operation.

However, for each refueling operation performed at TN station , a specially prepared 
contingency plan has been implemented.

The other fuel tanks in the station are:
- two steel tanks of 25.000 l each for helicopter refueling;
- four double-skinned steel tanks of 12.000 l each for generator refueling;
- four rubber tanks of 18.500 l each                     
- 2 steel tanks of 23.500 l each
- 500 steel drums.

The comparatively large consumption of fuel at TN station is due to the rather large size of 
the station, the large area covered by the programme, the use of 2 or3 helicopters, of a C- 
5
130 and of a Twin Otter light plane which is being used heavily for supporting the 
operations on the Plateau at Dome C, where an important Italian-French programme is being 
carried out.

Sewage treatment plant

At the beginning of the activities in Antarctica it was decided to install at TN a sewage 
treatment plant. The plant was actually installed during the construction of the station, in the 
second campaign (1986/87).

The first plant was based on a biological treatment and had the capability of treating sewage 
and grey waters. It was designed for a population of 40-50 persons. Monitoring at sea in the 
effluent area began the following year with measurements of BOD (Biochemical Oxigen 
Demand). The scope of this monitoring was broadened in the following year and monitoring 
itself became more systematic: in 1991/92 it included BOD, COD (Chemical Oxigen 
Demand), surfactants, nitrites, oils. This indicated that the plant was not large enough for 
the load and in the next season, 1991/92, a physico-chemical plant was added.

Further broadening of the monitoring ensued, sampling was performed on a daily basis and 
the results of it were used for continuous plant adjustment.

In 1993/94, because of high bacterial load in the effluent, sodium hypochlorite was added. 
Because of the too high load, in 1994/95 the two plants, were connected in series.

In the following year it was decided to install a completely new plant, which went into 
operation in the last season.

The sewage treatment plants has been difficult and expensive to run, but the results 
generally have justified the effort. Water pollution of the receiving body of water has been 
very low and this has been kept under surveillance all along by a good monitoring effort.

The sludges deriving from the plant operation are retrograded out of the Treaty area at the 
end of each campaign.

Waste management

The question of waste management and disposal was tackled since the first campaign. It had 
a high priority during the construction of the base in the second campaign and has remained 
a high priority item throughout the following years.

A Waste Management Plan as a formal document was prepared in April 1991. It was a 
consolidation of operating procedures and instructions given to expedition members since 
the beginning of Antarctic activity. This plan was updated when needed with additional 
material. Later, when more scientific activity was being carried out, the scientific 
coordinators were given forms in which the types and amounts of waste foreseen for various 
activities could be detailed and listed. This practice allowed a certain amount of waste 
disposal planning for the wastes which have to be retrograded out of the Antarctic Treaty 
area for disposal elsewhere.

6
After the signature of the Madrid Protocol in October 1991 the PNRA received the 
instruction from the Italian Authorities to follow the Protocol and its annexes even before 
the ratification. It was found that the basic criteria used by the PNRA were practically those 
also adopted in the Protocol.

Criteria for waste management at TN station

Aims and objectives of waste management

The strategic aim of the waste management is to minimise, to the maximum extent possible, 
the environmental impacts due to the waste generated by all activities of the Italian scientific 
and logistic activities in Antarctica.

The main objectives of the waste management plan have been:
- the establishment and the implementation of a waste minimization programme aiming at 
the reduction, to the maximum pracicable extent. of the volume and weight of waste;
- the establishment of a waste recycling programme, both locally and in Italy;
- ensuring that storage, transport, and final disposal are performed in accordance with 
national legislation;
- the development and the implementation of waste collecting and streaming practices;
- the adoption of an uniform waste classification;
- the adoption of suitable, safe and sufficient waste containers for all stages of waste 
management
- increase the awareness of waste management programmes through training programmes 
for staff and for scientific and logistic personnel;
- establish a documentation system for the waste management activities.

The activities in Antarctica can be classified as:
- logistical support;
- science programmes, both in the base and in the field;
- operation of the base
- construction and maintenance activities;
- clean-up operations.                                                         9
                                                                                                                  7
From these activities derive different types of wastes, such as:

- logistical support:
waste fuel, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, aluminium and ferrous wastes, defective or broken vehicles and equipmernt, lead batteries, shipboard wastes, empty fuel drums, wood, plastics, paper and cardboard;

- science programmes, including field activities:
laboratory chemicals, biologic specimens, photographic laboratory chemicals, sundry chemicals, solvents, radioactive isotopes, medical waste, glass, plastics, rubber, tins, obsolete or broken equipment, food rsidues, human wastes, grey waters;

- base operations:
aluminium and ferrous wastes, glass, wood, plastics, paper, cardboard, discarded personal items of clothing, kitchen and laundry effluents, expired and surplus materials, sludges from the sewage treatment plant, ashes from incinerator operation, dry batteries;

- construction and maintenance activities:
metal wastes, wood, plastic, paper, cardboard, paints, solvents, construction waste, adhesives, sealants, concrete fragments;

- clean-up operations
apart from any of the above wastes, fuel drums, gas cylinders, etc.

The waste produced and managed in Antarctic can be grouped into four basic groups:
1. Biodegradable waste: sewage, grey waters, food waste etc.
2. Non-hazardous waste: glass, metals, wood etc.
3. Petroleum products: fuel, contaminated fuel, transmission fluids, lubricants, etc.
4. Hazardous wastes: laboratory chemicals, photochemicals, radioactive materials, paints, thinners, etc.

The basic policy of the PNRA has been that all waste from the TNB station, its field activities, logistic and research ships should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

This has been the first basic criterion.

The only waste which is disposed of in Antarctica is the treated effluent from the sewage treating plant installed at TNB station

A second criterion is that requiring waste separation at the origin. This simplifies considerably waste handling and preparation for disposal.

The PNRA controls also the waste management practices of its contractors (i.e., the people who built the base, care for its maintenance and have added in time new buildings and installations).
In fig. 12 are indicated the amounts of waste, divided by type, produced at TN station during four campaigns, from 1988/89 to 1991/92, together with the indication of the amount of waste produced per person per day.

TN station is equipped with a double-chamber incinerator, mainly used for burning kitchen waste. Outlet temperature of the exhaust gases is 950°C; the gases pass through a scrubber system before discharge in the atmosphere.

Remote camps

The PNRA also operates at a number of remote camps located at various distances from Terra Nova station. Some of them keep the same location year after year. They are used by teams of geologists, biologists and researchers in the fields of atmospheric physics and environmental monitoring.
Amog the most important in the ?96/97 season were:
- Hell's Gate,        74°52'16.3" S, 153°49'8.7" E
- Edmonson Point,    74°19.85"S, 165°08.44' E
- Husky Pass,        71°39'650S, 163°31'365 E
. Starr Nunatak,     75°54'112S, 167°33'423 E

A certai amount of fuel, food and equipment is kept at all times in these locations. Every season, at the end of the campaign an inventory of the material left at the site is made and updated.

Strict rules of managemento of all types of waste generated at the camps are applied; all waste is taken back to TN station to be streamed together with all other wastes.

4.- Purpose and need of the activity

In 1981, when Italy signed the Antarctic Treaty, it had been decided by the Italian Government to launch an Antarctic Scientific Research Programme.
Previously Italian scientists from various disciplines had followed with great interest some of the scientific activities performed in Antarctica by other countries.
Some of them had participated in expeditions to Antarctica organised by other countries, notably the USA and New Zealand, during or after the International Geophysical Year.

At the time of the signature of the Antarctic Treaty the times were ripe for a direct Italian involvment in Antarctica. A programme of Antarctic research was set up by the National Research Council (CNR), the Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Environment (ENEA), together with a group of several Universities. This programme became eventually the PNRA.
The research programme implemented in Antarctica by the PNRA is formed by a number of thematic areas, as follows:

- Geologic Evolution of the Antarctic Continent

- Margins of the Antarctic Plate and Periantartic Basins

- Glaciology and Paleoclimate

- Physics and Chemistry of the Antarctic Atmosphere

- Sea-Ice- Atmosphere Interactions

- Ecology and Biochemistry of the Southern Ocean

- Physiological, Biochemical and Molecular Adaptation Mechanisms

- Ecophysiology and Ecotoxicology

- Ecological and Genetic Aspects of Differentiation Processes in Populations

- Biogeochemical Cycles of Contaminants

- Human Biology and Medicine

- Geophysical and Geodetical Observatories

- Sun-Earth Relationship

- Astrophysical Research

- Telesurveys, GIS, Databases

- Historic, Legal and Geographic Studies

- Human Impact

- Robotics and Telescience

- Sensoristics

Several of the thematic areas quoted do not have activity in Antarctica.

An important role in the activities of the PNRA is played by internàtional cooperation. Italian scientists participate in many international research activities sponsored by SCAR, such as IGPB, WCRP, EASIZ, BIOTAS, ANTOSTRAT. Italy also takes part in the LIRA Programme, for the study of the structure and of the evolution of the lithosphere in the Ross
10
region, in the AGONET Project, for the establishment of an international network of 
geophysical observations.

An important role in the PNRA activities is that of four major international programmes 
CONCORDIA, ITASE, APE and Cape Roberts. These four programmes are a regular part 
of the Italian programme; herefollows a short description.

- CONCORDIA. This a joint fifty-fifty programme for which an agreement was signed in 
1993 between france and Italy. Its aim is the construction and operation of a scientific 
research station on the Antarctic Plateau at DomeC, on a site at little more than 1000. km 
from the Terra Nova station and the French Dumont d'Urville station at an elevation of 
about 3250 on sea level. Many research projects are scheduled for CONCORDIA, among 
them projects in atmospheric physics,, astronomy, astrophysics, physics of the solid earth, 
Sun-Earth relationship, human biology and medicine, robotics and telescience. One large 
component of the CONCORDIA activity is glaciology; this will involve a deep ice coring 
operation, which should reach a depth of about 3500 m and which was begun in the '96/97 
campaign and should be concluded in two years. The deep coring operation is part of the 
EPICA Programme, in which 10 European countries and the European Union participate. 
CONCORDIA is also open to the participation of partners other than France and Italy. The 
construction of the station on the plateau will start at the end of the deep drilling activity and 
the station should be ready to operate at the turn of the century.

- ITASE(International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition): The purpose of this 
programme is to perform a series of traverses on the Antarctic continent with a number of 
comparatively shallow drillings in a number of sites. The aim of this study of the antarctic 
ice is a better knowledge of climatic changes. In the last '96/97 campaign a successful 
1200km traverve was carried out.

- APE (Airborne Polar Experiment). This programme, in cooperation between Italy and a 
number of Russian scientific institutions, aims at the study of the mechanisms of formation 
and depletion of the ozone layer, using as an instrumental platform the M-55 Geophysica 
aircraft. In the '96/97 campaign, after testing the instrumentation on land and in the air, the 
first set of seven scientific flights has been successfully performed from the Finnish airport 
of Rovaniemi.

- Cape Roberts Project. This is a six-nations (New Zealand, Australia, Italy, Germany, 
UK, USA) project having the purpose of performing drillings in marine sediments in the 
Cape Roberts area, in the Ross Sea Region. The aim is the reconstruction of climates going 
back to between 30 and 100 million of years. The actual drilling has not yet begun, but it 
should begin in the 97/98 season.

5. Activities generating impact

These activities can be grouped into three groups:

- logistic and support activities

- scientific activities
11
- accidents

In general, logistic activities are those generating more impact. The majority of transportation activity, the refueling of bases, the resupply of bases, these are the most dangerous for the environment. The few events which have generated large impacts in Antarctica are usually connected with logistics. However, also some apparently impact free actions may produce local impacts far from trivial. An example is the sampling for scientific purposes, where biological sampling of lichens, if done without good preventive planning may wipe away for extremly long periods of time the lichen population o certain areas.

The logistic support activities include:

- operation of ships and boats and their maintenance and refueling

- operation of aircraft: airplanes and helicopters and their maintenance and refueling

- habitation: permanent and field. For both one can consider construction, operation and maintenance, as well as fuel handling and storage.

The scientific activities include:

- collection of samples (geology, biology)

- drilling (geology, glaciology, oceanography)

- detonations (geology, geophysics)

- use of radioisotopes (biology, oceanography)

Among scientific activities, as mentioned before, sampling can generate impacts of a certain level. Also the use of explosives in geophysical activities could generate impacts, if done with good planning

Accidents:

- oil spills

- hazardous materials.

- fires

Accidents like oil spills generate large impacts; however, with good preventive planning, the implementation of contingency planning and good specific personnel training, oil spill occurrences can be controlled effectively

All of these impacts have to be considered to ensure that appropriate preventive or mitigative action is taken. 
12
6. Relation of the activity to relevant previous activities.

The area where TN station is located has not been in the past the site of other stations, nor there was in the area. any scientific activity having important impacts in the past The closest research station is a small German station, Gondwana, located at about 6 km from TN To the South, at about 350 km lies the large US McMurdo Station.

TN can therefore be considered quite isolated from other scientific activities in the area and its presence there should not interfere with the scientific activities of others. There have been no important organised research activities in the general area of the TN station in the past, apart from isolated expeditions. It is therefore safe to assume that there is no relation of the present activity to any previous activities in the area from an environmental impact point of view.

7. Decommissioning of the activity

The TN Station has been built in such a way that a possible future decommissioning would not be too great a task. The main buildings are made up of containers and their disassembly is not difficult. Most othe structures are also easy to decommission, with the exception of the hangars, for which demolition work would be necessary. The modifications done to the ground would be the only changes to the site which would be impossible to bring back to the original situation. In summary, the decommissioning of TN, even if a very expensive operation, could be performed.

8. Methods and data

In the case of this environmental review which refers to an activity which has been going on for more than 11 years, the question of prediction does not fully apply. For many impacts connected with the activities centered at TN station it is more a matter of veritying whatever impacts there have been, how they have been monitored and mitigated and how it has been possible to keep them to a minimum. Furthermore it is possible, on the basis of what has been done up to now, to predict future impacts.

Data and information

Many documents reporting on previously performed EIAs have been consulted. Among them the papers by Benninghof and Bonner (1985), by Keys (1984) and by May (1988). Then some of the information papers submitted at various ATCMs have been consulted and valuable insights have been gained.

These documents are useful in order to analyse general methodology used in similar evaluations in different areas of Antarctica

Assessment methods and useful data are provided in a number of EIAs, such as the "Final Supplemental EIA for the US Antarctic Program" (1991), the "Environmental Impact Statement for the US Antarctic Program" prepared by the USNSF in 1980 and reprinted in
13
1984, the Draft EIA for the oil salvage operation on the M/V Bahia Paraiso (1992), the 
Draft CEE for the South African Station SANAE IV (1993), the Final CEE for the 
Concordia Project, prepared by Italy and France (1994), the EIA produced by the New 
Zealand Antarctic Programme for the Cape Roberts Drilling Project.

Methods

The method used in this environmental overview is a modified matrix method, already used 
in EIAs both in Antarctic and elsewhere. In Antarctica it has been used in the EIAs 
mentioned above.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, in art. 3 of Annex I 
identifies three impact categories: They are:

- 1. likely direct effects

- 2. potential indirect or second order effects

- 3. cumulative impacts

The "likely direct effects" are associated directly with the activity, such as ice disturbance 
caused by vehicles, release and deposition of exhaust gases or particles, toxic effects on 
fauna and flora by oil spills.

The "potential indirect or second order effects", in the case of this particular study are many.

The object of this overview is the extremely varied activity of a medium-sized Antarctic 
research station. There is therefore quite a number of potential or second order effects, such 
as those related to the support of a number of remote camp activities, the support of the 
activities at the Dome C area for the implementation of the Concordia Project, as mentioned 
in the CEE prepared in 1994 for that project.
The "cumulative impacts" in this case are, for example those due to the long activity of the 
station or to the use of some areas for many years for similar activities.

9. Analysis of expected impacts

Assessment criteria

In order to assess the impacts a set of criteria has been established, derived from the 
Protocol on environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty. They are:

- nature of the impact, i.e., the type of effect that the activity under consideration has on 
the impacted environmental component. In the description of the impact what is being 
affected and how it is affected should be included,

- extent, i.e., the spatial size of the impact; this could be indicated as:
      1. local: the impact footprint extends only as far as the activity itself; 

14
2. site: the impact could affect the whole site of the station;
3. regional: the impact couldaffect areas well beyond the limits of the station.

- duration: the duration of the impact can be measured as a function of the lifetime of the activity, in our case, the station itself. Then:
    1. short term: the impact should vanish either through active mitigation or through natural mitigation in a time interval minor or equal to the causative activity.
    2. medium term: the impact will last beyond the end of the activity and will be substantially reduced by natural processes.
    3. long term: the impact will last for the whole operational life of the station. It will be mitigated by natural processes afterwards
    4. permanent

- intensity:
    1. low: the impact affects the environment but natural processes and functions are not altered.
    2. medium: the environment is altered but natural functions and processes, even if modified, continue.
    3. high: the natural functions of the affected environment are so altered that they stop, either permanently or temporarily. The intensity of an impact are classified as "high" also if the impact may be an health or safety hazard to personnel.

- probability: it is the likelihood of the occurrence of the impact, classified as:
    1. improbable.
    2. probable
    3. highly probable
    4. definite

- significance: it is an evaluation of the relevance of the impact based on the physical extent, the duration, the environmental component affected. It give salso guidance on the level of mitigation needed.

On the basis of these criteria a number of typical, important impacts have been examined and the matrixes on fig. 13, 14 and 15 have been prepared. All impacts analysed, but two, are impacts due to logistic activities.

10. Mitigation of impacts

Many of the impacts of actions carried out in connection with the operation of an Antarctic station like TN can be mitigated through the application of appropriate measures.

These are of different nature, according to the type of impact, and should be considered whenever possible to mitigate the effects of environmental impacts. They may apply either to the activity itself to reduce the impact or to the consequences of the impacts to minimise the environmental harm.

The actual effectiveness of the mitigation measures may be verified through an appropriate monitoring programme, as specified elsewhere in this document.
A first, but important, preventive measure is the development of an environmental 
awareness in all personnel going to Antarctica. This is done by the PNRA through the 
training that all Antarctic personnel undergo prior to their departure to Antarctica.

Furthermore, in the station the environmental officer and personnel in charge of the 
environmental monitoring programme are available for advice and help at all times.

A number of effective preventive measures have been taken at TNB over the years. 
Emissions from diesel engines exhausts have been reduced with the use of appropriate 
fuels and catalysed exhaust systems.

Open burning has been reduced to few well controlled cases, while the very efficient, high 
temperature, twin-chamber incinerator is used with a careful planning of its activity and by 
trained personnel.

As mentioned elsewhere in this document, a sewage treatment plant has been in operation 
at TNB since the second campaign in 1986/87.

A system for the recovery of waste heat from the operation of the diesel generators has been 
in use for years, while possible uses of alternative energies, such as solar and wind, are 
under study, with some solar energy applications already operational, in particular for use in 
remote locations away from the station.

An important corollary to the efforts towards impact mitigation is the environmental 
monitoring programme, implemented since the first campaign in 1986/86.

All these measures and actions have contributed to a good level of mitigation of the impacts 
of the operation of TN Station.

11 Monitoring

The main purpose of applied environmental monitoring is the detection of local and 
regional environmental effects caused by specific human activities. In the case of an 
Antarctic station the specific human activities are those performed during the operation of 
the station, both scientific and logistic. At TNB a monitoring programme was planned from 
the first campaign and its implementation began during the second campaign in 1986/87.

The factors considered in the selection of the parameters to monitor have been:
- type of environment,
- equipment and personnel available,
- cost of the monitoring activity and its planned duration,
- interference between monitoring and other activities,
- relevance of the monitored variables.

16
The activities taken as “monitorable activities” by PNRA in the initial planning were practically those mentioned in the Protocol several years later, namely:

- waste management and disposal,

- contamination due to spills of oil and other noxious substances,

- construction and operation of stations, field camps, ships, aircraft and logistic support in general,

- implementation of field programmes,

- activities related to protected areas,

- recreational activities.

TN has been a very active station from the beginning and the range of its logistic and scientific activities has always been very broad for a summer-only station.

Thus, in the selection of the variables to monitor, a certain number of decisions had to be taken. The monitoring programme has been developed as activities developed and changes in the monitoring were made with time. Moreover, the availability of different means of analysis of the collected samples has sometime changed the type or the frequency of sampling.

In the first campaign no monitoring was performed; the future programme was established and the actual monitoring began in the second campaign. The collection of samples began before the start of the constrution of the base, in order to establish a set of background values. The first monitoring was centered on airborne particulates and on freshwater.

The samples collected aimed at the measurement of elements of crustal, marine and anthropogenic origin. A significant problem encountered was the extremely low concentration of the elements; this was corrected by increasing gradually the sampling periods.

In the third campaign the sampling for airborne particulates was increased with the installation of two more low-volume samplers, in order to assess the effect of station activities.

In later campaigns high volume samplers were added. In the 1989/90 campaign the determination of airborne PAH (Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons) was started. These are characteristic of combustion products and their monitoring is performed by evaluating their accumulation in the marine bivalve Laternula Elliptica.

In this particular campaign the methodology for the monitoring of PAH was adjusted to Antarctic conditions and this monitoring has been performed in all subsequent campaigns. The PAH monitoring was made necessary by the general increase of the logistic activity, the increased power rating of the diesel generators, the entry into operation of the incinerator.

17
In the following years all monitoring activities were carefully carried out, new monitoring points were added, the analysis of the samples was generally improved with the use of nuclear activation analyses for some types.

An important aspect of the monitoring programme at TN station has been the use of the data for feedback on operations. One important example is the control on the effluent of the sewage treatment plant:the day to day operation of the plant is adjusted on the basis of monitoring which has been implemented specifically since the 1991/92 campaign. The sewage treatment plant is covered in more detail elsewhere in this document.

In conclusion, applied environmental monitoring has been one of the programmes that the TN station has carried out almost from the very beginning of Italian activities in the area. Many useful lessons have been learned and a number of modifications to activities have been implemented in consequence.

12. Unavoidable impacts

A certain number of impacts generated by any activity are practically unavoidable. In this case, as with the construction of any other base in Antarctica, the construction of station buildings and of the various infrastructures, such as the helo pads, the roads, the fuel tanks, has radically altered the areas directly involved with construction activity.

Among the most important unavoidable impacts one should consider:

- Deterioration of the water quality due to the operation of ships and boats, with consequent small leaks of petroleum products. This is very difficult to avoid, even if its significance is very small.

- Deterioration of air quality, due to the operation of ships, boats, land and ice vehicles, as well as to the burning of fuel in the electric generators and for the heating system. All this produces a local increase of nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, hydrocarbons, carbon dioxide, heavy metals. The concentrations in air of these contaminants will be small, but measurable and will interfere with other science activities. This impact, though, is extremely localized.

- Impact on terrestrial biota is unavoidable when any programme activity, especially logistic, comes into contact whith them. They are the lichens and mosses which may exist in ice free areas, sometimes together with small communities of bacteria, algae and fungi. These impacts have sometime special significance because of the very long time to recovery of lichens. In the area where TN station has been established there are very few of these organisms.

- Impact on marine biotas: this may be less significant in many cases, because of the inherent mobility of most marine biota. This impact may be substantially mitigated by avoiding areas where established colonies exist.

18
- Impact on ice: air pollution can have a permanent impact on this environmental component, because the addition of pollutants to an ice layer remains a part of the climatological record enshrined in the ice.

- Degradation of aesthetic value: this is generated by the preparation of the site for construction and by the construction of the station itself. It can be mitigated by the possible decommissioning and dismantling of the station at the end of its useful life

13. Gaps and uncertainties in the assessment process

An environmental evaluation process is a predictive process based upon the knwledge of a certain number of actions and on the evaluation of their consequences on the environment or on other actions which presumably have a final impact on some environmental elements or systems.

In all predictive processes there is a number of uncertainties which cannot be satisfactorily solved beforehand. Therefore, conservative hypotheses are taken into consideration in order to obtain results corresponding to worst case scenarios. On these worst case scenarios mitigation measures are applied or corrective actions are taken to modify the activity being analysed in such a way as to make acceptable unavoidable impacts. This may still leave some impacts uncorrected; in such cases a cost(environmental)-benefit analysis must be performed, to verify if an impact may still be acceptable, considering the scientific or logistic benefits.

Uncertainties are due to gaps in the knowledge of some parameters, to the variability of parameters due to unforseeable natural circumstances. They may be also due to the fact that the assessment is a prediction process, prepared before the action takes place. This makes possible that some operational conditions may change and the real activity differs from the one which was originally planned and analysed.

Some of the aforementioned considerations-do not apply to this particular document. Many of the actions described here have already taken place and what is written here is a record of how the PNRA has dealt with the possible and actual impacts at the time. However, many actions are still repeated at present and will be implemented in the future.

14. Conclusions

The construction and the operation of the Terra Nova Station has had and shall continue to have a number of impacts on the environment.

As detailed in the matrix-tables dealing with the assessment of potential impacts, the impacts originate from the preparation of the site prior to construction, the construction activity, the operation of the diesel generators, the fuel management, the waste management, the operation of aircraft, the operation of ships and small research vessels, of surface transport, the research activities.
However, as has been mentioned before, for most activities there is a definite possibility of effective mitigations of the related impact. In most cases the impact can either be largely avoided or it can be significantly reduced.

The applied environmental monitoring, regularly performed around the base since the beginning of the Italian activities in the area has proven that prevention of impacts or their mitigation has worked well.

Limited impacts have of course occurred and can occur again in the future. But most of them are temporary.

One impact that is certainly not temporary is the preparation of the site for construction, when it was necessary to obtain a more regular area for the construction of the station buildings and of the necessary infrastructures.

This impact is common to most bases and it is unavoidable. It is also practically impossible to eliminate, even after a possible decommissioning of the station. This is particularly true of sites on rock, where blasting has been necessary.

        Another unavoidable and permanent impact is the visual impact of the base itself. This is a corollary to the preparation of the site and it can somewhat mitigated with a careful layout of the base.

        This as far as the impacts are concerned.

On the positive side of this general conclusion it is necessary to point out that the TN Station, has been and may presumably continue to be the hub of a large and diversified scientific programme which is now in its 13th year. A very wide range of scientific activities has been carried out, a large number of scientists and researchers, both from Universities and other institutes has been active in Antarctica, working also together with researchers from other countriess, amassing a substantial amount of scientific knowledge.

Also from an "exploration" viewpoint the Italian Antarctic Research activities centered on TN have been noteworthy. Many new maps and charts of the Ross Sea Region have been produced, theme maps of different types have been drawn and more are in the making.

The Italian Programme has given an important contribution to a more complete knowledge of the region, with a good level of characterization to a large area centered on TN.

        In the last few years TN has also been one of the two coastal bases from where start the acivities at Dome C of the Italian-French CONCORDIA Project, the other base being the French station Dumont d'Urville. CONCORDIA is a major project, combining a deep ice coring and a varied research activity to be carried out at Dome C, at an elevation of 3.250 m on the Plateau, at more than 1.000 km from the coast.

Tthe balance in this case is between the impacts due to a well planned and environmentally conscious Antarctic Station, with its range of activities and a useful scientific research programme which is producing useful results, with good progress towards a better knowledge od an important area of the Antarctic continent.

The conclusion of the Italian Antarctic Programme is that this balance is definitely towards a continuation of the activity, with the same attention to the Antarctic environment. which has been a characteristic of the Programme in the past.

                                                                                                                                            20
21

South Atlantic Ocean

Scotia 
Sea

SOUTH 
AMERICA

SOUTH 
ORKNEY 
ISLANDS

Drake Shetland 
Passage

Deception I.

Antarctic 
Circle

Weddell Sea

Antarctic 
Peninsula

Coats 
Land

Filchner 
Ice Shelf

Shackleton 
Range

D R O N N I N G   M A U D 
L A N D

Bellingshausen 
Sea

ALEXANDRA

Ronne 
Ice Shelf

Kinston Massif 
Ellsworth 
Mountains

MARIE 
BYRD 
LAND

SOUTH 
POLE

TRANS 
ANTARCTIC 
MOUNTAINS

Beardmore 
Glacier

SIR KILPATRICK

ROSS 
ICE SHELF

MT EREBUS

McMurdo 
Sound

Terra Nova Station

VICTORIA 
LAND

Ross Sea

Amundsen 
Sea

Siple 
Island

Thurston 
Island

Indian 
Ocean

ENDERBY 
LAND

MAC ROBERTSON 
LAND

Prince Charles Mts 
Lambert Glacier 
Ice Shelf 
Prydz Bay

WILKES 
LAND

TERRE 
AD?IE

South Pacific 
Ocean

90°W

0

180°

90°E

0        500      1000 km

The Antarctic continent

Fig. 1
72°S
             170°E
ROSS SEA
72°S
Terra Nova
Station
75°S
McMurdo Station
Scott Base
             78°S
150°E                        160°E                        170°E
Fig. 2
22
163°40'0"E         163°50'0"E         164°0'0"E
74°39'0"S
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

STAZIONE BAIA TERRA NOVA- TERRA NOVA BAY STATION
PLANIMETRIA GENERALE AGGIORNAMENTO MARZO 1996
SITE PLAN UPDATED MARCH 1996

LEGGENDA (LEGEND)
01) CORPO PRINCIPALE (MAIN BUILDING)
02) GRUPPI ELETTROGENI (ELECTRIC GENERATORS)
03) SERBATOI CARBURANTE PER GRUPPI ELETTROG.
    (FUEL TANKS FOR ELECTRIC GENERATORS)
04) DISSALATORE/LIQUEFATTORI AZOTO ED ELIO/
    LABORATORIO GEOLOGIA
    (DESALINATOR/LIQUID NITROGEN AND HELIUM
    PRODUCTION PLANTS/GEOLOGY LABORATORY)
05) POMPA ACQUA MARE
    (SEA WATER SUCTION PUMP)
06) DEPURATORE (SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT)
07) INCENERITORE (WASTE INCINERATOR)
08) DISTRIBUTORE CARBURANTI/STAZIONE
    RICARICA BATTERIE/CAMERA IPERBARICA
    (VEHICLE REFUELLING AND BATTERY RE-
    CHARGING STATIONS/HYPERBARIC CHAMBER)
09) HANGAR MAGAZZINO (WAREHOUSE)
10) HANGAR OFFICINE E RICOVERO MEZZI
    (WORKSHOP/VEHICLE STORE/HANGAR)
11) FORESTERIA (GUEST HOUSE)
12) PINGUINATTOLO
    (HUT FOR SOCIAL ACTIVITIES)
13) CONTAINERS MAGAZZINI
    (WAREHOUSE CONTAINERS)
14) MOLO (JETTY)
15) PIAZZOLA PER ELICOTTERO (HELIPAD)
16) STAZIONE POMPAGGIO CARBURANTE ELICOTTERI
    (HELICOPTER FUEL PUMPING STATION)
17) SERBATOI CARBURANTE ELICOTTERI
    (HELICOPTER FUEL TANKS)
18) SERBATOI CARBURANTE 600 m^(3)
    (MAIN FUEL TANKS 600 m^(3) )
19) FONDAZIONE PER SERBATOIO FUTURO
    (FOUNDATION FOR FUTURE FUEL TANK)
20) TUBAZIONI FLESSIBILI PER REFUELLING
    (LONG LENGTH COLLAPSIBLE HOSE FOR
    REFUELLING)
21) DEPOSITO FUSTI CARBURANTE
    (FUEL DRUMS STORAGE AREA)
22) MAGAZZINO ALL'APERTO
    (OPEN STORAGE AREA)
23) AREA ESPANSIONE Futura
    (FUTURE EXPANSION AREA)
24) LABORATORIO GRAVIMETRIA
    (GRAVIMETRY LABORATORY)
25) LABORATORIO GEOFISICA
    (GEOPHYSICS LABORATORY)
26) OSSERVATORIO GEOMAGNETISMO
    (GEOMAGNETISM OBSERVATORY)
27) LABORATORIO GEOMAGNETISMO
    (GEOMAGNETISM LABORATORY)
28) MODULO AUTOMATICO INTEGRATO (AIM)
    (AUTOMATIC INTEGRATED MODULE, AIM)
29) LABORATORIO DASI
    (ASTRONOMY OBSERVATORY)
30) ACQUARIO/LABORATORI SCIENTIFICI
    (AQUARIUM/SCIENTIFIC LABORATORIES)
31) OSSERVATORIO ELIOSISMOLOGIA
    (HELIOSEISMOLOGY LABORATORY)
32) OSSERVATORIO SISMOLOGIA
    (SEISMOLOGY OBSERVATORY)
33) MANICA A VENTO
    (WINDSOCK)

I NUMERI SULLE CURVE DI LIVELLO INDICANO LA QUOTA IN METRI SUL LIVELLO DEL MARE
NUMBERS ON CONTOUR LINES INDICATE THE HEIGHT ON SEA LEVEL IN METRES

Fig. 4
E       HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER

        OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR

        ALARM BUTTON

        INTERPHONE PLANT MICROPHONE




SECOND FLOOR













BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION
MAIN BUILDING
LABORATORIES AND OFFICES AREA
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES

Fig. 5
                  25
E   HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER
    OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR
    ALARM BUTTON
    INTERPHONE PLANT MICROPHONE

EMERGENCY ASSEMBLY POINTS

BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION
MAIN BUILDING, DAY/NIGHT AREA
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES

Fig. 6
27
Fig. 7

BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION WAREHOUSE
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES


ALARM BUTTON
OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR
HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER
E   HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER

○   OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR

□   ALARM BUTTON

⊕   AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING PLANT
    HANDS ON ACTIVATION BUTTON




                                                             E
                        85                                     
                                                             E
                                                             E
                                                             E
                                                             E
                80          79          78                 E
                                                             E
                                                             E
                AQUARIUM                                     81




                                                             E
                77                      82                 
                                                             E
                            E       E       E       E       
                75                      76       84        
                            E       E       E       E       
                MERCEDES                                    ISOTTA
                GENERATORS                                  GENERATORS




                            E                                       
                86                                  86      
                            E                                       
                AUTOMATIC INTEGRATED MODULES (AIM)              




                72          83      73                          
                                                E               
                INCINERATOR - SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT             


BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION
TECHNICAL PLANTS CONTAINERS
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES

Fig. 8
                                                                                    28
E HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER
○ OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR
□ ALARM BUTTON
⊗ AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING PLANT
      HANDS ON ACTIVATION BUTTON


BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION
OASI LABORATORY
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES

Fig. 9
29
E   HANDS ON HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHER

      OPTICAL SMOKE DETECTOR

-     ALARM BUTTON




BAIA TERRA NOVA STATION
WORKSHOP-VEHICLE STOREHOUSE
LOCATION OF SAFETY DEVICES


Fig. 10
                                                                                  30
Fig 11

TERRA NOVA BAY STATION
OUTSIDE FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENTS


         00
         25
         50
         75
       100 metres


N. 2 FIREFIGHTING TRUCKS. LOCATION:
  - IN MAIN FUEL TANKS AREA
  - NEAR THE OLD HUT FOR SOCIAL ACTIVITIES

N. 2 TROLLEY HALON FIRE EXTINGUISHERS. LOCATION:
  - NEAR OLD HELIPAD
  - NEAR NEW HELIPAD
Waste production at Terra Nova Bay

1988/89:    71 days;     130 individuals
1989/90:   110 days;      87 individuals
1990/91:   104 days;      80 individuals
1991/92:    35 days;      50 individuals

|                 type | 1988/89  |         | 1989/90  |         | 1990/91  |         | 1991/92  |         |
|                      |    kg    | kg/person day |    kg    | kg/person day |    kg    | kg/person day |    kg    | kg/person day |
|----------------------|----------|---------------|----------|---------------|----------|---------------|----------|---------------|
| metals               |    16000 |          1.73 |     4500 |          0.47 |     6600 |          0.79 |      350 |           0.20 |
| recyclable cans      |     1000 |          0.11 |     1500 |          0.16 |     1050 |          0.13 |      350 |           0.20 |
| glass                |     2400 |          0.26 |     5000 |          0.52 |     2600 |          0.31 |      450 |           0.26 |
| plastics             |     6000 |          0.65 |     9000 |          0.94 |    20700 |          2.49 |      620 |           0.35 |
| residues sewage treat. |     1000 |          0.11 |     3200 |          0.33 |     7000 |          0.84 |      600 |           0.34 |
| residues grease separator tank |      300 |         0.032 |      200 |         0.021 |      100 |         0.012 |       60 |         0.034 |
| ashes                |     2200 |          0.24 |     1000 |          0.10 |     1000 |          0.12 |      540 |           0.31 |
| chemical liquid wastes. |     1100 |          0.26 |      550 |          0.12 |      652 |          0.16 |      nil |           nil |
| expired drugs        |       10 |        0.001 |       10 |        0.001 |       20 |        0.0024 |      nil |           nil |
| photographic chemicals |      nil |          nil |       10 |        0.001 |    0.500 |        0.0001 |      nil |           nil |
| batteries            |      300 |         0.032 |      900 |         0.094 |     2620 |          0.31 |      500 |           0.29 |
| filters with oil residues |      100 |         0.04 |      150 |         0.039 |      150 |         0.038 |       50 |         0.036 |
| oil                  |      800 |          0.32 |     1600 |          0.42 |     1200 |          0.30 |      600 |           0.43 |

Fig. 12
                                                                                                                         32
ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS

I

                                                                                
| ACTIVITY/ELEMENT          |                                   IMPACT                                  | POSSIBLE MITIGATION  |
| NATURE            | DURATION   | NATURE                          | EXTENT         | DURATION   | INTENSITY   | PROBABILITY | SIGNIFICANCE | YES/NO | DESCRIPTION                  |
|-------------------|------------|---------------------------------|----------------|------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|--------|-------------------------------|
| Site preparation  | 2 seasons  | Modification of ground surface to build Station | Site of Station | Permanent  | High        | Definite    | High         | N      |                               |
| Construction of Station | 2 seasons  | Litter, dust noise Disturbance to fauna and flora | Site of Station | Long term  | Medium High | Definite    | High         | Y      | Good Planning, Clean-up Decommissioning |
| Power generation  | Long term  | Exhaust gases, particulates Noise | Site of Station | Long Term  | Medium high | Definite    | Low          | Y      | Catalytic exhaust Appropriate fuel Good maintenance |
| Solid waste managements | Long term  | Solid waste                     | Site of Station | Medium     | High        | Definite    | High         | Y      | Separation at origin, compaction, retrograding, training |
| Liquid waste management | Long term  | Treated effluent                | Local          | Long term  | Medium high | Definite    | Low          | Y      | Verification by monitoring    |
| Fuel storage      | Long term  | Large fuel spill up to 600 cu.m. | Site and region | Short      | High        | Very low    | High         | Y      | Double skinned tanks, contingency plan, training |
| Fuel transfer     | Long term  | Fuel spill during refueling     | Site region    | Short      | High        | Low         | High         | Y      | Contingency plan, training    |

Fig. 13
33
ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS

II

| ACTIVITY/ELEMENT |                   |                   |        IMPACT        |                      |          |          |          |               | POSSIBLE MITIGATION |
|                  | NATURE             | DURATION          | EXTENT               | DURÄTION             | INTENSITY | PROBABILITY | SIGNIFICANCE | YES/NO        | DESCRIPTION          |
| NATURE           | DURATION           | NATURE            |                      |                      |           |             |              |               |                      |
| Vehicle Refueling| Long term          | Fuel spill        | Local                | Short                | High      | Very high   | Medium high  | Y             | Refueling procedures and spill contingency plan, training |
| Aircraft operations |                    |                   |                      |                      |           |             |              |               |                      |
| C-130            | 40-50 days         | Noise, exhaust gases, disturbance to sea ice surface | Site region          | Short                | Medium    | Definite    | Low          | Y             | Activity limited in time. Uses a sea ice runway |
| Helicopters      | Long term          | Noise, exhaust gases, small spills Disturbance to animals | Site region, remote camps | Short                | Low       | Definite    | Low          | Y             | Reduction of use to actual needs. Good planning of flights, training |
| Twin Otter       | Long term          | Noise, exhaust gases, small spills Disturbance to animals | Site region, remote camps, Dome C | Short                | Low       | Definite    | Low          | Y             | Good planning of flights |

Fig. 14
34
ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS

III


ACTIVITY/ELEMENT                   IMPACT                                                  POSSIBLE MITIGATION
NATURE      DURATION                NATURE                      EXTENT      DURATION      INTENSITY   PROBABILITY   SIGNIFICANCE   YES/NO   DESCRIPTION
            Scientific              Excessive sampling of     Wherever      Short-medium   Medium                 High         Can be very high   Y        Planning of activity
            activity                biological and            scientists                  term         Medium                 (lichens)              and coordination
            (sampling)              geological material       operate                   Long term                                  among science
                                                                                          (lichens)                                  groups
            Long term                                                                                                      
            Remote camps            Waste disposal Oil        Local         Short         Medium low              High         Low            Y        Removal of wastes,
            1-2 months              spills                                                                                                 training
            Use of                  Local contamination       Local         Depends on    Low                     Low         Medium-law     Y        Careful handling
            radioactive             Radioactive waste                     half-life                                      Training
            tracers                 Depends on                                                                                 Removal
                        half-life                                                                                              

Fig. 15

35
