ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING STATEMENT BY MS GILLIAN BIRD
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Australia

XXI ATCM/IP68
May, 1997
Original: English
XXI ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND 19-30 MAY 1997

STATEMENT BY MS GILLIAN BIRD
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA
2

OPENING STATEMENT
Ms Gillian Bird
Head of the Delegation of Australia

Mr Chairman,

The Australian delegation is pleased to be in New Zealand for the Twenty-First Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, especially this year which sees a significant anniversary for both the New Zealand and Australian Antarctic programs. We look forward to working with you and our colleagues in these excellent facilities in the beautiful surrounds of Christchurch.

As this meeting commences, the 1996/97 Australian Antarctic summer program has just concluded. The last voyage of the season returned to Hobart three weeks ago concluding a very successful season which included a major marine geological science component, and completion of part of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment.

  In 1997, Australia is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions (ANARE). On 26 December 1947, a small group of men flew the Australian flag and set up camp at Atlas Cove on Heard Island as part of the first ANARE. Subsequently, in 1954 the Australian Government established Mawson station, which is now the longest continuously operated station south of the Antarctic Circle. In 1997, Australia not only commemorates 50 years of involvement in, and commitment to, Antarctic research, but reaffirms its commitment to continuing a quality program of research in Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic. A number of activities have been planned to celebrate our Jubilee, including a science symposium in Hobart in July this year. We look forward to welcoming many of our Antarctic colleagues to that symposium.

These anniversaries also remind us of how far we have all come in our relationship with the Antarctic and now, at our Twenty-First Meeting and with the ratification of the Madrid Protocol drawing nearer, we can take pride in our achievements. Nevertheless, still more work needs to be done to solve the problems involved in protecting the unique Antarctic environment and the management of developing industries such as tourism and fishing.

  The Australian delegation is greatly heartened by ratifications of the Madrid Protocol achieved since we last met. The objective we all share of bringing the Protocol into force is now within reach. Australia hopes that those countries which have yet to announce their ratification will be encouraged by the recent ratifications and join us in bringing the Protocol into force as soon as possible. With the prospect of the entry into force of the Protocol, my delegation looks forward to working constructively on the preparations for the establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection and a smooth transition from the Transitional Environmental Working Group.

Mr Chairman,

Another issue of fundamental importance which my delegation would like to see resolved as soon as possible is agreement on the location of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to the Treaty system. If agreement is not reached on this important matter in the near future, my
3

Government will be pleased to offer Hobart as a suitable alternative, even, if necessary, on an 
interim basis.

The liability regime is another important issue which must be resolved. It is six years since the 
Protocol was adopted and although we support the continuation of discussion under the 
excellent guidance of Professor Wolfrum at this meeting, Australia would like to see the 
discussion on liability moved to formal negotiations, hopefully at the Twenty-Second Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting in Norway. Australia remains firmly committed to finalising 
quickly this important component of the Madrid Protocol.

In conclusion, the Australian delegation is delighted to be meeting again with our Antarctic 
Treaty colleagues and would like to thank New Zealand for organising the Twenty-First 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We hope that the issues I have mentioned above will 
attract constructive discussion at this meeting, and look forward to all Parties working together 
to further develop the Treaty system.

●
 
●
