ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



OPENING ADDRESS BY
DR MIKE RICHARDSON, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF
THE UNITED KINGDOM



Agenda item 3                         Submitted by United Kingdom

XXI ATCM/IP123
May, 1997
Original: English
OPENING ADDRESS BY DR MIKE RICHARDSON, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the UK delegation I thank the Government of New Zealand for hosting the XXIst ATCM in Christchurch. I feel sure that the Antarctic spirit which is so much in evidence in this important gateway city to Antarctica will encourage us in our discussions, and decisions.

We congratulate the USA and Finland on their ratification of the Environmental Protocol and we look forward now to the timely ratifications by Russia and Japan, and the early entry into force of the Protocol.

My opening address to the XXth ATCM noted that a certain degree of inertia had set in to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. We are pleased to note as a result of New Zealand's able preparations for the meeting positive steps have been taken to overcome this inertia. We particularly welcome the decision to hold a Heads of Delegation meeting to address the problem. We must ensure that on entry into force of the Protocol the Committee for Environmental Protection has a clear steer as to its role.

Too often in recent years the decisions which, in our opinion, should have been taken by the Consultative Parties have, unwittingly or deliberately, been delegated to others - or have not been addressed at all. The net result has been a gradual weakening of the effectiveness of the ATCM. We must ensure that we, as Consultative Parties, fully address the agenda we have set ourselves and make decisions in a timely manner. To do otherwise is an abdication of our responsibility towards the governance of Antarctica.

One of the problems of the last few ATCMs has been the lack of substantive Working Papers, and the over abundance of Information Papers.  In an effort to reverse this trend, the UK delegation took the decision to reduce its Information Papers to the minimum and to concentrate efforts on four Working Papers each of which contain substantive proposals. These, we hope, can be used as a focus for discussions and hopefully decisions on some priority issues. The papers are on:
- Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning;
- Proposals for Improving the Protected Area System;
- Proposals for Education and Training; and
- Enhancing Compliance with the Protocol through Departure State Jurisdiction.

The first of these we see as particularly important. Despite the obligations set out in the Protocol's Article 15 and Annex IV, and despite the increasing number of tourist ships now visiting Antarctica, little has been done since the adoption of the Protocol to address this crucial issue. Yet there is a growing inevitability of a major maritime accident in
Antarctica. We must begin to examine and take action on the commendable work done by COMNAP and presented to us back in Venice in 1992. Further delay on this matter is unwarranted and indefensible.

We note the considerable work that has been done by the Experts Group on liability. We were pleased to host an intersessional meeting of the Group of Experts in Cambridge in October last year. The UK is committed to the introduction of an Annex on Liability and we will continue to play an active role in the discussions which we believe before too long will require a policy steer.

Mr Chairman, the United Kingdom delegation looks forward to a profitable and productive meeting under your chairmanship.
