ANTARCTIC TREATY          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING  XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


REPORT ON THE 6TH SESSION OF THE IOC
REGIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE SOUTHERN
OCEAN AND THE 1ST SOUTHERN OCEAN FORUM

Agenda item 12     Submitted by IOC

XXI ATCM/IP45
May, 1997
Original: English
2

THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE IOC REGIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE 
SOUTHERN OCEAN AND THE FIRST SOUTHERN OCEAN FORUM

Held at Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research, 
Bremerhaven, Germany, September 1996

Introduction

The First Southern Forum was held during the three days (9-11 September 1996) immediately 
prior to the Sixth Session of the IOC Regional Committee on the Southern Ocean, in 
Bremerhaven, Germany. The Southern Ocean Forum was attended by 26 scientists, science 
administrators and representatives of international organisations and programmes who discussed 
items of great concern such as Climate and Climate Change, Southern Ocean Ecosystems and 
their Living Resources, Marine Pollution and Monitoring, Global Ocean Observing System 
(GOOS) and Data Management, laying particular emphasis on the implementation of the regional 
components of global programmes such as World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), 
GOOS, International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP). They stressed that cooperation 
with other international organisations and the Antarctic Treaty system has to pursued and if 
possible increased.

Recommendations regarding the future IOC activities and co-operation in the Southern 
Hemisphere

The following conclusions and recommendations were made by the IOC Regional Committee for 
the Southern Ocean on the basis of the discussions and conclusions of the First Southern Ocean 
Forum.

The Southern Ocean is unique in its physical and biological characteristics. Southern Ocean 
studies are of great importance for the understanding of the world's climate and climate change, 
as well as for the global cycling of carbon and other elements. Moreover, the Southern Ocean is 
potentially a major source of marine living resources.

In order to promote international coordination of Southern Ocean scientific activities and 
observing systems, the IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean formulated a number of 
conclusions and recommendations. These were directed to the IOC Assembly and its subsidiary 
bodies, and to a large range of other appropriate governmental and non-governmental bodies.

The recommendations were classified into the following broad themes:
(i)     International cooperation in the Southern Ocean;
(ii)    Climate and climate change;
(iii)   Ecosystems and their living resources;
(iv)    Pollution and monitoring;
(v)     Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and data management.

The recommendations necessarily cover a wide range of topics, from interactions between major 
programmes to new requirements for resources and technology. The full text of the
3

recommendations are included in the IOC meeting report and only the essence of the
recommendations is reported here.

Southern Ocean studies include a broad spectrum of scientific disciplines, involving several
international programmes and organisations. The IOC Regional Committee for the Southern
Ocean sees a clear need for greater liaison between programmes and a major role for IOC in this.
Several issues are identified in relation to data acquisition and management, especially the means
of increasing spatial and temporal coverage for physical and biological measurements.

(i) International Cooperation

During the last decade, many important international developments of great relevance to the
Southern Ocean have taken place. They include the approval of the Agenda 21, in particular its
Chapter 17 of UNCED; the entering into force of UNCLOS, UN FCCC, UNCBD; development
of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; initiation and successful
implementation of global programmes aimed at understanding and prediction of global
environmental and climatic change, including World Climate Research Program (WCRP),
International Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGBP), Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS)
and Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). Many international programmes have been
developed through joint efforts by several international organisations, and new projects related to
climate, marine living resources, assessment and monitoring of marine pollution, data and
information management have been initiated with Southern Ocean components.

(ii) Climate and Climate Change

The Southern Ocean is the primary conduit connecting the oceans. The largest ocean current on
the planet, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, transfers water, heat, carbon and other properties
between the Indian, Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Over 50% of the World's water masses are
formed in the Southern Ocean, which forms a key element of the planetary climate system. The
Southern Ocean is a major sink of anthropogenic carbon dioxide.

(iii) Ecosystems and their Living Resources

With the growing concern over the conservation of Southern Ocean Ecosystems and their living
resources, and with the world-wide awareness of potential climate change as a result of increased
levels of CO_(2) and depletion of stratospheric ozone, Antarctica became the focal point of global
conservation in the 1980s. These issues have stimulated the interest and activities of the
scientific community who found in the unique physical, chemical and biological characteristics
of the Southern Ocean major opportunities to improve our understanding of marine ecosystems,
ocean productivity and pollution impacts. Nonetheless, these opportunities have not been
fulfilled completely and, as a result, serious gaps in our knowledge have been identified and
underscored.

(iv) Pollution and Monitoring

The Southern Ocean has been little affected by pollution, except in so far as levels of
contaminants reflect their global spread from remote sources. This very low level of
contamination allows the use of the Southern Ocean as baseline for the level of global pollution.
At the same time, there is a compelling need to preserve the Southern Ocean environment and to
have in place mechanisms for response to any future local incidents.
(v)  Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and Data Management

The IOC/WMO/UNEP/ICSU Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) is in its formative stage.
It will provide a basic suite of operational oceanographic data for a wide variety of user groups.
To support the broad requirements for research and operational activities in the Southern Ocean,
GOOS must have a comprehensive Southern Ocean component.

Amongst priority areas are the study of the climate of the ocean interior and interaction with
cryosphere and atmosphere and focus on the interaction between the ecosystem and physical
forcing, in the context of both climate feedbacks and management of marine living resources.
Baseline studies for pollution monitoring and understanding of the effects of increasing flux of
ultraviolet radiation are also emphasised.

Revised Terms of Reference of the IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean

The IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean (IOC-SOC) shall:

(i)  promote plans for a comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean, within the context of the
     global scientific issues and programmes;

(ii) promote the development and coordination of joint ocean research and systematic ocean
     observations in the Southern Ocean, the latter in particular within the framework of WCRP and
     IGBP, the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and the Global Climate Observing System
     (GCOS);

(iii) promote cooperation, training, education and mutual assistance among Member States
      and relevant international organisations in the study of the role of the Southern Ocean in global
      environmental and climate change; and in the investigation of marine pollution, living marine
      resources and ocean ecosystem dynamics; particularly within the frameworks of WCRP, IGBP,
      GIPME, OSLR and TEMA;

(iv) closely cooperate and encourage exchange of relevant information with relevant
     international governmental and non-governmental organisations (eg. ATCM, CCAMLR, WMO,
     FAO, UNEP, IWC, ICSU, SCAR, SCOR);

(v)  encourage timely exchange and evaluation of various types of oceanographic data and
     information in this region among Member States and relevant international organisations;

(vi) in performing its activities, the Committee will take into account the need to not affect
     the respective sovereignties and jurisdictions of the coastal states of the region, nor affect the
     rights and obligations emanating from the Antarctic Treaty and related instruments.

The IOC Executive Council urged Member States of IOC to participate in the activities of the
Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean and designate official national contacts for the
Southern Ocean Committee.
5

Further action

The Recommendations of the 6th Session of the IOC Regional Committee for the Southern 
Ocean could be implemented through a series of discrete projects. These projects have not yet 
been approved by the IOC. Projects for initial consideration include..............

1.      A pilot project on marine pollution monitoring and the establishment of base-line in some 
        selected areas of the Southern Ocean (coastal and open waters) within the framework of the 
        GOOS Health of The Ocean Module (HOTO) and the GIPME (MARPOLMON) in cooperation 
        with UNEP, COMNAP and CCAMLR. A Planning Group is to be set up.

2.      Convening together with SCAR, SCOR and CCAMLR a Symposium/Workshop in 1998 
        on large-scale variability in the coupled sea-ice/ocean system, and underlying circum-Antarctic 
        mechanisms (eventually atmosphere and pelagic ecosystems to be included). An organising 
        committee is to be established.

3.      Convening a Workshop on Coastal Antarctic Current and the Antarctic Shelf-Slope 
        Front: dynamics, structure, variability in 1999 in cooperation with SCOR (through its iAnZone 
        programme) and SCAR through ASPECT (Antarctic Sea Ice Processes, Acosystems and 
        Climate). An organising committee is to be formed.

4.      Development of a coordinated ship of opportunity program for the Southern Ocean 
        utilising resupply and tourist ships. This project could be initiated through the Valdivaea 
        grouping (Climate Change group chaired by Argentina or the newly formed Ocean group chaired 
        by Brazil). A proposal could be prepared for funding of this project from the Global 
        Environment Fund (GEF) administered by the World Bank.
6

MARINE SCIENCE ISSUES RAISED AT THE SOUTHERN OCEAN FORUM

Physical Oceanography of the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean

Dr John Church, Leader of the Climate and Southern Ocean Program at the Antarctic
Cooperative Research Centre, University of Tasmania, made the following comments in his
opening address at the First Southern Ocean Forum organised by the IOC. Oceans are a very
dynamic part of the climate system. Covering 70% of the Earth, with a mean depth of 3,800m
and a mean temperature of 3.5°C, they are by far the largest store for heat in the climate system.
This means that the oceans have a tremendous capacity to absorb heat in one location, transport it
thousands of kilometres, before releasing the heat back into the atmosphere. The Southern Ocean
has a central and unique role in this system. It is the only circumpolar ocean and it allows large
transports of mass, heat and other properties between ocean basins. It thus transforms what
would otherwise be a basin scale problem into a global issue. The circum-polar nature of the
Southern Ocean also allows unique dynamics to occur which are present in no other ocean basin.

The Southern Ocean is a window to much of the deep oceans of the world. Over half of the
world's water masses are formed in the Southern Ocean. Antarctic Intermediate Water and
Antarctic Bottom Water can be traced well into the northern hemisphere. The oceans are the
largest store of carbon in the world and absorb an estimated 2GtC/yr of carbon released by the
burning of fossil fuels. Determining the factors that control the size of this sink and how it may
vary in future is important to determining future atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide.
(Church, 1996).

Quantitative knowledge of physical oceanography and hence our ability to model the oceans, was
until recently poor. Although the first tentative descriptions of the seasonal, interannual and
decadal variability of the Southern Ocean are becoming available (White and Peterson, 1996)
many gaps in our understanding of the Southern Ocean's role in the climate system and global
change remain. It appears that an important scientific goal for Southern Ocean research is to
develop an understanding of the teleconnections between Southern Ocean physical processes and
those in adjacent oceans and the atmosphere. In particular recent work has revealed what appears
to be an intrinsic periodicity in ocean, ice and atmospheric properties, but the mechanism for this
is unclear. The interactions of this sub-decadal variability with that of adjacent oceans deserves
further study.

One feature of the climate system that has an impact on each of the components of the climate
system is sea ice, through its impact on the interactions between ocean and the atmosphere. This
large expanse of ice greatly reduces the exchanges of heat, mass and momentum between ocean
and atmosphere. Sea ice also greatly decreases the amount of solar radiation absorbed by the
ocean surface.

Traditionally, understanding the climate system has fallen into many different disciplines that
have studied their part of the climate system in isolation. Over the last ten years it has become
clear that in order to fully understand the climate we must study it as an integrated system that
encompasses many fields, including meteorology, glaciology, geology, and oceanography.

The Antarctic Zone is the area located to the south of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC).
This is the source region of the coldest and densest bottom waters. The Antarctic Bottom Water
7

(ABW) formed near the Antarctic Continent spreads throughout all the world's oceans and generates slow abyssal circulation beneath the wind-driven gyres. However, due to wind induced up welling the layer of relatively warm/salty Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) lies very close to the surface within the Antarctic Zone. It provides substantial upward heat flux to the upper layer and through the sea ice to the atmosphere. This heat flux is sufficient to maintain relatively low ice concentration in particular areas of the otherwise ice-covered Antarctic Zone. Presumably, a very delicate balance exists between the strength of the ACC, the amount of CDW transport to the Antarctic Zone, the intensity of large-scale/meso-scale up welling and CDW entrainment to the upper layer and, finally, the intensity of heat flux from the ocean to the atmosphere. All these processes are important for understanding the climate variability on time scales from 10 to 1000 years. (Danilov et al, 1996).

Sea ice is a vivid indicator of the climate variability but at the same time, sea ice is also a global climate forcing factor. Southern Ocean sea ice cover has greater variability than that of the Arctic region. Numerical models and statistical climatic or forecast models of the sea ice with various degrees of complexity depict the sea ice cover with least adequacy for the Southern Ocean due to insufficient or inaccurate sea ice specification.

The Global Ocean Observing System

The Southern Ocean presents a challenge to many aspects of a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS). GOOS is intended to provide a global framework for the gathering, coordination, quality control, distribution, and the generation of derived products, of all kinds of marine and oceanographic data of common utility, as defined by the requirements of a full spectrum of user groups. The gathering of data in the Southern Ocean, as an operational activity to generate products, is made difficult by climatological and logistical challenges. Historically this has resulted in a relatively sparse in situ data set for the Southern Ocean. Also, for a GOOS (unlike the WMO GCOS) coordination of observing systems in polar regions involve a different group of agencies and more specialised oceanographic observing platforms than those involved in subpolar and tropical oceanography. GOOS will be built to the extent possible on existing observational and data management systems. Because new resources for the growth of new observational systems (or expansion of existing systems) are extremely limited, a plan for a Southern Ocean component of GOOS must be very pragmatic. (Lindstrom, 1996).

Marine Living Resources

The living resources of the Southern Ocean have been exploited since Captain Cook discovered large seal populations around South Georgia. Forty years of slaughter brought the fur seal close to extinction. Early this century, the Southern Ocean was the richest whaling ground in the world, but over-exploitation led to the collapse of this industry by the 1960s to its present low level. Since then commercial activity has focused on fin-fish and krill, which are thought to represent a major harvestable resource in global terms.

As Tuna — especially southern blue fin — disappear, trawlers have begun to seek out the masses of Patagonia toothfish that live at depths of between 600 and 3,200 metres around sub-Antarctic Islands. Around South Georgia and other islands off the southern tip of South America tens of thousands of tonnes of toothfish, highly sought after in Asian markets, are being harvested. Australia's sub-Antarctic Territories are also thought to harbour large untouched stocks of Patagonia toothfish.
8

Antarctic krill are tiny shrimp-like crustaceans with an average weight of little more than one gram. They mature after two years and have a life cycle of 5-10 years reaching an adult length of up to 55 millimetres. The biomass of this one species may be the largest of any multi-cellular animal species on the planet. The annual catch of krill alone has exceeded 500,000 tonnes, making it the largest single-species crustacean fishery in the world. Recent catches have however been much lower. Remote fishing grounds, difficulties with mechanical shelling and extremely perishable meat have held back the expected rapid growth of this industry.

The recognition that overfishing of krill could have a detrimental effect on the dependent species such as birds, seals and whales caused the Antarctic Treaty nations to develop a mechanism for regulating future harvesting. The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) came into force in 1982, and it continues to be very active in the fields of Antarctic ecosystem research and resource management. This reflects the continued emphasis that the Commission places on rational, ecosystem-sensitive management of the exploitation of fisheries resources in the Southern Ocean.

• Research supports the legal framework for management of the developing fisheries in the Southern Ocean and creates a knowledge base for future exploitation. Advice is provided to CCAMLR through its Scientific Committee and Ecosystem Monitoring Programme. CCAMLR closed the South Georgia fishery for mackerel icefish in the 1990s in the interests of sustainable development.

There are currently three major fisheries in the CCAMLR Convention Area, for krill (between 70,000 and 100,000 tonnes taken annually mainly from the South Atlantic), toothfish (about 8,000 tonnes taken annually from around South Georgia and Kerguelen Islands) and mackerel icefish (about 4,000 tonnes taken from Kerguelen in 1995). The fishery for toothfish currently takes its allowable catch, but the krill fisheries take less than 10% of their allowable catch. (Kock, 1996).

•
9

References

Church John (1996). Oceanography of the Antarctic Zone of the Southern Ocean. IOC Regional 
Committee for the Southern Ocean (Sixth Session) and the First Southern Ocean Forum. Alfred-
Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany, 9-13 September 
1996. UNESCO.

Danilov, A.I., A.V.Klepikov and N.N. Antipov (1996). Oceanography of the Antarctic Zone of 
the Southern Ocean. IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean (Sixth Session) and the 
First Southern Ocean Forum. Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, 
Bremerhaven, Germany, 9-13 September 1996. UNESCO.

Kock Karl-Hermann (1996). Activities of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) in the Southern Ocean. IOC Regional Committee for the 
Southern Ocean (Sixth Session) and the First Southern Ocean Forum. Alfred-Wegener Institute 
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany, 9-13 September 1996. UNESCO.

Lindstrom Eric J. (1996). The Southern Ocean component of the Global Ocean Observing 
Experiment (GOOS) including data/information management. IOC Regional Committee for the 
Southern Ocean (Sixth Session) and the First Southern Ocean Forum. Alfred-Wegener Institute 
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany, 9-13 September 1996. UNESCO.

White, W.B. and R.G. Peterson (1996). An Antarctic circumpolar wave in pressure, wind, 
temperature and sea-ice extent. Nature, Volume 380, April 25 1996.
