ANTARCTIC TREATY                         TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE     XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


CONTRIBUTION TO FURTHER UNDERSTANDING OF
THE TERMS "MINOR" OR "TRANSITORY" IMPACTS
RUSSIAN VIEWPOINT: BRIEF VERSION


Agenda item 6b, 14                        Submitted by Russia

XXI ATCM/IP80
May, 1997
Original: English
Contribution to further understanding of the terms “minor” or “transitory” impacts. Russian viewpoint. Brief version

presnted by Russia

Clear understanding of the terms “minor or transitory impacts” (MTI) is crucial while making decision about conducting Initial or Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations, which differ considerably in terms of research and finances to be involved, from those needed for Preliminary Environmental Evaluation. Uncertainty of the terms under discussion is a precedent to dispute almost any human activity in Antarctica.

In our opinion, the following circumstances should be taken into account to clarify successfully the terms MTI:

- MTI is not an abstract concept and its absolute value should be determined in each certain case separately;
- as any action is essentially an interaction, any human impact can be considered as interaction between man and natural object/system, certain value of MTI will be dependent both on the type of activity performed and features of the system under influence.

Ability of the system to resist to external influence depends on its ability to recover after the influence is terminated. To a greater extent such an ability is a function of its dynamic character and duration of life cycle. Thus, all biotic objects including animals, plants and microbiota, should be considered as dynamic ones; while abiotic objects break up in two groups: dynamic and stationary. Dynamic objects are able to recover after being affected within certain limits. Time needed for this restoration depends on reproductive ability of living organisms and ecosystem as a whole. Abiotic dynamic systems, such for example as water systems or glacier, are also able to recover and required time will be dependent on their natural cycle duration. Stationary abiotic objects such as rocks or permafrost, have natural cycle much longer than man’s life or even existence of humanity, as they are considered motionless. Practical implication is that any impact onto such objects wills need
endless amount of time to recover, based on historic (not a geological) time scale.
Hence, any impact on dynamic objects/systems should be regulated and absolute
value of MTI in these cases will be determined using knowledge about their features.
This also means, that any fixed model scale duration, proposed regardless of a certain
system, is senseless. Any impact on stationary objects/systems should also be
regulated, but any activity affecting them should be considered a priorias equal or
more than MTI.

Then, all various types of human impacts can be divided into two major groups as
follows:
- activities similar to those taking place in nature (for example, noise, heat or nitrate
pollution, or plant collection);
- activities that have no any analougues in nature processes in given system (for
example organochlorine pollution or introduction of foreign organisms).

The latter activities are especially dangerous because the system is not adapted to
these impacts being never exposed before. Also, it is the impacts that are subjected to
the true cumulation. (Here we should mention, that under "true cumulative" effect
we understand process when similar impacts add to each other in the course of
influence and will continue to affect the system even after the activity causing it, is
stopped. A classic example is organochlorine pollution. Impact in the case of multi-
operation in the area we consider as a "combined" effect). In practice, this means
that for intact areas (which are still abundant in Antarctica) any alien impact should
be considered as equal or more than MTI. On the other hand, areas already impacted,
will be never used as wilderness standard. Hence, the same activities planned in
intact and impacted areas may require different approaches while determining MTI.

Proceeding from all mentioned above, the value of MTI for the given natural system
and certain impact should be determined taking into account the following:

* resistance of Antarctic system/object and its ability of restoration including
longevity of natural life cycle and natural fluctuations;
* type of anthropogenic activity regarding its similarity to the natural processes;
* anthropogenic background of the area.
