ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN              
COALITION (ASOC) UNDER ARTICLE III(2) OF THE ANT-              
ARCTIC TREATY              


              
              
Agenda item 5B              Submitted by ASOC
XXI ATCM/IP62              
May. 1997              
Original: English              


62
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
Private Bag 92/507                 424 C Street NE
Wellesley Street                   Washington, D.C. 20002
Auckland                           USA
New Zealand                        Tel. (202) 544-0236
Tel. (649) 630-6317                Fax (202) 544-8483
Fax (649) 630-7121                 Econet: antarctica@igc.org

REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
(ASOC)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

XX!Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Agenda Item 5 (b)
May 1997

Since the XX ATCM in Utrecht, ASOC and its member groups have participated in and monitored components of the Antarctic Treaty System. ASOC member groups have continued to provide educational and public information materials on the Antarctic Treaty System to government and legislative officials, scientists, professional groups, the media and the public in many countries.

PROTOCOL RATIFICATION

Our primary focus during the past year has been working with individual Parties to achieve ratification of the Protocol. More than five and a half years have now elapsed since the signing of the Protocol, and although the past year has seen two further ratifications, two Consultative Parties (Japan and Russia) still have not completed their ratification processes. We are aware that both countries have made substantial progress towards ratification, and the possibility exists that the Protocol will enter into force within four months. ASOC urges Japan and Russia to make the commitment necessary to complete ratification at the earliest possible date.

ASOC also calls upon those Non Consultative Parties which are active in Antarctica, or from which activities in Antarctica are organised, to ratify and implement the Protocol as soon as possible. In particular we recommend that Bulgaria, Canada and Ukraine take the necessary legal steps to bring the Protocol into force for their countries.

PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION

We urge all Parties to take the necessary steps at this ATCM to enable actual implementation of the Protocol during the 1997/98 Antarctic summer season. This means addressing the procedural issues necessary for Protocol implementation, including establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), ensuring that domestic regulations are fully operative, putting into place the process for reviewing environmental impact assessments, and implementing the Annex V provisions for establishing and managing protected areas.

The practical implementation of the Protocol is as important as the fact of ratification.
Although 24 Parties have ratified the Protocol, only ten have passed implementing 
legislation. ASOC hopes that, consistent with each state's legal processes, all Parties will 
work towards an effective domestic legal basis for their commitments under the 
Protocol. In many cases this will require Parties to enact enabling legislation to codify 
these commitments. Effective implementation is the litmus test for this Protocol. We 
encourage all Parties to offer whatever assistance they can to facilitate the practical 
implementation of the Protocol. In this context, it would be useful for every Party to 
table as an information document the provisions of its new legislation or revised 
regulations that are designed to implement the Protocol.

We also urge Parties to facilitate practical implementation by increased sharing of 
expertise and technology, and through multilateral and bilateral initiatives. In this 
respect, we support in principle the proposals outlined in the paper tabled at this ATCM 
by the UK government on "Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning" as a 
good way to achieve rapid response to environmental threats and impacts.

LIABILITY ANNEX
ASOC continues to direct substantial attention and resources to the question of a 
liability annex to the Protocol. An effective liability regime is essential to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of the Protocol and thus is a key part of the overall 
system of "comprehensive" protection articulated by the Protocol, and mandated by 
Article 16.

ASOC congratulates Professor Rudiger Wolfrum for his work in developing the elements 
of a liability annex, and putting forward successive "Offerings." We continue to submit 
detailed comments on each of these Offerings. ASOC's "Commentary on the Chairman's 
Seventh Offering" is tabled at this ATCM as an Information paper. We are ready to 
participate fully in these liability discussions, and request all Parties to agree to the 
inclusion of observers.

ASOC is extremely concerned about the slow rate of progress Parties are making 
towards a completed annex and by several Parties' support for a very weak final 
instrument, which we believe would undermine the comprehensive nature of the 
Protocol. We note with concern efforts by several Parties to negotiate additional annexes 
which would undercut progress toward completion and entry into force of a 
comprehensive annex on liability.

SECRETARIAT
We note with disappointment the continuing failure to establish a Secretariat, which 
could greatly contribute to the implementation of the Protocol and assist with other 
aspects of the Treaty's work.

TEWG AND CEP
ASOC looks forward to the third meeting of the Transitional Environmental Working 
Group (TEWG), and hopes that the imminent entry into force of the Protocol will 
encourage Parties to ensure a smooth transition to the creation and full functioning of 
the CEP.

2
Given the rapid increase in Antarctic tourism, ASOC reiterates the urgent need for 
adequate prior EIAs by operators and Parties and their review by the TEWG/CEP. In 
particular, we are concerned about the possible cumulative impacts of such activities. A 
large proportion of tourist expeditions still proceed to Antarctica without any prior, let 
alone adequate, EIA. We are especially concerned since we understand that the number 
of tourists which will visit the Antarctic in the 1997/98 season is expected to exceed all 
previous seasons, including several large boats carrying in excess of 400 passengers. We 
do, however, acknowledge and welcome the fact that a number of tourist operators are 
producing EIAs, and anticipate that this number will increase now that the U.S. has 
enacted domestic legislation which requires prior EIA for all activities.

In September, ASOC participated in the IUCN workshop on the Minimisation and 
Management of Cumulative Impacts in the Antarctic, which built on the results of the 
SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental monitoring. ASOC submits that the 
recommendations will be useful to the ATS as it continues to grapple with the need to 
address and take account of cumulative impacts when planning activities and preparing 
EIAs.

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

ASOC continues to focus significant attention and resources on science. ASOC scientists 
participated in the meetings of SCAR and some of its Groups, such as GOSEAC, Seals, 
and Biology. We note the need for adequate resources to be provided by the Treaty 
system if SCAR is realistically to be able to provide the advice sought of it.

It is our belief that the best available environmentally sound technologies should be 
introduced into Antarctic operations as early as possible. These should include 
renewable energy and minimum impact waste disposal systems. For technologies as yet 
untested in Antarctic conditions, Parties could undertake in-situ testing as part of their 
research programmes.

CCAMLR

In the broader context of the Antarctic Treaty system, ASOC maintains its keen interest 
in CCAMLR's progress towards precautionary management and conservation of 
Antarctica's marine living resources. ASOC is very concerned that nations have begun to 
bow to domestic economic pressures at the expense of conservation, and have attempted 
to gain consensus for catch levels which are economically beneficial, without regard to 
the state of the fishery. ASOC submits that practical application of the significant 
theoretical advances in CCAMLR's approach to management in recent years is being 
threatened by unresolved bilateral issues between some Parties and by the 
overwhelming commercial realities of the burgeoning Patagonian toothfish (black hake) 
fishery. In this fishery CCAMLR faces a challenge which is threatening to negate its 
reputation as a credible conservation and fisheries management regime.

ASOC urges that actions to ensure sound management and enforcement of these 
fisheries should, wherever possible, be taken in a truly international manner.

ASOC is also extremely concerned over the reports of substantial illegal fishing, 
particularly in the South Atlantic and the Western Indian Ocean Sector of the Southern

3
Ocean, whose totals appear to have exceeded the legal catch. This is especially 
dangerous since this fishing is now occurring throughout most of the Southern Ocean. 
We welcome the efforts of several nations to address this problem, but believe that 
ultimately CCAMLR must take steps as an organization to address it. This must include 
the creation of an enforcement regime with measures sufficiently severe to curb these 
illegal activities. ASOC calls on those members whose vessels have taken part in illegal 
fishing to take all necessary steps to enforce the rules against their fishers, and 
encourages all members to take steps to encourage non-member nations with Southern 
Ocean fisheries (in particular, Namibia, Portugal, Panama, and Vanuatu) to join 
CCAMLR.

ASOC is disappointed that the problem of seabird mortality in the longline fishery has 
not yet been adequately resolved. Efforts to date to reduce albatross mortality, while 
showing some success, have resulted in a consequential increase in petrel mortality. 
ASOC urges Members to take steps to ensure that the incidental mortality of all seabirds 
is further reduced. ASOC notes that incidental seabird mortality is heightened by the 
illegal longline fishery. and cannot be adequately addressed until the illegal fishery is 
dealt with..

We look to Parties to both the Protocol and CCAMLR to integrate Protocol-type 
measures into CCAMLR. It is important to ensure that CCAMLR is kept up to date and 
consistent with the newer and more rigorous environmental protection initiatives of the 
Protocol.

INTERNATIONAL WHALING COMMISSION

This also applies to the International Whaling Commission (IWC). ASOC has continued 
its policy of sending an observer to the annual IWC meetings. ASOC is very concerned 
that despite the Resolutions passed at the 1996 meeting and previous meetings of the 
IWC, recommending that scientific whaling should not be permitted in Sanctuaries, 
large-scale "scientific" whaling is still being conducted by Japan in the Southern Ocean 
Whale Sanctuary. In both the 1995/96 and 1996/97 seasons 440 Minke whales were 
killed, up from 330 in previous years.

CLIMATE CHANGE

Looking beyond issues arising within Antarctica, ASOC remains concerned about the 
impacts on Antarctica of global environmental problems such as stratospheric ozone 
depletion and anthropogenic climate change. Over the past year there has been 
increasing evidence that global warming is having an impact on Antarctica's systems. The 
consequences of climate change can be seen most dramatically in the physical geography 
and biological inhabitants of the Antarctic. Seemingly small changes in temperature have 
already changed the physical aspects of the region, affecting the populations of seals, 
penguins, krill, and native flora.

ASOC member organisation Greenpeace mounted an expedition to Antarctica in 
January to monitor the impacts of climate change in the region. ASOC has prepared a 
short information paper on this issue, and a full report from the expedition will be made 
available. ASOC urges all governments that have carried out any research in the 
Antarctic that is pertinent to climate change to make the data available prior to the

4
Kyoto meeting of the Climate Convention in December.

We urge Parties to ratify those Treaties and Protocols, specifically the Montreal Protocol and the Climate Change Convention, directed to controlling or minimising these problems, to use their particular knowledge of Antarctica to raise awareness of the issues in appropriate fora, and to promote further action to ensure the long term protection of the Antarctic environment.

ASOC looks forward to working with delegates at this XXI ATCM, and to the successful resolution of some of the more contentious issues addressed in this report.

 
            5
