ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF URUGUAY


Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Uruguay

XXI ATCM/IP130
May, 1997
English
Original: spanish
OPENING ADDRESS BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF URUGUAY

Mr. Chairman:

On behalf of the delegation of Uruguay I wish to express our appreciation to the people
and authorities of Christchurch for their warm and cordial hospitality as well as for the excellent
organization of our meeting.

We have before us two intensive weeks of work during which we shall attempt to
synthesize past experiences and future responsibilities with regard to the Antarctic.

My country attaches the greatest importance to safeguarding the Antarctic environment,
not only because of its intrinsic values or its importance to science but also because Uruguay is,
geographically, very near the Antarctic Continent. We are therefore pleased to know that the
Madrid Protocol will soon come into effect; it is an essential instrument that Uruguay has
complied with for many years. Its entry into force will simply be a formality leading us to the
effective protection to which we are all committed.

Notwithstanding the above, we believe that environmental protection can be harmoniously
and rationally reconciled with the primary objective of our presence in the Antarctic: peace and
science. We therefore fully adhere to the principle of international scientific cooperation as the
cornerstone that cannot be undermined, at the risk of violating the very essence of the Treaty.
We must listen with the greatest attention to the scientific community and to the managers of
Antarctic programs, who have made us aware of the very special realities of a region that does
not admit purely theoretical approaches; we must therefore double our efforts to arrive at a
Liability Annex that reflects these realities. In that exercise we may need to reflect about the
scope of the instrument that we are developing and about the consequences it may have on
scientific cooperation and on Antarctic science itself. No legal liability regime should end up
virtually limiting scientific activities and related logistics, especially with regard to those countries
that carry them out under great financial hardship.

My country believes that the Antarctic Peninsula can become a priority region for close
cooperation in the interest of protecting, as effectively as possible, the area visited by the largest
amount of people, both tourists and scientists. We therefore believe that it is essential to consider
the possibility of developing joint response plans to possible incidents, in compliance of
Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol. Individual efforts, regardless of their quality, may be
ineffective. It is only through joint work that we will have the best vehicle to protect the
Antarctic environment: prevention.

Uruguay believes that the Treaty needs a Permanent Secretariat, and is convinced that it
will make the Antarctic Treaty System more operational. We also believe that there is a need for
an appropriate balance among Antarctic institutions, which is why we have always maintained
that the headquarters of the Antarctic Treaty should be in Latin America.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, we believe the Antarctic Treaty should continue benefiting from
the contribution by SCAR and COMNAP, which have provided us with specific approaches
aimed at understanding the challenges we face as a result of the activities carried out in the
Antarctic.
