ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANISATION
(WMO) ATCM-XXI, CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND,
19-30 MAY 1997


 
Agenda item 3                  Submitted by WMO

XXI ATCM/IP41
May, 1997
Original: English
2

STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANISATION (WMO)
ATCM-XXI, CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND, 19-30 MAY 1997

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

The United Nations was established in the aftermath of a devastating war to help stabilise
international relations and give peace a more secure foundation. The United Nations,
however became much more than peace-keeper. Often without attracting attention, the
United Nations and its agencies are engaged in a vast array of work that touches every
aspect of people's lives around the world. The Convention of the World Meteorological
Organisation came into force in March 1950, transforming the previous non-
governmental International Meteorological Organisation, which had existed since 1873,
into the intergovernmental WMO which now serves as a Specialised Agency of the
United Nations.

WMO's major activity, that of providing the international framework for meteorological
observations and data exchange, has contributed decisively to the remarkable success
story of weather forecasting. By providing the international framework for meteorological
observations and data exchange, WMO has contributed to the remarkable improvement in
weather forecasting. Weather forecasting has been able to evolve from a state in the early
1950's, of being mostly art strengthened by science to its current status of being
predominantly science, reliant on the steadily improving global numerical weather
analysis and prediction models.

In the last 45 years, much has been accomplished by WMO and its Members. For
example, the beginnings of the Global Ozone Observing System date back to 1957. The
measurements so painstakingly coordinated and standardised under the auspices of WMO
were, just 30 years later, of utmost relevance to countries that, in 1987, signed the
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.

Through World Weather Watch (WWW) - a global system for the collection, analysis of
weather and other environmental information - WMO has made a unique contribution to
international cooperation. There has never been a better world-wide operational system
similar to the WWW to which every country in the world contributes, every day of the
year for the common good.

In collaboration with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), WMO has
played a pioneering role in the global coordination of geophysical and meteorological
experiments. Thus it may claim credit for laying down the operational foundations for the
world-wide monitoring of the chemical composition of the atmosphere and of climatic
change. These matters are assuming an even greater priority.
3

The present world-wide concern about climate change has its roots in the changing 
chemical composition of the atmosphere. Measurements of the changes taking place are 
essential to diagnose these trends and their likely impacts and the sources of the polluting 
substances. The basic world-wide network for these observations is the Global 
Atmosphere Watch of WMO, initiated in 1989 to coordinate two long-standing 
measurement programmes: the Global Ozone Observing System and the Background Air 
Pollution Monitoring Network (BAPMON). These activities are providing vital 
information on the chemical and physical constituents and properties of the global 
atmosphere including the dispersion, transport, chemical transformation and deposition of 
atmospheric pollutants over land and sea, among other things.

The World Meteorological Organisation spearheaded the campaign on the potential 
effects of climate change such as global warming and sea level rise, and was instrumental 
in the negotiations for a UN Convention on Climate Change, which was signed during the 
Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit in 1992 and became international law in 1994. In order to 
meet long-term meteorological observational requirements for a more enhanced 
description of the earth’s climate system, as envisaged by the United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development (UNCED), and its Agenda 21, WMO and three other 
international organisations established the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) 
which is in its planning stage. GCOS is taking a comprehensive view towards these 
requirements, and will of necessity include observations from the ocean, in concert with 
the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS), in addition to the current operational 
meteorological observational programme of WMO.

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

The World Meteorological Organisation is a specialised agency of the United Nations, 
consisting of some 160 Member States and Territories. It was created :

(a) To facilitate world-wide cooperation in the establishment of networks of stations for 
the making of meteorological observations as well as hydrological and other 
geophysical observations related to meteorology, and to promote the establishment 
and maintenance of systems for the rapid exchange of meteorological and related 
services; 

(b) To promote the establishment and maintenance of systems for the rapid exchange of 
meteorological and related information;

(c) To promote standardisation of meteorological and related observations and to ensure 
the uniform publication of observations and statistics;

(d) To further the application of meteorology to aviation, shipping, water problems, 
agriculture and other human activities;

(e) To promote activities in operational hydrology and to further close cooperation 
between Meteorological and Hydrological Services; and

(f) To encourage research and training in meteorology and, as appropriate, in related 
fields and to assist in coordinating the international aspects of such research and 
training.
4

World Meteorological Congress

The World Meteorological Congress is the supreme body of WMO. It brings together the delegates of all Members once every four years to determine general policies for the fulfilment of the purposes of the Organisation, to approve the Long-term Plan, to authorise maximum expenditures for the following four-year financial period, to adopt Technical Regulations relating to international meteorological and hydrological practice, to elect the President and Vice-Presidents of the Organisation and members of the Executive Council other than the presidents of the regional associations and to appoint the Secretary-General. The twelfth WMO Congress was held in Geneva 30 May - 21 June 1995 when Dr. John W. Zillman, Permanent Representative of Australia, was elected President of WMO.

WMO Executive Council

WMO EC is composed of 36 directors of national Meteorological or Hydrological Services. It meets at least once a year to conduct the activities of the Organisation, to implement the decisions taken by its Members in Congress and to study and make recommendations on any matter affecting international meteorology and related activities of the Organisation. The 49^(th) session of WMO EC will be held in Geneva from 10 to 20 June 1997.

WMO Executive Council Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology

WMO and ICSU jointly initiated the World Climate Research Programme which has a significant Antarctic component, particularly with respect to sea ice as a climate “memory” and feedback system. The WMO EC Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology (WGAM) maintains close contact with other groups or bodies such as COMNAP, SCAR and IOC which extended the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) to include ice, ocean, and atmosphere interactions in high southern latitudes.

The WMO EC-WGAM operates under clear terms of reference from the Executive Council of the World Meteorological Organisation. WGAM is composed of members nominated by the permanent representatives of countries that are a party to the Antarctic Treaty, and experts designated by permanent representatives of Members that have not yet acceded to the Antarctic Treaty but have active meteorological programmes in Antarctica. WGAM has a role to provide suitable information on meteorological activities in the Antarctic to the WMO Executive Council.

It is, of course, a pity that Dr. Neil Streten left his position as chairman of the WMO Working Group on Antarctic Meteorology, due to his retirement from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology in January 1997. Neil held the office of chairman of the working group since 1984. The new Chairman of the EC Working Group on Antarctic
5

Meteorology will be designated at the 49th session of the WMO Executive Council (June
1997).

Regional Associations

There are six Regional Associations (Africa, Asia, South America, North and Central
America, South-West Pacific and Europe), composed of representatives of Member
governments. They coordinate meteorological and related activities within their
respective Regions and examine from the regional point of view all questions referred to
them.

Technical Commissions

There are eight technical commissions of WMO, consisting of experts designated by
Members. They are responsible for studying any subject within the purposes of the
Organisation. Technical Commissions have been established for basic systems,
instruments and methods of observations, atmospheric sciences, aeronautical
meteorology, agricultural meteorology, marine meteorology, hydrology, and climatology;

The Secretariat

The WMO Secretariat is located at 41 Avenue Giuseppe-Motta, Geneva, Switzerland. It
is composed of a Secretary-General and such technical and clerical staff as are required
for the work of the Organisation. The Secretariat works in close collaboration with the
United Nations and its specialised agencies. Professor G. O. P. Obasi is the Secretary-
General of WMO.
