ANTARCTIC TREATY          
TRATADO ANTARTICO      
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING   XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE    
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ      
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE  XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

A DESCRIPTION OF NORWEGIAN PROCEDURES 
DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 1 OF 
ANNEX I TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND 
NORWEGIAN REGULATIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION 
OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN ANTARCTICA

Agenda item 6b                         Submitted by Norway

XXI ATCM/IP38
May, 1997
Original: English
. 05/04 '97 09:38  831 70 3632983    New Zealand Emb.    
    24/04/97 19:24   UD/~   31 70 3632983                 2005
                                 NR. 885   3004/025


A description of Norwegian procedures developed in accordance 
with Article 1 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Norwegian Regulations 
Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica.

Background

Article 1 of Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty (the Environmental Protocol) states that environmental impacts of proposed 
activities shall, before their commencement, be considered in accordance with 
appropriate procedures. Each Treaty Party should circulate a description of the 
national procedures to the other Treaty Parties (Article 6, Annex II). The following is a 
description of the EIA procedures developed by Norwegian authorities based on the 
requirements in the Environmental Protocol, as well as the requirements put forth in 
the Norwegian Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica. 
It is expected that the procedures will be further developed as experience gives us new 
insights.

Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment In Antarctica

The Norwegian Regulations Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica 
(Antarctic Regulations) constitute the Norwegian legal framework for implementing 
the Environmental Protocol. The regulations were laid down by Royal Decree of 5 
May 1995, with authority in § 7 of Act no. 3 of 27 February 1930 relating to 
Bouvetøya, Peter I Øy and Dronning Maud Land.

The Antarctic Regulations apply to Antarctica, defined as the region south of 60°S. 
The Antarctic Regulations apply to Norwegian nationals, Norwegian legal persons, 
Norwegian ships and aircraft, foreigners resident in Norway, and foreigners who are 
members of, or responsible for the organisation of, expeditions to Antarctica which 
are organised in Norway.

The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) have been granted the authority relating to the 
Antarctic Regulations, and is responsible for all the practical procedures/guidelines to 
be developed in connection with the implementation of the Antarctic Regulations.

Advanced notice and Environmental Impact Statements

Chapter 3 of the Antarctic Regulations (see Appendix 1) covers the obligation to give 
advanced notice and Environmental Impact Assessments for activity in Antarctica. 
Advanced notice of activities pursuant to scientific research programs, tourism and all 
other planned activities in Antarctica is to be given to the Norwegian Polar Institute at 
the latest one year before the intended start of the activity. This requirement also 
applies to any change in an activity not previously notified. The notice shall contain 
information on who is responsible for the activity, the scope of the activity, and an 
initial environmental evaluation.

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I 
ATCM XXII/Info

1

4/23
05/04 '97 09:39     831 70 3632983      Aiew Zealand Emb.        006
04/04/97 19:25   UD1~~ 31 70 36329833632983                  NR.883  S005/023

Thus, anyone intending to start a planned activity in Antarctica shall prepare an Initial 
Environmental Evaluation (IEE) as described in Article 2 of Annex I to the 
Environmental Protocol).

If an Initial Environmental Evaluation indicates that a proposed activity is likely to 
have more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment, a Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) is to be prepared as described in Article 3 of Annex 
I to the Environmental Protocol.

The Norwegian Polar Institute can order that an activity be changed, postponed or 
completely prohibited if its implementation will or may result in undesirable impacts 
on the Antarctic environment. NPI can also order changes to, postpone or prohibit 
continuation of an activity that has been initiated, but which has lead to unforeseen 
impacts on the Antarctic environment.

The provisions relating to impact statements in the Antarctic Regulations are similar 
to the provisions in the Environmental Protocol, although with one exception. In 
Article 8 of the Environmental Protocol it is stated that Antarctic activities are to be 
subjects to procedures for prior assessment of impacts according to whether the 
activities are identified as having:

- less than a minor or transitory impact (preliminary environmental evaluation)
- a minor or transitory impact (initial environmental evaluation)
- more than a minor or transitory impact (comprehensive environmental evaluation)

The Norwegian Antarctic Regulations require that an Initial Impact Evaluation is 
prepared for all activity, also activity assessed to have less than a minor or transitory 
impact. The concept of Preliminary Environmental Evaluation is thus not used in the 
Norwegian Antarctic context.

For the purpose of sharing information about IEEs developed, NPI operates with two 
types of IEEs, namely those with a resulting "less than minor or transitory" impact and 
those with a resulting "minor or transitory" impact. Only the latter impact evaluations 
are made available to the Antarctic Treaty System in English.

Norwegian activity in Antarctica

Norwegian activity in Antarctica can be grouped into three different categories, 
namely research projects/expeditions, adventure expeditions and tourist expeditions. 
The two latter can overlap.

Norwegian research in Antarctica is mainly concentrated to the Norwegian Antarctic 
Research Expeditions (the last one being carried out in the 96/97 season). Research 
constitutes the major proportion of Norwegian activity in Antarctica, both in number, 
duration and intensity.

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I
ATCM XXuInfo                                                         2
                                                          2
                  1252
05/04 '97 09:39     831 70 3632983     New Zealand Emb.           2007
04/04/97   19:25     UDI                  31 70 3632983632983     NR. 883  S206/023

Norwegian adventurers find their way to Antarctica just about every Antarctic summer
season. In the 96/97 season. one solo-crossing of the continent and one climbing
expedition in Dronning Maud Land were carried through. This type of activity
constitutes a small share of the total Norwegian activity in Antarctica, both in number
and intensity.

The number of Norwegian tourists travelling to Antarctica is increasing yearly, and
also Norwegian tour operators (sub-charters) are now entering the Antarctic scene.
However, the activity still has a fairly low intensity.

Procedures
The Norwegian Antarctic Regulations came into force in May 1995. Procedures for
the implementation of the Antarctic Regulations were developed by the Norwegian
Polar Institute. Appendix 2 shows a schematic overview of the general process. The
procedures will be developed further based on experience. The procedures vary
according to the type of activity in question. Although the Antarctic Regulations
require that an Initial Impact Evaluation is prepared for all activity to be carried
through in Antarctica, NPI accepts that the IEEs vary in the level of detail depending
on the assumed intensity of an activity. In this manner Norway is, in fact, informally
utilising the three impact levels as described in Article 8 of the Environmental
Protocol.

IEE Procedures for Research projects
All research project that are to be carried through in Antarctica have to be evaluated
for their impucts on the Antarctic environment. NPI has developed a standard IEE
form for research projects (Appendix 3) to ensure that similar kind of information is
received from all projects. The form is also developed in order to ease the processing
of the statements. The forms are still under development, and the work is being co-
ordinated with the appropriate authorities in Finland and Sweden.

The forms are distributed to the project leaders in co-operation with the Norwegian
Polar Research Committee. The Committee first approves projects based on scientific
criteria. IEE forms are then to be filled in for the approved projects, which are
submitted to NPI for processing. Due to the funding cycle, the IEEs are nomally
received by NPI less than 1 year before the planned activity is to take place. With the
so far assumed low intensity of the projects, NPI has accepted a shorter time limit than
the Antarctic Regulations require. If more time should be needed to assess the
impacts of a project, NPI will require that the project is postponed until the assessment
can be made.

Once the IEE forms are received at NPI, the environmental officer (EO) goes through
the statements. EO will if needed contact the project leader to clarify any unclear
issues or gather any missing information.

EO, in co-operation with NPI's Head of Antarctic research, evaluates the IEEs and
identifies whether there are issues that need closer examination. If so, experts in the
relevant fields will go through those IEEs in order to evaluate such issues.

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 3, Annex I
ATCM XX/info

3
6/23
. 05/04 '97 09:40 831 70 3632983    New Zealand Emb.           008
04/04/97 19:26 UDA 31 70 36329833632983         NR.883 5007/023

A letter granting permission (with or without conditions), or which prohibits the 
activity, is sent to the project leaders. IEEs for projects headed by NPI scientists are 
forwarded to the Ministry of Environment for final evaluation in order to prevent 
institutional bias in the decision.

IEE Procedures for Research expeditions
In addition to an evaluation of the individual research projects, it is also considered 
essential that an IEE is prepared for the overall expedition, i.e. an assessment of the 
logistics surrounding the expedition and the cumulative impacts of the research 
projects to be carried through.

NPI is responsible for the Norwegian research expeditions, and so it is the Institute's 
responsibility to prepare this IEE. A thorough description and assessment regarding 
vessel operation, station operation, transportation, cumulative impacts and alternatives 
is prepared by gathering information from the logistics section at NPI, as well as from 
the shipping company in charge of the research vessel. Separate forms are being 
developed for this purpose in co-ordination with the other Nordic countries. The final 
IEE for the research expedition is forwarded to the Ministry of Environment for final 
evaluation in order to ensure an independent and neutral evaluation.

IEE Procedures for Adventure expeditions
Persons planning to carry through adventure expeditions to Antarctica are required to 
prepare an IEE that is to be sent to NPI. No standard form has been developed for this 
purpose, due to the wide variation in these activities.

Once the IEE is received at NPI, the environmental officer (EO) goes through the 
statement. EO will if necessary contact the project leader to clarify any unclear issues 
or collect any missing information.

EO summarises the impact evaluation and indicates additional conditions for the 
activity to be carried through. If impacts are considered to be more than minor or 
transitory in nature, it will be suggested that the activity should be disallowed or that a 
CEE should be prepared. The evaluation is circulated for comments to those experts 
pertinent to the issues raised in the evaluation, before final decision by NPI.

A letter granting permission (with or without conditions), or which prohibits the 
activity, is sent to the person responsible for the activity.

NPI is still experiencing some problems relating to the fact that some adventurers are 
not aware that they are required to give advanced notice and prepare impact 
evaluations. NPI therefore often has to contact the person in charge of the activity 
first, based on e.g. information picked up through the media. So far the IEEs handed 
in are also very variable in form and content, and standard procedures are hard and 
undesirable to develop due to the variations in the activities. In reality, the processing 
of IEEs for adventure expeditions therefore is done on a case by case basis.

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I
ATCM XX/Info.

4

7/23
05/04 '97 09:40     831 70 3632983   New Zealand Emb.
04/04/97 19:26     UD/men     31 70 20 3632983                  NK. 003   5000/003
                                                          Q 009

Tourism

Most Norwegian Antarctic tourists travel as part of foreign operations. Single
individuals take part in foreign tours or a Norwegian travel agency sub-charters a
foreign tour operator. The procedures relating to environmental impact evaluations
therefore depends on the origin of the country in which the activity is arranged. The
Antarctic Regulations do not apply to persons staying in Antarctica as part of an
expedition organised by another Treaty State which has corresponding provisions, and
is a party to the Protocol (Antarctic Regulations §2). Thus, if the tour operator
originates in a country which is party to the Protocol, the Norwegian tourists or travel
agency cannot be required to give advanced notice or prepare an IEE. However, they
are encouraged to supply NPI with necessary information, including copies of relevant
documents/permissions from the authorities in the country in which the activity
originates.

If the activity originates in a country which is not party to the Protocol the
tourist/travel agency is required to give advanced notice and prepare an IEE for the
activity. If the tour operator, although not required to do so, has prepared an IEE, a
copy of this will suffice in order for NPI to evaluate the activity. A separate form has
been developed for gathering of relevant information from tourists/travel agencies.
The form is still being developed in co-operation with the other Nordic countries.

Few tourists are aware of the requirements in the Antarctic Regulations, and there is a
continued need to find procedures that will enable NPI to make the necessary impact
evaluations related to Norwegian tourism in Antarctica. However, good co-operation
is being established between NPI and the Norwegian travel agencies offering
Antarctic trips.

NPI is also co-operating with appropriate authorities in Finland and Sweden on issues
regarding tourism, and routines are being established for handling tourist expeditions
that involves more than one of these countries.

Advance notices and IEEs for the 1996/97 season

Research projects
In 1995/96 season one advance notice was received for research projects in Antarctica
(no independent Norwegian expedition was carried through this season). In the
1996/97 season a total of 13 advance notices were received for research projects, of
which five were projects lead by NPI scientists. None of the projects required
comprehensive environmental evaluation to be prepared. Additional information
needed to be gathered for half of the projects. An overview of IEEs are given in the
table below.

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I
ATCM XXIX/Inf.

12/r7
.05/04 '97 09:41       31 70 3632983       New Zealand Emb.              010
04/04/97 19:27     UD^       31 70 3632983       NR. 803 3003/03


| Season   | No. of EEs | NPE projects | No additional inf. needed | Some additional inf. needed | Extensive additional inf. needed | Activities needing CBE |
|----------|------------|--------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------|
| 1995/96  | 1          | 0            | 0                          | 1 (100)                     | 0                              | 0                      |
| 1996/97  | 13         | 5 (38)       | 6 (46)                     | 7 (54)                      | 0 (0)                          | 0 (0)                  |

Number in parentheis = percent of total notices

No additional information needed: Advance notice and IEE complete enough for thorough evaluation
Some additional information needed: Includes further description of methods, number of samples, specifications regarding protected areas, etc.
Extensive additional information needed: Includes more vital questions about impact on environment that has not been assessed in the IEE (or a need in clarity whether a CEE should be prepared)

The projects fell into the following categories:

| Season   | Marine Geophysics | Marine Biology | Marine Geology | Terrestrial Geophysics | Terrestrial Biology | Terrestrial Geology | Geodesy Mapping |
|----------|-------------------|----------------|----------------|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-----------------|
| 1995/96  |                   | 3              | 1              | 5                      | 1                   | 1                   | 1               |
| 1996/97  | 1                 |                |                |                        |                     |                     |                 |

Four projects applied for a permit to collect/gather flora/fauna in the 1996/97 season in accordance with § 14 in the Antarctic Regulations. None of the activities for which permit was sought were considered to have a harmful effect on the species population or the Antarctic environment in general. Three project teams applied for permit for entering or engaging in activity in specially protected areas (SSSI no. 23) in accordance with § 25. Conditional permits were granted in all cases.

Research expedition

In the 1996/97 season Norway arranged the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition 96/97 (NARE 96/97). An initial environmental evaluation was prepared for the expedition as such. The expedition was evaluated to have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. Copies of the IEE is available to any interested party at The Norwegian Polar Institute, P.O. Box 399. 9001 Tromsø. Norway (phone: +47 77 60 67 00, fax: +47 77 60 67 01).

Adventure expeditions

Although few in numbers, Norwegian adventure expeditions are regularly carried through in the Antarctic. These expeditions normally consist of a limited amount of people with a minimum amount of equipment. The following expeditions have been carried through (or attempted carried through) during the last two seasons:

| Season   | Type of exp.              | Location                         | Assumed impact                |
|----------|---------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 1995/96  | Solo crossing of continent | Berkner Isl. to McMurdo          | Less than minor or transitory |
| 1996/97  | Climbing expedition       | Sor Rondane. Dronning Maud Land  | Less than minor or transitory |
| 1996/97  | Solo crossing of continent | Berkner Isl. to McMurdo          | Less than minor or transitory |

Norwegian Procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I
ATCM xxInfo

6

9/23
05/04 '97 09:42     31 70 3632983       New Zealand Emb.              011
04/04/97 19:27     UDS/ -- -- 31 70 36329833632983                  NR. 883  S010/023

Tourism

A full overview of Norwegian tourists travelling to Antarctica is not available.
However, the last two seasons the major proportion of the Norwegian tourists have
booked through a Norwegian travel agency that sub-chartered the Canadian tour
operator Marine Expedition Inc. During the 96/97 season approx. 35 Norwegian
tourists joined this expedition onboard the vessel Professor Multanovsky. Advanced
notice was given by the travel agency, and the IEE document prepared by the
Canadian tour operator was accepted as IEE for the expedition as a whole.

Bouvetøya

A few comments about the situation on Bouvetøya are appropriate to complete this
documentation of Norwegian environmental evaluation procedures in Antarctica.

Bouvetøya is located north of 60°S, and is therefore outside Antarctica in Treaty
terms, and is not covered by the Environmental Protocol or the Norwegian Antarctic
Regulations. This sub-Antarctic island is, however, protected as a nature reserve in
accordance with Regulations relating to the protection of Bouvetøya and surrounding
territorial waters as a nature reserve (Bouvetøya Regulations), laid down by Royal
Decree on Dec. 17 1971. NPI has been granted the authority of the Bouvetøya
Regulations.

The Bouvetøya Regulations do not require that environmental impact statements are
prepared for activity to take place on the island, although any activity that can harm
the flora or fauna on the island is prohibited. NPI believes that the Bouvetøya
environment should be treated with the same care as the rest of the Antarctic
environment, and as far as possible the standards of the Protocol and the Antarctic
Regulations are applied to Bouvetøya as well. In this manner the Institute emphasises
the importance of the dependent and associated ecosystems of Antarctica as has been
stressed in the text of the Protocol.

In 1996 the Norwegian Polar Institute prepared an initial environmental evaluation for
the construction of a small research station on Bouvetøya. The IEE was forwarded to
the Ministry of Environment for final evaluation in order to prevent institutional
biases. The IEE is only available in Norwegian.

Final comment

Since the coming into force of the Norwegian Antarctic Regulations in May 1995, the
Norwegian Polar Institute has been developing IEE procedures for activities to take
place in the Antarctic. Experiences so far with the procedures have been good, but the
Institute also realises that further development of the procedures will be necessary as
more experience with the process is gained. NPI is enjoying a fruitful co-operation
with Finland and Sweden in the process of developing the IEE procedures. It is the
hope of Norwegian authorities that such co-operation will also continue in the whole
Antarctic Treaty System, so that in the end common procedures can be developed for
all Parties to the Treaty.

Norwegian procedures in accordance with Art. 1, Annex I
ATCM XX/Info              7
10/n-
Regulations Relating to Protection of 
the Environment in Antarctica
laid down by Royal Decree of 5 May 1995, with authority in. § 7 of 
Act no. 3 of 27 February 1930 relating to Bouvet Island, Peter I's 
Island and Queen Maud Land. Submitted by the Ministry of the 
Environment.

Chapter 1 Purpose and Scope

§ 1 Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the 
environment in Antarctica and the dependent and associated 
ecosystems, to preserve the intrinsic value of Antarctica, 
including its wilderness and aesthetic values, and to maintain its 
value as an area for the conduct of scientific research. These 
considerations shall be fundamental to the planning and 
implementation of all activities in Antarctica.

§ 2 Scope
The Regulations apply to Antarctica, defined as the region 
south of 60°S.
The Regulations apply throughout the whole of Antarctica,
to:
a) Norwegian nationals
b) Norwegian legal persons
c) Norwegian ships and aircraft
d) foreigners resident in Norway
e) foreigners who are members of or responsible for the 
organization of expeditions to Antarctica which are 
organized in Norway or depart from Norway and proceed 
direct to Antarctica.
16

The Regulations also apply, on Queen Maud Land and Peter 
I's Island, to anyone staying there or responsible for activity 
there, cf. § 9.

The Regulations shall however not be applied to persons 
staying in Antarctica as part of an expedition organized by 
another State which has corresponding provisions and is a 
party to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, or who are responsible for organizing such an 
expedition.

§ 3 Relation to the exercise of authority by another State
Legal action in respect of contraventions of these Regulations 
can only be taken with the consent of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in cases when:
a) the act was committed by a person who is not a Norwegian 
national or resident in Norway, or
b) the act was committed elsewhere than in Queen Maud 
Land or on Peter I's Island.

Chapter 2 General Provisions

§ 4 On activities in Antarctica in general
Activities in the Antarctic shall be planned and conducted so 
as to have the least possible effect on the environment in 
Antarctica and dependent and associated ecosystems, and so as 
to preserve the value of the region to research. In this connection, 
the activity must be prevented from leading to:
• effects on climate or weather patterns,
• effects on air or water quality,
• changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial, glacial, limnetic or 
marine environments,
• changes in the distribution, occurrence or productivity of 
species or populations of animals or plants,
17
            05/04
04/24/37 97
19:28 08:12
UD/1
31 70 383283
31 70 36328353283
New Zealand Emb.
NP 883
S011/023
0012
- risk to endangered or threatened species or populations of such species,
- risk of damage to areas of biological, ecological, historical or ethnic importance, or of significance to the region's characteristics as a wilderness, or
- damage or other degradation of historical sites and cultural monuments.

§ 5 Prohibition of mineral resource activities

Any activity relating to mineral resources, other than scientific research, is prohibited.

The Norwegian Polar Research Institute decides in each case what constitutes research.

§ 6 Inspections

Observers designated by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall have full access to all parts of stations, installations, equipment, ships and aircraft which are open to inspection under the Antarctic Treaty.

§ 7 Emergencies

The provisions in the present Regulations do not apply to emergencies. It is considered an emergency if the safety of human life, ships, aircraft, highly valuable equipment or the natural environment is threatened.

Emergency action taken shall immediately be notified to the Norwegian Polar Research Institute.

§ 8 Obligation to report

The person responsible for an activity is obliged to prepare reports on the activity and the use made of permissions granted in pursuance of the present Regulations, including a final report
on the conclusion of the activity. The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can provide more detailed guidelines for obligatory reporting.

Chapter 3 Notice of Activity and Environmental Impact Assessments

§ 9 Obligation to give advance notice

Advance notice of activities pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other planned activities in Antarctica shall be given to the Norwegian Polar Research Institute at the latest one year before the intended start of the activity. The same applies also to plans for any change in the activity of which notice has not previously been given. The Institute can in particular cases accept a shorter time limit.

The notice shall contain information on who is responsible for the activity, and on the scope of the activity, including an initial environmental evaluation, cf. § 10, and the technology and measures which will be adopted to limit any harmful effects. The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can issue more detailed rules concerning the information and evaluations a notice must contain.

§ 10 Initial environmental evaluation

Anyone intending to start a planned activity in Antarctica shall prepare an initial environmental evaluation, unless a comprehensive environmental evaluation is initiated according to § 11.

An initial environmental evaluation shall contain:

a) a description of the proposed activity, including its purpose, location, duration, intensity, use of means of transport, clearing-up plans, and the impact if any on the environment.
b) an evaluation of alternatives to the proposed activity and 
any impacts that the activity may have, including 
evaluation of cumulative effects in the light of existing and 
known planned activities.

§ 11 Comprehensive environmental evaluation
If an initial environmental evaluation indicates or the 
Norwegian Polar Research Institute determines that a proposed 
activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact 
on the environment, the person responsible for the activity shall 
prepare a comprehensive environmental evaluation. The 
comprehensive environmental evaluation shall be in a suitable 
form for official consideration.

A comprehensive environmental evaluation shall include:
a) a description of the proposed activity including its purpose, 
location, duration and intensity, and possible alternatives 
to the activity, including the alternative of not proceeding, 
and the consequences of those alternatives;

b) a description of the initial environmental reference state 
with which predicted changes are to be compared and a 
prediction of the future environmental reference state in 
the absence of the proposed activity;

c) a description of the methods and data used to forecast the 
effects of the proposed activity;

d) estimation of the nature, extent, duration, and intensity of 
the likely direct effects of the proposed activity;

e) consideration of possible indirect or second order impacts of 
the proposed activity;

f) consideration of the cumulative impact on the 
environment, including the impact on individual species 
and the ecosystem, in the short and long term, of the 
proposed activity in the light of existing activities and 
other known planned activities;

g) descriptions of measures, including monitoring 
programmes, that could be taken to minimise or mitigate 
impacts of the proposed activity and to detect unforeseen
impacts, and that could provide early warning of any 
adverse effects of the activity, in addition to dealing 
promptly and efficiently with accidents;

h) identification of unavoidable impacts of the proposed 
activity;

i) consideration of the effects of the proposed activity on the 
conduct of scientific research and on other existing uses 
and values;

j) an identification of gaps in knowledge and uncertainties 
encountered in compiling the information required under 
this section;

k) a non-technical summary of the information provided 
under this section; and

l) the name and address of the person or organization which 
prepared the comprehensive environmental evaluation.

§ 12 Orders changing, postponing or prohibiting an activity

The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can order that an 
activity be changed or postponed or completely prohibit the 
activity if its implementation will or may result in impacts on the 
environment in Antarctica and its dependent and associated 
ecosystems which are contrary to the purpose of the present 
Regulations, provisions in the Regulations, or provisions issued 
pursuant to the Regulations, or international resolutions, advice, 
and recommendations adopted by the parties to the Antarctic 
Treaty system. The same applies to notices of changes in 
activities.

The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can order the 
postponement of an activity or a change in an activity if 
necessary to ensure that an environmental evaluation is carried 
out in accordance with rules to which Norway has acceded by 
international agreement, cf. §§ 10 and 11.

If an activity which has been started proves to lead to 
unforeseen impacts on the environment in Antarctica or 
dependent and associated ecosystems, the Norwegian Polar 
Research Institute can order changes in the activity, postpone the
·05/04 '97 09:44       31 70 3632983        Aiew Zealand Emb.         2015
04/04/97 19:30                                     31 70 3632983 3632983     NR. 883 5014/023


permission given by the Norwegian Polar Research Institute in                   
accordance with rules to which Norway has acceded by                             
international agreement. The introduction of dogs is                             
prohibited.                                                                       
                                                                                 
The importation of food is not ensured by the first paragraph,                   
provided it is subject to proper control.                                        
The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can issue more                            
detailed rules to prevent the introduction of micro-organisms                    
and fauna which do not occur in the native flora and fauna.                      


                                  Chapter 5 Management of Pollutants            
                                              and Waste                           

§ 16 Soope                                                                      
Chapter 6 applies to all activities not covered by Chapter 6.                    


§ 17 Remaval of waste from Antarctica                                            
It is prohibited to leave waste to be burnt in                                   
Antarctica. The ban does not apply if the waste can be                            
incinerated without environmentaly harmful emissions. The                        
Norwegian Polar Research Institute can issue more detailed                       
guidelines for much incineration. If special reasons so indicate, the            
Norwegian Polar Research                                                         

Institute can grant exemptions from the first paragraph.                         


§ 18 Prohibition of emissions of environmentally detrimental                    
substances and products                                                          
Emission of substances or products which can harm this                           
environment in Antarctica is prohibited.                                         
If special reasons so indicate, the Norwegian Polar Research                     
Institute can grant exemptions from the first paragraph.                         


                                                                 23              

                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
activity, or completely prohibit it if necessary to counteract or                
limit the unforeseen impacts.                                                    

                                                                                 
         § 13 Monitoring and measures (to the extent of emergencies)             
Impacts                                                                          
The person responsible for an activity for which a                              
comprehensive environmental evaluation is required to                           
monitor the environment regularly and effectively in order to:                  
• measure the impacts of an ongoing activity, including verification             
  of foreseen impacts, and early discovery of possible                           
  unforeseen environmental impacts;                                              
• in the event of an activity unreasonably for the activity                      
  come to light, the Norwegian Polar Research Institute                          
  obliged to notify the Norwegian Polar Research Institute                       
  immediately, and to make the changes in the activity necessary                 
  to mitigate the damage.                                                        


                                  Chapter 4 Conservation of Flora and            
                                              Fauna                              

§ 14 Conservation of native flora and fauna                                     
The taking of or harmful interference with flora and fauna, in                   
Antarctica, is prohibited, including harmful traffic. In                         
Antarctica, the Norwegian Polar Research Institute can permit taking or          
catching in accordance with rules to which Norway has acceded                    
by international agreement.                                                      

§ 15 Introduction of plant and animal species and micro-organisms               
Plant or animal species can only be introduced pursuant to                       


                                                                 23              

-1/1/1-                                                                          
                                                                                  
05/04 '97 09:45       231 70 3632983       New Zealand Emb.        2016
04/04/97 19:30       UD/1         31 70 36329838632903       NR.883 S015/023


§ 23 Discharges of sewage
to discharge sewage into the sea within 12 nautical miles of land
impair operations in Antarctica.
Sewage stored in a holding tank which is discharged beyond
this distance must be discharged gradually, and the ship shall if
possible maintain a speed of at least 4 knots.
The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can require record
books to be kept of sewage discharge.
If the person responsible for an activity hires a vessel flying a
foreign flag he shall be obliged to ensure
that the ship observe this provision.
Exemptions from the provisions can be granted for special
reasons.

§ 24 Contingency plans
The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can issue rules
governing contingency plans for ships, including ordering ships to
prepare each contingency plan.

Chapter 7 Specially Protected and
Specially Managed Areas

§ 25 Specially protected areas
Areas may be designated specially protected
outstanding environmental; scientific, historic, aesthetic or
wilderness values, any combination of these values, or
ascertain which areas have been designated specially protected.

Persons planning to stay in Antarctica are obliged to
26

§ 19 Storage of waste
All waste to be removed later, incinerated or otherwise
disposed of in Antarctica shall be stored in such a way as to
prevent its disposal or emission into the environment.

§ 20 Cleansing up of waste
Fuel and present waste disposal sites
users of the sites and abandoned work
grant of the sites. The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can
environmental exemption if it would have more harmful effects on the
The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can
responsible for an activity to clean up with a specific time limit.
If the order is not complied with, the Norwegian Polar Research
Institute can claim the
costs from the person responsible for the activity.

§ 21 Waste management control and record books
Waste shall be managed and waste management record books
kept according to a classification system prepared by the
Norwegian Polar Research Institute.

for waste management in Antarctica must have
complying with the guidelines approved by the Research Institute.

Chapter 6 Pollution by Ships

§ 22 Scope
Subject to the limits which follow from this Chapter
applies to activities engaged in from every vessel at sea.

24
.05/04 '97  09:45                   231 70 3632983    New Zealand Emb.                   2017
04/04/97  19:31   UD              31 70 3632983                          nr. 003   3010/03


Chapter 8 Special Provisions

§ 28 Exemption
The Norwegian Polar Research Institute can grant
exemptions from the provisions in these Regulations when there
are special reasons and when to do so is not contrary to the
purpose of the Regulations.

§ 29 Supervision
The Norwegian Research authorities shall supervise whether all of these
supervising authority shall have un unrestricted access to
all installations, means of transport and areas where activitizo
are conducted which fall within the neopass of these Regulations.

§ 30 Rights of appeal
Appeals against decisions taken by the Norwegian Polar
Research Institute can be lodged with the Ministry of the
Environment according to the rules in the Public Administration
Act of 30 February 1987.

§ 31 Insurance cover for rescue expenses
The persons responsible (or an authority) must make provision
for efficient insurance, or guarantee for expenses of whatever kind
guarantee for expenses of whatever kind and incurred by a public
authority or others in connection with searches, rescue
operations or transport of patients which have to be carried out
in connection with activities in Antarctica.
The insurance or guarantee must cover each expenses
regardless of whether negligence was alleged by the person
responsible for the activity, persons employed by him, or
members of the expedition.


To enter or engage in activity in specially protected areas,
permission is required from the Norwegian Polar Research
Institute. The permit staten the stay.
During a stay in a specially protected areas, the holder of the
permit must have a copy of it with him.

§ 26 Specially managed areas
Areas where activities are being conducted or may in future
be conducted can be designated specially managed areas to assist
in the planning and coordination of activities, avoid possible
conflicts with foreign environmental effects, impose obligations to
Persons planning to stay in Antarctica are obliged to
ascertain which areas have been designated specially managed
areas

Persons entering a specially managed area, stays to
the rules governing ecuseance, including rules governing access to the area, issued by the Norwegian
PolarResearch Institute. Information is issued by the

§ 27 Historical sites and monuments
Historical sites and monuments which have been registered
pursuant to international agreements which Norway has
acceded shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed.
If a historical site or monument has been designated a
specially protected or specially managed area, §§ 25 and 26 apply
in addition to the first paragraph.
.05/04 '97 09:46       31 70 3632983         New Zealand Emb.         018
.04/04/97 19:31       UD/       7   31 70 3632983 3632983       NR. 883  2017/823


                                                                               823


The Norwegian Polar Research Institute determines the 
amount of the insurance of guarantee.

§ 32 Penalties
Deliberate or negligent violation of 
prohibitions or orders issued pursuant to them is punishable by 
fines or imprisonment for up to one year or both.

§ 33 (Entry into force) These Regulations enter into force 
immediately. Expeditions travelling to Antarctica within one 
year of their entry into force shall comply with the Regulations 
as far as possible. 
The Ministry of the Environment can adopt amendments to 
the Regulations.
05/04 '97 09:46           31 70 3632983   Aiew Zealand Emb.         NR. 003   2019
04/04/97 19:32           UD/MFO   31 70 3632983                      3018/003

Appendix 2

Schematic overview of IEE procedure in Norway

                                 PERSON IN CHARGE
                                 OF PLANNED ACTIVITY
                                 IN ANTA[?]CTICA

Separate farms for            iee                          cee           Both IEE and CEE to be
research projects and                                     Permission,      handed in at least a year in
for tourist expeditions                                   conditions, prohibition
                                                             ↓                
                                                         Norwegian Polar Institute
                                                              Environmental Officer
                                                              Head Antarctic Scientist
                                                              Experts as needed
                                                                 ↓
                                                                 NPI's own activity
                                                             Evaluation
                                                                 ↓
                                                         Ministry of Environment           Ministry of Environment is
                                                         Permission, conditions, prohibition   authority in case of appeals

18/n-
05/04 '97  09:47     031 70 3632983        Aiew Zealand Emb.                  020
04/04/97  19:32    UD/1/1/1    31 70 3632983 3632983        NR. 883  9019/023      appenciuix  C


ADVANCED NOTICE OF ACTIVITY IN ANTARCTICA*
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT


A. GENERAL                                                                 Only for NPI

Name of person in charge of project:

Address:

Phone:                  Fax:                  e-mail:


B. DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY

Project title:

Project number:

Short description of how project is to be performed, and a summary of scientific purpose:


Time frame for project:                  Number of persons in field:

Geographic locality/area/routes for the research project (enclose map):


Are you aware of other research projects (except NARE-projects) in the same area?

Indicate where project personnel will be located, and in what time period (station, field camp,
vessel,...):


Can the project be carried through in an alternative location. If so - indicate place/location - and the
conditions for being able to use this location.

* Antarctica includes all area south of 60° S, as well as Rouveteoya


1


                                                                                           19/23
. 03/04 '97  09:47   B31 70 3632983      New Zealand Emb.        021
24/04/97   19:32   UD1     31 70 36329833632983         NR. 883  S020/023

C. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

1. Flora and Fauna

§ 14 of the Antarctic Regulations prohibits harmful interference with flora and fauna, including 
harmful traffic. Are you aware of unique occurrences of flora or fauna in the project area (incl. 
transport routes)? If yes, what possible impacts may the planned project have on these occurrences 
(positive/negative)? What efforts are planned in order to mitigate and minimise negative impacts?

§ 14 of the Antarctic Regulations prohibits the taking of flora/fauna unless permission is acquired 
from the Norwegian Polar Institute. Does the project involve the taking of biological material 
(includes fauna also when the animals are subsequently freed)? If yes, indicate the species and 
number/amount.

 Species          | Number/amount | Purpose
------------------|---------------|--------
                  |               |
                  |               |
                  |               |
                  |               |
                  |               |

2. Waste

Does the project entail the generation of waste (except regular household waste, sewage, etc.)?

 Waste category   | Indicate amount if possible
------------------|-------------------------
Paper             | 
Organic material  | 
Metal             | 
Plastic           | 
Glass             | 
Hazardous waste   | 

What actions are planned with respect to waste handling in the project?

2

20/n
-05/04 '97 09:48     831 70 3832983      New Zealand Emb.        022
04/04/97   19:33     UD/MEO +41 9 612 8171 31 70 3632983     NR. 883  8821/883


3. Chemicals

Are you planning to bring the following to Antarctica (if yes, fill out separate enclosed forms):
- toxic chemicals     Yes  No 
- radio isotopes     Yes  No 

Are you bringing other harmful/hazardous substances to Antarctica? If yes, what? Indicate amount 
and purpose.

It is prohibited to dispose/emit substances or products that may harm the Antarctic environment 
(§18). Are there plans for how remains of such substances/products are to be stored and disposed of? 
Describe.


4. Pollution/Noise

Indicate what mode of transportation will be used during the field work, estimate use and amount of 
fuel to be consumed.

Mode of transportation         Hours      Estimated fuel consumption
Helicopter                     
Band wagon                     
Snow mobiles                   
Zodiacs                        
Research vessel                

Does the project require use of other machines that might be a source of pollution?

What scientific instruments will you bring?

Does project activity involve a potential danger as regards to pollution of water, air, soil or ice at the 
project locality? How? What actions will be taken to minimise such impacts?

3

21/57
05/04 '97  09:48     31 70 3632983        Aiew Zealand Emb.           023
04/04/97  19:33     UD/Mon not  on  31 70 3632983  nr. 023  2022/203


What response plans exixts as regards to accidental spills of potantially polluting subalances?





5. Historic Sites and Monuments

Is it possible that the project may harm historic sites and monuments? In which manner, and how
will this impact be minimised?





6. Specially protected and managed areas

In order to enter or engage in activity in specially protected areas a permit from the Norwegian Polar
Institute is required ($25). Will project personnel enter or engage in activity in such areas? If yes,
indicate which areas, and describe the activity.





7. Clean up

What actions are planned as regards to clean up after the field work has been completed?





8. Alternatives

Have alternatives been considered? Describe.





22/27                        4
-05/04/ '97 09:48        831 70 3632983       Aiew Zealand Emb.       
04/04/97   19:33      UD/rn ~ 31 70 3632983       3632983         NK. 883  2023/023

9. Insurance

The person responsible for an activity must make provision for sufficient insurance, or in the event 
not equivalent guarantees for expenses of whatever kind incurred by a public authority or others in 
connection with searches, rescue operations or transport of patients which have to be carried out in 
connection with activities in Antarctica (§ 31). The person responsihle for the projects must 
document that such insurance exists.

D. CONCLUSION

Short summary of the projects assumed total impact on the environment.

 
   
 
5

23/23
