ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING     XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE   XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


OPENING SPEECH BY AMBASSADOR CARMEN E. SILVA,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF PERU



Agenda item 3                  Submitted by Peru

XXI ATCM/IP91
May, 1997
Original: English/Spanish
                                                                 91
OPENING SPEECH BY AMBASSADOR CARMEN E. SILVA,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF PERU TO THE XXI ATCM

Mister Chairman:

On behalf of the Peruvian Delegation allow me to congratulate 
you on your election as Chairman of this important meeting and to convey, through 
you, our warmest thanks to the Honorable Government of New Zealand for its kind 
hospitality. We are sure that the decisions adopted in this Forum will contribute to 
the strengthening of the Antarctic Treaty System, and we wish to collaborate in the 
discussions leading towards this objective.

● The Delegation of Peru is aware of Antarctica’s great 
importance as a peace zone, free of nuclear weapons and devoted to scientific 
research. In this context, my Delegation considers that protecting this environment 
for future generations is a great challenge, which demands a concerted effort in 
order to consolidate the mechanisms of the Antarctic System.

● The preservation of Antarctica is of special import to my 
country as our ecosystem is inextricably linked to that of the White continent. 
Therefore, it cannot be indifferent to activities that could affect it. Thus, Peru is 
currently developing scientific research programs in order to gain a better 
knowledge of the Antarctic space, and in this manner contribute to the studies that 
are currently being carried out by other countries.

● Since its admission as a Consultative Party to the Antarctic 
Treaty in 1989, Peru has sent eight scientific expeditions and built a research 
station called “Machu Picchu” in the Bahia del Almirantazgo, located in the Isla
Rey Jorge. The construction and maintenance of this base, through annual scientific expeditions, is an example of my country's interest in contributing to the development of Antarctic science.

The VIII Peruvian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica was carried out thanks to the decision taken by my country's government and the cooperation of various agencies related to the National Commission on Antarctic Affairs, a national mechanism in charge of Antarctic Policy. The IX Expedition has been scheduled for the next Southern summer, with the participation of the research ship "Humboldt", a pioneer of the Peruvian expeditions to that continent.

Mister Chairman:

Peru awaits with particular interest the entry into force of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection, an instrument which must guarantee the preservation of the Antarctic ecosystem. My country is aware of the need to have adequate mechanisms in order to safeguard the Antarctic resources and to settle any disputes that may arise. This is the reason why it was among the first countries that ratified that Protocol, in March 1993.

In the light of the above considerations, Peru hopes that during this XXI Meeting the necessary 26 endorsements for the entry into force of the Protocol will be completed.

Finally, on behalf of my Delegation, I would like to express once more, to the organizers of the XXI Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty, our sincere appreciation for their warm reception and hospitality.
