ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIeme REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


 
LETTER TO DR RUDIGER WOLFRUM
re LIABILITY

 
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
 
Agenda item 6g                  Submitted by IUCN

XXI ATCM/IP60
May, 1997
Original: English
IUCN
The World Conservation Union

Commission on Environmental Law
Adenauerallee 214
D-53113 Bonn
Germany
Tel.: ++49 228 / 2692 231
Fax: ++49 228 / 2692 250

Professor Dr. Rudiger Wolfrum
Director
Max Planck Institut Fur Auslandisches
Offentliches Recht und Volkerrecht
D-69120 Heidelberg
Germany

15 May 1997

Dear Dr. Wolfrum,

As you know, the IUCN Commission on Environmental Law (IUCN-CEL) has taken a strong interest in the progress of the Working Group of Legal Experts tasked with developing the Annex on Environmental Liability to the Madrid Protocol. In November, 1995, IUCN-CEL prepared comments on the "Chairman's Fourth Offering". We have now had a chance to consider the "Chairman's Seventh Offering" which will be the subject of the Working Group's forthcoming meeting in Christchurch. We would be most grateful if you could circulate this letter containing our comments to the other members of the Working Group.

We are guided by the objective laid out in Article 16 of the Madrid Protocol, that the Annex on Environmental Liability must be "consistent with the objectives of this Protocol for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems."  We believe that the Working Group of Legal Experts has made considerable strides in achieving this objective, but in our view more needs to be done. We hope that our comments outlined in the Annex to this letter will be taken in this light.

We wish you and the members of the Working Group the best of successes in Christchurch.

Sincerely,

RGT
Nicholas A. Robinson
Chair

World Headquarters: IUCN, Rue Mauverney 28, CH-1196 Gland, Switzerland
Tel: ++41 22 / 999 00 01; Fax: ++41 22 / 999 00 02; Telex: 419 624 iucn ch
ANNEX

General Comment

We note that while the operator is to be "strictly liable", actual incidents where such liability will occur will be very limited by virtue of the various qualifications and exemptions. In such circumstances, a robust liability regime in practice will require ensuring that the Environmental Protection Fund be as strong and effective as feasible. Accordingly, we refer the Working Group to our earlier comments on the "Chairman's Fourth Offering", which contains detailed suggestions for improving the effectiveness of the Fund.

Specific Comments

a. We do not support replacing the term "reparation" in Article 1 or Preamble by "containment", as we believe that the response and remediation aspects of the Liability Annex are essential. By the same token, we find that the new second sentence is a useful clarification of purposes and that the current Annex should focus only on damage to the "environment".

b. The use of the phrase "acts or events" in Article 2(2) is confusing. The term "activities" is preferable as it is more consistent with the terminology in the rest of the Annex.

c. We believe that the substance of deleted Article 2(4) should be reflected in the Annex, as it is an important clarifying provision. This can be done by restoring the deleted provision or by a modification to Article 2(4) "...or other international instruments concerning environmental protection or environmental liability applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area."

d. We urge that the threshold in Article 3(1) (a) be "more than minor or transitory". This would be consistent with the language found in the Protocol and its meaning in practice will become clearer as Article 8 of the Protocol is implemented. As such, it is preferable to both "significant and lasting" and "is of a more than minor and more than transitory nature". "Significant and lasting" seems particularly inappropriate as sets an unduly high standard (unduly limiting the scope of the Annex) and its implementation might entail delays in determining whether harm is "lasting".

e. We do not support the view that an Initial Environmental Impact Evaluation will provide a sufficient basis for determining
avoidability, and therefore prefer the deletion of "[Initial or]" 
in Article 3(1) (aa).

f.      We agree with the suggestion made to use the term "harm" in 
Article 3(5).  Should this be adopted, we suggest substituting 
damage for harm throughout the text, e.g. Article 2(1).

g.      The text in square brackets in Article 3 ter should be 
deleted.  The risks of significant damage to this fragile 
environment justify the application of joint and several 
liability without qualification.

h.      Article 3 quater is a useful provision but the Working Group 
may wish to consider alleviating potential problems with its 
application in practice.  The reality of some expeditions is that 
they are organized in one country, but the final place of 
departure is another.  In these circumstances, it might be 
appropriate to require that the relevant obligations of both 
countries be harmonized so as to avoid both confusion, loopholes, 
and undue burdens on operators.

i.      It is preferable to replace the term "expedition" with the 
term "activity" in Article 3 quater, so as to more completely 
encompass tourism.

j.      The text in Article 5(2) requires clarification.  Who is the 
"party which caused or contributed to the damage in question"?  
The text may be understood as meaning that this is not a State 
Party, at least not normally, but what is then the sense of the 
word "party"?

k.      Article 5 ter (2) (b) can be strengthened if it contemplates 
the execution of judgement in other countries.  One possibility 
for accomplishing this is to add the following sentence:

        The Contracting Parties agree that judicial decisions given 
under Art.  5 ter para(2)(b) will be executed under the 
jurisdiction of any other Contracting Party according to 
the general rules of international private law.

But an even better formulation may be had by adapting Article X 
of the 1969 Brussels Convention on Civil Liability for Oil 
Pollution Damage as follows:

1.  Any judgment given by a Court with jurisdiction in 
accordance with Arti e 5 ter (2)(b) which is 
enforceable in the Sta. Party of origin where it is 
no longer subject to ordinary forms of review, shall 
be recognized in any State Party, except
10/05 91 FK 14:30 FAX -49 220 2092200                    ICC ELC/CEL/ICEL         14) 000

a. where the judgment was obtained by fraud; or

b. where the defendant was not given reasonable 
notice and a fair opportunity to present its case

2. A judgment recognised under paragraph 1 of this 
article shall be enforceable in each State Party as 
soon as the formalities required of that State have 
been complied with.  The formalities shall not permit 
the merits of the case to be re-opened".

1. We support the suggestion of Germany with respect to Article 
7, as it gives greater certainty to this requirement.
