ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXI CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XXI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXIe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XXI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY

Agenda item 6a                        Submitted by Brazil

XXI ATCM/IP128
May, 1997
Original: English
Introduction

Ratification of Protocol on Environmental Protection and of its Annexes, particulary Annex V, by the Brazilian Government on June 6, 1995, led to efforts for the implementation of their provisions specially the ones related to environmental impact assessment of Brazilian activities in the Antarctic. This paper aims to briefly describe steps that have been taken in this regard.

1. Environmental Assessment Group

Establishment of the Grupo de Avaliacao Ambiental - GAAm (Environmental Assessment Group) as part of the structure of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) in January 1995, provided  a technical-scientific forum and advisory body for PROANTAR on environmental matters.

GAAm is coordinated by the Ministerio do Meio Ambiente, Recursos Hidricos e Amazonia Legal (Ministry of Environment, Water Resouces and Legal Amazon) and consists of science experts from the areas of Biology, Oceanography, Meteorology and Geology, representatives from the Ministerios das Relacoes Exteriores, Educacao e do Desporto, Marinha, Ciencia e Tecnologia ( Ministries of External Relations, Education and Sports, Navy, Science and Technology) and coordinators of the Grupo de Assessoramento ( Science Advisory Group) and Grupo de Operacoes (Operations Group) of PROANTAR.

1.1 Mandate

Functions of GAAm include :

- to assess possible environmental impacts of activities for science, science support, operational, tourism and non-governmental in the Antarctic in order to limit their impacts in the region, as well as on dependent and associated ecosystems;

- to provide Preliminary, Initial and Comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment reports of these activities;

- to indicate means to minimize or mitigate the impact of the activities in the Antarctic environment and on its dependent and associated ecosystems;

- to propose the modification, suspension or termination of activities that have negative effects on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems;

- to propose programs for the environmental monitoring of activities;
- to propose procedures to be applied to emergency situations that required urgent action for 
the protetion of the Antarctic environment;

- to identify the need and propose research useful to the understanding of the Antarctic 
environment;

- to identify the need and suggest the creation of protected areas according to the terms of 
Annex V and prepare their management plans;

- to organize and manage data on Antarctic environment as well as to promote the exchange 
of information.

1.2 Procedures

In its first year of operation GAAm elaborated and started the application of a 
Guide and a questionnaire for the Preliminary Environmental Evaluation of science research 
projects and associated support activities in the Antarctic in compliance with Annex I of 
Madrid Protocol.

The questionnaire must be filled out when a scientist submit a research project 
to PROANTAR. It is structured in order to allow for a preliminary determination of potential 
environmental impacts associated with the proposed science activities.

The following procedural sequence is then followed for the examination of the 
questionnaire:

a) initial review by the technical staff of the Ministry of Environment and its associated 
agency, the Instituto Brasileiro do Meio Ambiente e dos Recursos Naturais Renovaveis - 
IBAMA (Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Natural Renewable Resources).

If the review concludes that the proposed activity may only produce a less than 
minor or transitory impact, a recommendation for this proceeding of the activity is passed to 
GAAm;

b) if the preliminary review indicates that the proposed activity is likely to have an impact 
equal to a minor or transitory, GAAm submits it to "ad hoc" consultants. Assessment by 
consultants is then reviewed by GAAm for preparation of its conclusive report. This report 
consists in the Initial Environment Evaluation (IEE);

c) in the case the preliminary technical review determines that the proposed activity is likely to 
have more than a minor or transitory impact, it recommends to GAAm the preparation of a 
Comprehensive Environment Evaluation (CEE). In this case, Terms of Reference will be 
prepared by Ministry of Environment /IBAMA, consisting of a schedule of the essential 
content of the CEE.
A similar guide and questionnaire is now been developed by GAAm for logistical and operational activities of PROANTAR.

2. Developping an understanding of Minor or Transitory

The need of conceptual refinement of the terms minor or transitory that are practical for the determination of the category of the environmental assessment procedure to be applied to the examination of proposals of activities is also one of the first tasks assigned to GAAm.

On the basis of the work of an " ad hoc" working group, GAAm prepared preliminary definitions to guide the environmental reviews within the PROANTAR. A text describing the main elements in the definition and the approach utilized was submitted by the Brazilian Delegation as XXI ATCM - INFO 97.

3. Compatibility of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and the National Environmental Legislation

A working group established by the Comissao Nacional para Assuntos Antarticos (National Commission for Antarctic Affairs) coordinated by the chairperson of GAAm was assigned the task of examining the compatibility of measures in the Madrid Protocol and the national environmental legislation in force. On the basis of legal advice prepared by the Legal Department of the Ministry of Environment, GAAm concluded that there is no need to enact a specific domestic law to incorporate the measures in the Madrid Protocol into the domestic legislation, after its ratification by the Brazilian Government.

A more detailed comparative review of environmental measures in the Protocol and pertinent Brazilian legislation is also being developed.
